CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MAUSTON, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
Published in 2016 by Order of the Common Council 
____________ 

MAUSTON OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Brian T. McGuire 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dennis Emery (District 1) 
Dennis Nielsen (District 2) 
Leslie Householder (District 3) 
Francis McCoy (District 4) 
Steven Leavitt (District 5) 
Richard Noe (District 6) 
Floyd Babcock (District 7) 
Common Council 
____________ 
Nathan R. Thiel 
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer 
____________ 
Rebecca Richards-Bria 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Mauston, Wisconsin. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1991 Code, as amended through May 26, 2015, and ordinances adopted by the common council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1991 Code, as amended, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Kim Ryder, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Nathan Thiel, City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, Ms. Diane Kropiwaka, Administrative Assistant, and Ms. Val Nelson, Zoning Administrator, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mauston, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mauston, Wisconsin. 
(c) ;hg;Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mauston, Wisconsin. 2016. 
Ordinance No. 2016-1083 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MAUSTON, WISCONSIN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
The common council of the City of Mauston, Wisconsin, do ordain as follows: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Mauston, Wisconsin," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 114, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 8, 2015, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance or which is repealed by the enactment of this ordinance. 
Section 4. (a) Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  Any person who commits a violation of the Code shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  Any person found guilty of a violation of the Code, who has previously been convicted of the same violation within one year, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for such violation, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding six months. 
(3)  With respect to violations of the Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation of the Code occurs, continues and/or remains present constitutes a separate offense. 
(4)  With respect to violations of the Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each violation is a separate offense. 
(5)  In no case shall the forfeiture imposed for a violation of any provision of the Code exceed the maximum fine for the same offense under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, the penalty provisions as stated herein, shall apply to the entire Code of Ordinances adopted by this ordinance, without regards to whether such penalty is reenacted by this ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code. 
Introduced and adopted this    8th    day of    March    , 2016 
  
APPROVED: 
      Brian T. McGuire, Mayor     
ATTEST: 
      Nathan R. Thiel, City Administrator     
• Dates of Readings: 2/23/2016 and 3/8/2016 
• Date of Adoption: 3/8/2016 
• Votes: Two-thirds vote of the members elect required 
D. Emery  Aye 
D. Nielsen  Aye 
L. Householder  Aye 
F. McCoy  Aye 
S. Leavitt  Aye 
R. Noe  Aye 
F. Babcock  Aye 
• Date of Publication: 4/9/2016 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2016-1083  3- 8-2016 Included 1 2016-1084  5-10-2016 Omitted 1 2016-1086  7-12-2016 Included 1 2016-1087  8-23-2016 Included 1 2016-1088  8-23-2016 Included 1 2016-1089 10-11-2016 Omitted 1 2016-1090 10-11-2016 Omitted 1 2016-1085 10-25-2016 Included 1 2016-1091 11-22-2016 Omitted 1 2017-1092  4-11-2017 Included 2 2017-1093  4-11-2017 Included 2 2017-1095 11-28-2017 Included 2 2017-1096 11-28-2017 Included 2 2017-1097 12-12-2017 Included 2 2017-22 (Res.) 11-28-2017 Included 3 2018-1098  2-13-2018 Omitted 3 2018-1099  7-24-2018 Included 3 2018-2002  2-13-2018 Included 3 2018-2005  2-13-2018 Included 3  
PART I - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Mauston, Wisconsin," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Mauston Municipal Code," or as the "Mauston Code." The Code consists of parts I and II. 
(Code 1991, § 1.01) 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. 
(1)  When provisions conflict, the specific prevails over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the common council may be effectuated. 
(2)  Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings shall be construed according to such meanings. 
(3)  Provisions shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(4)  If any manifest error is discovered consisting of a misspelling, an omission of a word necessary to express the manifest intention of any provision, the use of a word to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of one word where it is manifest that a different word should have been used to express the intent of any provision, such spelling shall be corrected and such word supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the words correctly spelled, and as supplied, omitted or substitute, were used originally. This subsection shall not permit any change to be made should there exist doubt as to the meaning of the provision in question. 
(5)  The provisions of part II of this Code are a codification of ordinances pertaining to land development. The provisions of this are a codification of other ordinances. The inclusion of a provision in this that relates to land development does not excuse failure to comply with such provision. The inclusion of a provision in part II of this Code that does not relate to land development does not excuse failure to comply with such provision. 
    Actions by agents. When a provision requires an act to be done that may legally be done by an agent, such requirement includes all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Mauston, Juneau County, Wisconsin. 
    Code, Municipal Code. The term "Code" or "Municipal Code" means the Mauston Municipal Code, as designated in section 1-1, as now or hereafter revised or amended. The Code consists of parts I and II. 
    Common council, council, city council. The terms "common council," "city council" and "council" mean the common council of the City of Mauston. 
    Computation of time. All periods of time shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 990.001(4). 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the terms "and" and "or" may be interchangeable when the context so requires: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    Councilmember, alderman, etc. The term "councilmember" shall be substituted for the terminology "alderman" and the term "councilmember" shall be the term used to designate members of the common council. 
    County. The term "county" means Juneau County, Wisconsin. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Fees, charges, etc. When language appears providing substantially that a fee, charge, forfeiture or penalty is as established by the city, such language means that the fee, charge, forfeiture or penalty may be established by ordinance, resolution or any other method not prohibited by law. 
    Fine. The term "fine" is the equivalent of the term "forfeiture." 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    Health department, heath officer. The term "health department" means the county health department; the term "health officer" means the county health officer. 
    Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
    Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more persons give such authority to a majority of such persons. 
    Law. The term "law" means an applicable federal law, the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Wisconsin, federal regulations, state administrative regulations, state statute, the ordinances and resolutions of the city and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect and states a prohibition. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. Words in the singular include the plural; words in the plural include the singular. 
    Oath, affidavit. The terms "oath" and "affidavit," and their derivatives, shall include affirmation and declaration, and their derivatives, in the senses of equivalents of the expressions used. 
    Officers, departments, etc. 
(1)  References to officers, departments, board, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
(2)  References to any public officer or department shall apply to the person or department for the time being exercising the powers and performing the duties of the office intended. If the office or department intended has been abolished, or if the power or duty thereof which was under contemplation in the reference has been transferred or assigned to some other officer or department, the reference shall be construed to follow the power or duty and to apply to the successor in authority to the officer or department to which reference is made. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to land, building or premises, shall include the owner, his agent, the lessee, the occupant or the person in charge of such building or premises, and in each case as circumstances and condition may require. 
    Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any limited liability company, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action, evidences of debt and energy. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following," when used by way of reference to any section or subsection of this Code, shall be construed to mean the section or subsection next preceding or next following that in which said reference is made unless some other section or subsection is designated in such reference. 
    Reasonable time, reasonable notice. A requirement that any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given to any person, shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt execution of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription by mark. If the signature of any person is required, it shall always be the handwriting of such person, or if he is unable to write, his mark or his name written by some person at his request and in his presence. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Wisconsin. 
    Street. The term "street" includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, bridge, viaduct, trestle and the approaches to any bridge, viaduct or trestle. 
    Tenant or occupant . The terms "tenant" and "occupant," as applied to premises, include any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
    Tenses. The present tense of a verb includes the past and future tenses; the future tense includes the present tense. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days; provided, however, that a publication in a newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day in each week. 
    Wis. Admin. Code. The abbreviation "Wis. Admin. Code" refers to the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as now or hereafter amended or renumbered. 
    Wis. Stats. The abbreviation "Wis. Stats." refers to the Wisconsin Statutes, as now or hereafter amended or renumbered. 
    Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1991, § 1.01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. §§ 990.001, 990.01. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  History notes that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Editor's notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(d)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. References to sections or subsections of this Code apply to such section or subsection as now or hereafter amended, revised or re-enacted, as long as such section or subsection referred to deals with the same subject matter as when the reference was made. If any section or subsection is repealed and re-enacted under another number dealing with the same general subject, whether in the same or in other language, existing references to such section or subsection as originally numbered shall thereafter be construed to apply to the section or subsection as it exists under its new number. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(6). 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal or amendment of ordinances. 
    The repeal or amendment of any provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution shall not: 
(1)  By implication, revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal or amendment takes effect. 
(2)  Affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or amended. 
(3)  Affect any act duly done or suffered under any enactment so repealed or amended. 
(4)  Affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended. 
(5)  Affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offense committed against any enactment so repealed or amended. 
(6)  Affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment. 
(Code 1991, § 1.02) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mauston, Wisconsin, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mauston, Wisconsin, is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be removed from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability. 
    The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable so that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code, for the common council declares that it is its intent that it would have enacted this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code without such invalid or unconstitutional provisions. 
(Code 1991, § 1.03) 
State Law reference- Severability of state statutes, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(11). 
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion thereof pertaining to the following, which ordinances designated continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any Charter ordinance. 
(1)  Annexing property into the city. 
(2)  Detaching property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Describing the corporate limits. 
(4)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(5)  Authorizing, granting or approving any lease, easement, contract, deed, or agreement. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Accepting any gift or grant. 
(8)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(9)  Providing for salaries or other officer or employee benefits. 
(10)  Releasing a person from liability. 
(11)  Establishing a bulkhead line or shoreline. 
(12)  Naming or renaming a park, recreational or other facility. 
(13)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(14)  Adopting or amending the official map or shown on the official map. 
(15)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(16)  Authorizing, dedicating, establishing, naming, renaming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating or discontinuing any street, alley, bridge or viaduct. 
(17)  Establishing the grade or any street or sidewalk. 
(18)  Establishing curblines and widths of sidewalks. 
(19)  Providing for street lighting. 
(20)  Providing for the construction of public works. 
(21)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(22)  Levying or imposing taxes. 
(23)  Providing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations not inconsistent with this Code. 
(24)  Rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map. 
(25)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(26)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(27)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Secs. 1-11-1-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PENALTY AND CODE ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 1-51. - Definition. 
(a)  In this article the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by order, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by order, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by order, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this article "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this article. 
Sec. 1-52. - Citations. 
(a)  Adoption. The city hereby adopts and authorizes the use of a citation, more particularly described below, to be used for violations of this Code, including those violations for which a statutory counterpart exists. 
(b)  Content. The uniform traffic citation shall be used for all traffic violations. Citations for all other violations shall conform with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.0113. 
(c)  Bond schedule. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the city may accept, from any person arrested for a violation of this Code, a bond, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0111. The amount of the bond may be set by the common council by resolution, and the bond amounts may be different for different violations. The bond schedule shall be on file with the city clerk and the police department. The bond for any violation not covered by the bond schedule shall be not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, as determined by the police department. No bond shall exceed the amount fixed by state statute. 
(d)  Issuance. City officers and city employees may issue a citation for any violation of this Code that such officer or employee is authorized to enforce. 
(e)  Procedure. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(3), relating to a violator's options and procedure on default, is hereby adopted and fully incorporated herein by reference. 
(f)  Other procedures authorized . This section shall not preclude the city from adopting any other ordinance which provides for the enforcement of any law or ordinance in a different manner or through a different procedure. The issuance or non-issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the city from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method available to the city, to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order. 
(Code 1991, § 25.02) 
Secs. 1-53-1-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PENALTIES AND OTHER REMEDIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Ordinance violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0109 et seq.; imprisonment for failure to pay forfeiture and other remedies available to court for ordinance violations, Wis. Stats. § 800.09 et seq. 

Sec. 1-71. - Forfeiture and continuing violations. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  First offense. Any person who commits a violation of this Code shall be subject to a forfeiture in the amount established by the city, and in default of payment of such forfeiture shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture is paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating a violation of this Code, who has previously been convicted of the same violation within one year, shall be subject to a forfeiture in the amount established by the city, and in default of payment of such forfeiture shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture is paid, but not exceeding six months. 
(3)  Maximum fine. In no case shall the forfeiture imposed for a violation of any provision of this Code exceed the maximum fine for the same offense under the laws of the state. 
(4)  Joint prosecution. Prosecution of two or more offenses committed by the same violator may be joined into one action, and the prosecution of two or more violators for the same offense may be joined into one action except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(5)  Continuous violations. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation of this Code occurs, continues and/or remains present constitutes a separate offense. 
(6)  Violations that are not continuous. With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each violation is a separate offense. 
(Code 1991, § 25.01) 
Sec. 1-72. - Additional remedies for failure to pay forfeiture or costs. 
    Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture, the municipal court, in lieu of imprisonment or in addition to imprisonment or after release from imprisonment, may do the following: 
(1)  Render a money judgment against the defendant in favor of the city for such forfeiture and said judgment may then be docketed and collected by the city in any manner permitted by law; and/or 
(2)  Issue an execution against the property of the defendant for the payment of such forfeiture, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. ch. 815. 
(Code 1991, § 25.01) 
Sec. 1-73. - Abatement of violations. 
    In addition to any other penalty provided herein, for a violation of this Code, the city may seek the removal, prevention and/or abatement thereof per the specific provisions of the chapter or this section. Such remedies may be joined with any action seeking forfeiture, or may be separately commenced and maintained. In addition to any forfeiture authorized herein, the City may seek the removal, prevention and/or abatement of violations as follows: 
(1)  By the violator at the violator's sole expense; and/or 
(2)  If the violator fails to remove, prevent and/or abate the violation within the time limits established by the court, then by the city at the sole expense of the violator. If the city incurs expenses in the removal, prevention and/or abatement of any violation, on application to the court by the city: 
a.  The court may impose upon the violator a new or additional forfeiture in the amount not to exceed the expenses incurred, and in default of payment of such forfeiture, the court may imprison the violator in the county jail until such forfeiture is paid, but not exceeding 90 days; 
b.  The court may issue an execution against property of the violator for such expenses pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 815; 
c.  The court may render a money judgment against the violator in favor of the city for such expenses, and said judgment may then be docketed and collected by the city in any manner permitted by law; and/or 
d.  The court may order the payment of restitution for violations of this Code in conformity with Wis. Stats. §§ 943.24 and 943.50 and shall use the restitution procedures as provided therein. 
(Code 1991, § 25.01; Ord. No. 2017-1093 , 4-11-2017) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cities generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 62; municipalities generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Official newspaper. 
    The Juneau County Star-Times Newspaper is hereby designated as the official city newspaper for publication of council proceedings and legal notices. 
(Code 1991, § 3.102) 
State Law reference- Official newspapers, Wis. Stats. § 985.05. 
Sec. 2-2. - Public records. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with Wis. Stats. ch. 19, subch. II (Wis. Stats. § 19.21 et seq.), commonly known as the Wisconsin Public Records Law, which law is hereby adopted by reference. Furthermore, this section shall constitute the "notice" required by Wis. Stats. § 19.34(1). 
(b)  Legal custodians. The following-identified legal custodians shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry out the duties of an authority regarding the records under their control, pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 19, subch. II (Wis. Stats. § 19.21 et seq.) and this chapter. 
(1)  Personnel records. The city administrator, or in his absence, the administrative assistant, shall be the legal custodian of all personnel records of city officials and employees, except that the mayor shall be the legal custodian of the personnel records of the city administrator. 
(2)  All other records. The city administrator, or in his absence, the deputy city clerk, shall be the legal custodian of all other city records not specifically identified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(c)  Procedure. In addition to the procedures and access requirements required by law, the following requirements shall apply to all requests for public records: 
(1)  Where. Written requests for public records shall be mailed to the custodian, care of city hall, and oral requests shall be made at city hall, or over the telephone to city hall. 
(2)  To whom. Written requests shall be addressed to the custodian. Oral requests shall be made to the custodian, but if the custodian is not present, the clerk or person in charge of the clerk's office shall transcribe the oral request and shall promptly forward it to the appropriate custodian. 
(3)  Fees. The fees authorized by Wis. Stats. § 19.35(3) shall be charged. A fee in the amount established by the city shall be charged for all photocopies. The term "actual costs" as used in the statutes shall mean the total cost of personnel, including wages and fringe benefits, plus expenses for supplies, postage, telephone, paper, and other materials used or purchased to make or supply a copy. The custodian may demand prepayment of the estimated fee if the custodian believes that the actual cost will probably exceed $5.00. 
(d)  Destruction of records. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this subsection (d) to authorize and permit the custodian of any public record to destroy said record at the earliest date permitted by law and to remove any obligation from the custodian to maintain public records beyond the minimum period required by law. 
(2)  Time periods. Unless a shorter period of law has been fixed by the public records and forms board under Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e) or by any other law, all public records may be destroyed after seven years. 
(Code 1991, § 3.108) 
Sec. 2-3. - Apointments and terms of city officials and members of committees, boards or commission. 
(a)  Appointment. All other officials or appointees to committees, boards or commissions, whose appointment or selection is not specifically addressed by this Code or state law, shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. 
(b)  Term. All persons appointed hereunder shall serve a term of one year unless otherwise provided by this Code, state law or the rules of the body to which they are appointed. 
(Code 1991, § 3.319) 
State Law reference- Employee residency requirements prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 66.0502. 
Secs. 2-4-2-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mayor generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(8); common council generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.1. 

Sec. 2-25. - Conduct of meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. The council shall meet on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month; provided, however, that the council may cancel or reschedule any such regular meeting from time to time by favorable vote of two-thirds of the alderpersons present. 
(b)  Special meetings. A special meeting may be called by three or more alderpersons by filing with the clerk a written request, signed by the requesting alderpersons, stating the purpose for which the meeting is to be called and stating the time at which the meeting shall be called, provided the time selected for the meeting shall not be less than 24 hours from the time of filing the request. The clerk shall give notice immediately upon receipt of the request for such meeting. Notice shall be delivered to each alderperson personally, or left at his usual place of abode, at least six hours before the meeting. 
(c)  Robert's Rules of Order. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (11th edition), except as otherwise provided by law or this Code. 
(d)  Order of business. At all meetings, the following order shall be observed in conducting the business of the council: 
(1)  Call to order by the presiding officer. 
(2)  Roll call. (If a quorum is not present, the meeting shall thereupon adjourn, which may be to a date specified by a majority of those present.) 
(3)  Reading, correcting and approval of the minutes of the preceding meeting or meetings. 
(4)  Public appearances. 
(5)  Reports of committees, commissions or boards. 
(6)  Adjournment. 
Any business can be addressed out of order upon majority approval of the alderpersons present. 
(Code 1991, § 3.104) 
State Law reference- Council meetings and procedures, Wis. Stats. § 62.21(2), (3); open meeting requirements, Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq. 
Sec. 2-26. - Enactment of ordinances. 
(a)  Writing. All proposed ordinances submitted to the council for enactment shall be in writing and shall be available to the public. 
(b)  Notice and reading. Before enactment of any ordinance, notice of each proposed ordinance shall be placed on the agenda for two council meetings (regular or special), which meetings shall be at least seven days apart. At each such meeting, the title and a brief summary of each proposed ordinance shall be read by the clerk. 
(c)  Enactment. A proposed ordinance may be enacted at the same meeting as the second reading, provided public appearances are permitted after the second reading and before council action on the proposed ordinance. 
(d)  Changes. A proposed ordinance shall be substantially in final form at the first reading. Substantive changes in a proposed ordinance shall cause such ordinance to become a new proposed ordinance which must comply with subsection (b) of this section. However, non-substantive changes, such as the correction of typographical or spelling errors, or changes in headings or format, shall not constitute a new proposed ordinance. 
(e)  Exception. If the council finds that an emergency exists, which necessitates prompt action by enactment of an ordinance, the council may temporarily suspend all or part of the foregoing rules by a favorable vote of six alderpersons. Any ordinance adopted pursuant to these emergency procedures shall expire 90 days after passage unless during said 90-day period the ordinance is ratified by a separate ordinance adopted pursuant to the non-emergency procedures set forth above. 
(Code 1991, § 3.105) 
State Law reference- Ordaining clause, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(3)(f); publication of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(4); charter ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0101. 
Secs. 2-27-2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal officers, Wis. Stats. § 62.09. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-56. - Ethical standards. 
(a)  Declaration of policy . It is declared that high ethical standards among city officers and employees are essential to the conduct of good representative government and that a code of ethics for the guidance of public officers and employees will help them avoid conflicts and will promote and strengthen the confidence of the residents of the city in their public officers and employees. The purpose of this section is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all city officers and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the public interest and which compromise, or appear to compromise public trust in the fairness, independence and integrity of city officers and employees and their official actions. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public employee means any person excluded from the definition of a public officer who is employed by the city. 
    Public officer means those persons serving a statutory elected or appointed office, and all members of boards, committees and commissions of the city, whether paid or unpaid. 
(c)  Adoption of statutes. The provisions of the following-listed statutes, including any future revisions or amendments thereto, describing and defining regulations with respect to the conduct and ethics of government officials, employees and candidates, including the penalty to be imposed and the procedure for prosecution, are hereby adopted and, by reference, made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any of the following-listed statutes incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Statutes adopted: 
(1)  Wis. Stats. § 19.59, Codes of ethics for local government officials, employees and candidates. 
(2)  Wis. Stats. § 946.10, Bribery of public officers and employees. 
(3)  Wis. Stats. § 946.11, Special privileges for public utilities. 
(4)  Wis. Stats. § 946.12, Misconduct in public office. 
(5)  Wis. Stats. § 946.13, Private interest in public contract prohibited. 
(d)  Specific conflicts of interest. 
(1)  Use of public property. No public officer or public employee shall use or permit the use of city vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such items are available for use by the public generally or except when the use of such items is authorized by the council. 
(2)  Conflicts of interest and disclosure of interest . Except as provided herein, no public officer or public employee shall engage in any business transaction with the city, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which will tend to impair his independence or judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. Any public officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, including employment, in any business entity entering into, proposing to enter into or bidding on any transaction with the city, or as part of his official duties will be making an official decision or recommendation significantly affecting a business competitor, client or regular customer, shall disclose such interest to the council (or committee, board or commission thereof as appropriate) to be recorded in the minutes of that body. Upon such disclosure, it is advised that the public officer or employee abstain from voting on the matter and from participating in the discussion of the matter. 
(3)  Representing private interests. No public officer or public employee, including persons or firms engaged to provide professional services to the city, shall represent, for compensation, private interests before the city council or any city board, commission or committee without disclosure of the private business relationship and explicit consent of the council. 
(4)  Disclosure of confidential information . No public officer or public employee shall, without proper authorization of the city council, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the city nor shall he use such information to advance financial or private interest of himself or others. 
(5)  Gifts and favors. No public officer or public employee shall accept anything of value whether in the form of gift, service, loan or promise from any person, who, to the knowledge of the public officer or public employee, has a direct financial interest in any transaction or official business with the city, which may tend to impair the public officer's or public employee's independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. It is not, however, a conflict of interest for any public officer or employee to receive a gift of gratuity that is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value. 
(6)  Award and administration of contracts . No employee, officer or agent of the city shall participate in the selection, award, or administration of a contract if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved. Examples of such conflicts would arise when the employee, officer or agent, or any member of their immediate family or their partner, or an organization which employs, or is about to employ, any of them, has a financial or other interest in a firm to whom a city contract is awarded. No city employee, officer or agent shall solicit or accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from existing or potential contractors or subcontractors. 
(Code 1991, § 3.107) 
Secs. 2-57-2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC POSITIONS 

Sec. 2-86. - Administrator; clerk; treasurer; comptroller. 
(a)  Creation . Pursuant to the authority granted in Wis. Stats. § 62.09, the office of the city administrator for the city is hereby created. 
(b)  Appointment and term. The administrator shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to education, training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the council. He shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to termination by the council, with or without cause. 
(c)  Compensation. The salary and other benefits payable to the administrator shall be established by separate ordinance, resolution and/or written contract. 
(d)  Duties and powers. Subject to the limitations and responsibilities set forth in state statutes and in the resolutions and ordinances of the city, the administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, responsible only to the mayor and council for the proper administration of the business affairs of the city, and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Carry out directives of the council and the mayor which require administrative implementation, reporting promptly to the mayor and council regarding the results obtained and any difficulties encountered. 
(2)  Responsible for the administration and supervision of all day-to-day operations of city government, including the monitoring of city compliance with state statutes and regulations, city ordinances and resolutions. 
(3)  Establish, where necessary, administrative procedures to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of city government according to current practices in government and consistent with the directives of the council. 
(4)  Serve as an ex officio nonvoting member of all boards, commissions, and committees of the city, except as otherwise specified by the council, this Code or state law. 
(5)  Represent the city in matters involving legislative and inter-governmental affairs when authorized and directed by the council. 
(6)  Act as public information officer for the city, with the responsibility of assuring that all open meeting rules and regulations are followed. Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communication between citizens and city government to ensure that complaints, grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt attention by the responsible official or department, and to ensure that all such matters are expeditiously resolved. 
(7)  Attend all meetings of the council, unless excused by the mayor or majority vote of the council, and at such meetings be prepared to answer questions and provide information regarding city affairs to assist the mayor and alderpersons in the performance of their duties. 
(8)  Inform the mayor and council of any ordinances, resolutions, documents, committee appointments or other matters requiring action. 
(9)  In coordination with the mayor and council, prepare agendas for all meetings of the council and all committees, commissions and boards, together with such supporting material as may be required or helpful; provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed to give the administrator any authority to limit or prevent matters or issues from being considered by the council, or any committee, commission or board. 
(10)  Be a member of the board of review, and shall obtain the training required by Wis. Stats. § 70.46(4). 
(11)  The administrator shall carry out the duties and responsibilities of clerk, treasurer and comptroller set forth in state statutes, the administrative code, city ordinances, and such instructions and policy as may be issued by the council. 
(e)  Additional contractual obligations. Nothing herein shall preclude or limit the city and the administrator from establishing, by written contract, other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1991, § 3.304) 
Sec. 2-87. - City attorney. 
(a)  Appointment. The city attorney shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to education, training, experience and general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the council. He shall be subject to termination by the council, with or without cause. 
(b)  Compensation. The salary and other benefits payable to the city attorney shall be established by separate ordinance, resolution and/or contract. 
(c)  Duties and powers. The city attorney shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  He shall exercise the powers and carry out the duties and responsibilities set forth in the state statutes, the state administrative code and this Code. 
(2)  He shall carry out the directives of the council, the mayor and the city administrator which require legal work. 
(3)  He shall attend the meetings of the common council and all committees, commissions and boards when requested by the chairperson thereof. 
(4)  He shall prosecute all ordinance violations. 
(d)  Additional contractual obligations. Nothing herein shall preclude or limit the city and the attorney from establishing, by written contract, other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1991, § 3.305) 
State Law reference- City attorney, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(12). 
Sec. 2-88. - Director of public works/engineer/street commissioner. 
(a)  Creation. Pursuant to the authority granted in Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a), the office of director of public works for the city (hereinafter "director of public works") is hereby created. 
(b)  Consolidation of offices. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3)(a), the statutory offices of engineer and street commissioner, and the new office of director of public works are hereby consolidated into the office of director of public works. 
(c)  Appointment and term. The director of public works shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to education, training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the council. He shall serve at the pleasure of the council and shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to termination by the council, with or without cause. 
(d)  Compensation. The salary and other benefits payable to the director of public works shall be established by separate ordinance, resolution and/or written contract. 
(e)  Duties and powers. Subject to the limitations and responsibilities set forth in state statutes and in the resolutions and ordinances of the city, the director of public works shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Carry out the directives of the administrator, common council and the mayor, reporting promptly regarding the results obtained and any difficulties encountered. 
(2)  Responsible for the administration and supervision of all day-to-day operations of the public works department including public services such as garbage and refuse collection and disposal, snow and ice removal, street cleaning, and such other activities as may be assigned to the department from time to time by the council. Nothing herein shall limit the authority of the council to hire independent third persons to perform public works projects. 
(3)  Responsible for the administration and supervision of city parks, property, and tree inventory. 
(4)  Have general charge and supervision over city public right-of-way and the maintenance, repair and construction of all city infrastructure within the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Establish, where necessary, administrative procedures to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the department of public works according to current practices in government and consistent with the directives of his superiors. 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the common council, unless excused by the mayor or city administrator, and at such meetings be prepared to answer questions and provide information regarding public works. 
(7)  Attend all meetings of the public works committee as a non-voting adviser, and attend all other committee, commission or board meetings when requested by the mayor or chairperson thereof. 
(8)  Carry out the duties and responsibilities of city engineer and street commissioner set forth in state statutes and the administrative code, provided; however, when such duties require special skill, training or licensure, he shall promptly report the same so that a qualified, licensed engineer can be consulted by the city. 
(9)  Appointed as the weed commissioner for the city set forth in state statutes. 
(10)  Interpret, administer and enforce the environment and natural resources code (chapter 14). 
(11)  Interpret, administer and enforce the public nuisance and property management code (chapter 24). 
(12)  Interpret, administer and enforce the solid waste code (chapter 28). 
(13)  Interpret, administer and enforce the streets, sidewalks and other public places (chapter 32). 
(14)  Interpret, administer and enforce the traffic and vehicles code (chapter 36). 
(15)  Interpret, administer and enforce utilities code (chapter 38). 
(f)  Additional contractual obligations. Nothing herein shall preclude or limit the city and the director of public works from establishing, by written contract, other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1991, § 3.307) 
Sec. 2-89. - Chief of police. 
(a)  Created. The office of chief of police is hereby created. 
(b)  Appointment and term. The chief of police shall be appointed and shall serve a term pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 
(c)  Termination. The chief of police may be terminated, suspended or disciplined pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 
(d)  Compensation. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13, the salary of the chief of police shall be fixed by the council. All rewards for the apprehension of criminals shall be paid to the city police department, and the council shall direct by resolution the expenditure of each reward, which may include the payment thereof to the chief and/or his subordinates. 
(e)  Duties and powers. Subject to the limitations and responsibilities set forth in state statutes and in the resolutions and ordinances of the city, the chief of police shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Carry out the directives of the council, mayor and administrator, and the board of police and fire commissioners where applicable under Wis. Stats. § 62.13, reporting promptly regarding the results obtained and any difficulties encountered. 
(2)  Responsible for the administration and supervision of all day-to-day operations of the police department. 
(3)  Cooperate with the board of police and fire commissioners in the implementation and administration of the rules, regulations and procedures of Wis. Stats. § 62.13 and all amendments thereto. 
(4)  Establish, where necessary, administrative procedures to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the police department according to current law enforcement practices and consistent with the directives of his superiors. 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the board of police and fire commissioners, unless excused by the president thereof or majority vote of the board, and at such meetings be prepared to answer questions and provide information regarding the operation of the police department. 
(6)  Attend regular meetings of the council, commissions, committees or boards when requested by the chairperson thereof or the mayor. 
(7)  Have control of all apparatus used by the department and shall be responsible for proper maintenance and records. Emergency repairs may be authorized by the chief. 
(8)  Responsible for the enforcement of all the ordinances of the city and the state statutes, and ensure the department is familiar with and prepared to attend to the enforcement of such ordinances by all lawful means. 
(9)  Interpret, administer and enforce the emergency management and emergency services code (chapter 12). 
(10)  Interpret, administer and enforce the public nuisance and property management code (chapter 24). 
(11)  Interpret, administer and enforce the traffic and vehicles code (chapter 36). 
(Code 1991, § 3.308) 
State Law reference- Chief of police, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(13); police department, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; employee residency requirements prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 66.0502. 
Sec. 2-90. - Chief of the fire department. 
(a)  Created. The office of chief of the fire department is hereby created. 
(b)  Appointment and term. The chief of the fire department shall be appointed and shall serve a term pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 
(c)  Termination. The chief of the fire department may be terminated, suspended or disciplined pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 
(d)  Compensation. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13, the salary of the chief of the fire department shall be fixed by the council. 
(e)  Duties and powers. Subject to the limitations and responsibilities set forth in state statutes and in the resolutions and ordinances of the city, the chief of the fire department shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Carry out the directives of the council, mayor and administrator, and the board of police and fire commissioners where applicable under Wis. Stats. § 62.13, reporting promptly regarding the results obtained and any difficulties encountered. 
(2)  Responsible for the administration and supervision of all day-to-day operations of the fire department. 
(3)  Establish, where necessary, administrative procedures to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the police department according to current law enforcement practices and consistent with the directives of his superiors. 
(4)  Attend all meetings of the board of police and fire commissioners, unless excused by the president thereof or majority vote of the board, and at such meetings be prepared to answer questions and provide information regarding the operation of the fire department. 
(5)  Attend regular meetings of the council, commissions, committees or boards when requested by the chairperson thereof or the mayor. 
(6)  Preside at all meetings of the fire department, call special meetings, preserve order, decide all points of order that may arise and enforce a rigid observance of this article and the bylaws of the department. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of the chief, or in his absence, the ranking officer of the fire department, to be present at all fires, to have complete command of, and entire responsibility for, all firefighting operations, to plan the control of the same, to direct the action of the company when they arrive at the fire, to observe that the department does its duty, to grant leaves of absence at a fire when he may deem it proper and to see that the fire apparatus is kept in proper condition at all times. 
(8)  Appointed as fire inspector with power to appoint one or more duty fire inspectors, who shall perform the same duties and shall have the same power as the fire inspector. 
(9)  Have control of all apparatus used by the department and shall be responsible for proper maintenance and records. Emergency repairs may be authorized by the chief. 
(10)  Interpret, administer and enforce the emergency management and emergency services code (chapter 12). 
(11)  Interpret, administer and enforce the fire prevention and protection code (chapter 16). 
(Code 1991, § 3.310) 
State Law reference- Fire department, Wis. Stats. § 62.13; employee residency requirements prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 66.0502. 
Sec. 2-91. - City assessor. 
(a)  Appointment and term. The city assessor shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to education, training, experience and general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the common council. He shall be properly certified under Wis. Stats. § 73.09. He shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to termination by the council, with or without cause. 
(b)  Compensation. The salary and other benefits payable to the assessor shall be established by separate ordinance, resolution and/or written contract. 
(c)  Duties and powers. The city assessor shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  He shall carry out the duties and responsibilities of the assessor enumerated in state statutes, the state administrative code, directives from the state department of revenue, and city ordinances and resolutions. 
(2)  He shall carry out the directives of the council, the mayor and the administrator. 
(3)  He shall advise the city on assessment issues, and shall keep the city informed regarding current legislation and administrative rules affecting the city's assessment. 
(4)  He shall attend all meetings of the board of review, and he shall attend meetings of the council or committees thereof when requested by the mayor or committee chairperson. 
(d)  Additional contractual obligations. Nothing herein shall preclude or limit the city and the assessor from establishing, by written contract, other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent herewith. 
(e)  Confidentiality of information provided to assessor. 
(1)  Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af) is hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  An officer may make disclosure of such information under the following circumstances: 
a.  The assessor has access to such information in the performance of his duties; 
b.  The board of review may review such information when needed, in its opinion, to decide upon a contested assessment; 
c.  Another person or body has the right to review such information due to the duties of an office or as set by law; 
d.  The officer is complying with a court order; 
e.  The person providing the income and expense information has contested the assessment level at either the board of review or by filing a claim for excessive assessment under Wis. Stats. § 74.37, in which case the base records are open and public. 
(Code 1991, § 3.311) 
State Law reference- City assessor, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a). 
Sec. 2-92. - City building inspector. 
(a)  Creation. Pursuant to the authority granted in Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(a), there is hereby created the office of building inspector for the city, hereinafter referred to as "building inspector." 
(b)  Appointment and term. The building inspector shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to education, training, experience and general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the common council. He shall be certified by the state to engage in the administration and enforcement of the state uniform dwelling code. He shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to termination by the council, with or without cause. 
(c)  Compensation. The salary and other benefits payable to the building inspector shall be established by separate ordinance, resolution and/or written contract. 
(d)  Duties and powers. Subject to the limitations and responsibilities set forth in state statutes, the building inspector shall: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain such licenses and certifications with the state as may be required to enforce the uniform dwelling code. 
(2)  Carry out the directives of, and be supervised by, the city administrator, and shall carryout such additional directives as may be issued by the council or the mayor, reporting promptly regarding the results obtained and any difficulties encountered. 
(3)  Interpret, administer and enforce the public nuisance and property management code (chapter 24). 
(4)  Interpret, administer and enforce the city building code (chapter 102), including those portions of the state uniform dwelling code which are incorporated therein by reference, and shall specifically have the duties and powers set forth in chapter 102, article II, division 2. 
(5)  Attend such meetings of the common council or committees thereof, the plan commission and the zoning board of appeals as may be requested. 
(6)  Cooperate with and lend assistance to other city officers and departments in the investigation, enforcement and prosecution of other ordinance violations. 
(e)  Additional contractual obligations. Nothing herein shall preclude or limit the city and the building inspector from establishing, by written contract, other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1991, § 3.313) 
Sec. 2-93. - City zoning administrator. 
(a)  Creation. Pursuant to the authority granted in Wis. Stats. § 62.09, there is hereby created the office of zoning administrator for the city (hereinafter "zoning administrator"). 
(b)  Appointment and term. (The zoning administrator shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to education, training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the common council. He shall serve at the pleasure of the council, and shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to termination by the council, with or without cause. 
(c)  Salary and benefits. The salary and other benefits payable to the zoning administrator shall be established by separate ordinance, resolution and/or written contract. 
(d)  Duties and powers. Subject to the limitations and responsibilities set forth in state statutes, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Carry out the directives of, and be supervised by, the city administrator, and shall carry out such additional directives as may be issued by the council, the mayor, and the plan commission, reporting promptly regarding the results obtained and any difficulties encountered. 
(2)  Interpret, administer and enforce compliance with the public nuisances and property management code (chapter 24). 
(3)  Interpret, administer and enforce compliance with the floodplain zoning code (chapter 104). 
(4)  Interpret, administer and enforce compliance with mobile home and mobile home parks (chapter 108), specifically including the annual inspection of mobile home parks (section 108-116). 
(5)  Interpret, administer and enforce compliance with the shoreland and wetland zoning code (chapter 110). 
(6)  Interpret, administer and enforce compliance with the subdivisions code (chapter 112). 
(7)  Interpret, administer and enforce compliance with the zoning code (chapter 114), specifically including the duties set forth in section 114-297(b). 
(8)  Attend all meetings of the plan commission and the zoning board of appeals, serving as a non-voting advisor, on policy and enforcement issues and shall attend such meetings of the common council as may be requested. 
(9)  Serve as a member of the site plan review committee, pursuant to section 114-299. 
(10)  Administer, interpret, implement, enforce and maintain compliance with the Mauston-Lemonweir Extraterritorial Zoning Ordinance (and any other extraterritorial zoning ordinances which the city may hereafter adopt), specifically including the duties set forth in section 114-297, and perform all of the above-listed duties in the extraterritorial district to the extent applicable. 
(11)  Issue citations for code violations and assist the police and city attorney in the prosecution of such violations. 
(e)  Additional contractual obligations. Nothing herein shall preclude or limit the city and the zoning administrator from establishing, by written contract, other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1991, § 3.314) 
Sec. 2-94. - Health officer. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 250.01, as incorporated by reference into Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1), the city hereby designates the county health department and the county health officer as the health department and health officer for the city. 
(Code 1991, § 3.316) 
Secs. 2-95-2-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- City finance, Wis. Stats. § 62.15; municipal budget systems, Wis. Stats. ch. 65; municipal borrowing and municipal bonds, Wis. Stats. ch. 67; municipal finances generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.0601 et seq. 

Sec. 2-117. - Official depositories. 
    The official depositories of the city shall be as established at the organizational meeting of the council in April of each year. 
(Code 1991, § 3.201) 
State Law reference- City depositories, Wis. Stats. § 62.12(7); public depositories generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 34; designation of public depositories, Wis. Stats. § 34.05. 
Sec. 2-118. - Authorized signatures. 
    The authorized signatures for the transfer of city funds shall be the mayor, president of the council, the city administrator, the deputy clerk and the deputy treasurer. 
(Code 1991, § 3.202) 
Sec. 2-119. - Signatures required. 
    Each and every draft from any city account shall be signed by the city administrator, or in his absence the deputy clerk or deputy treasurer, and countersigned by the mayor, or in his absence the president of the council; provided, however, the transfer of funds from one city account to another city account can be made with only the signature of the city administrator, or in his absence, the deputy treasurer. 
(Code 1991, § 3.203) 
State Law reference- Withdrawal or disbursement from local treasury, Wis. Stats. § 66.0607. 
Sec. 2-120. - Intra-governmental transfers. 
    Temporary cash transfers from and between various funds and accounts of the city may be made as necessity may require to avoid temporary shortages of funds in any particular account, provided that such transfers are: 
(1)  Repaid as promptly as the revenues of the various funds permit; 
(2)  Made in accordance with accepted municipal accounting procedures; and 
(3)  Reported and explained to the common council at the next meeting following the transfer. 
(Code 1991, § 3.205) 
Sec. 2-121. - Reimbursement bonds. 
    Pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code Regulations, section 1.150-2 (as the same may be amended or supplemented, the "regulation"), the city administrator, or his designee, is hereby designated and authorized to declare the city's official intent to reimburse itself for previously paid project expenditures out the proceeds of subsequently issued bonds. The city administrator is only authorized to declare the city's intent, and is not authorized to make capital expenditures or incur tax-exempt debt without further city approval. The authority granted herein to declare the city's official intent is made for the purpose of facilitating compliance with the Internal Revenue Code Regulations. The city administrator shall also be responsible for making the "reimbursement allocations" described in the regulations, being generally written allocations that evidence the city's use of the applicable bond proceeds to reimburse the original expenditures. Each declaration shall comply with the requirements of the regulations, including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Each declaration shall be made not later than 60 days after payment of the applicable project cost and shall state that the city reasonably expects to reimburse itself for the expenditure out of the proceeds of a bond issue or similar borrowing. 
(2)  Each declaration shall: 
a.  Contain a reasonably accurate description of the project, as defined in the regulations, which may include the property or program to be financed, as applicable, to which the expenditure relates; and 
b.  State the maximum principal amount of bonding expected to be issued for that project. 
(3)  Care shall be taken so that declarations are not made in cases where the city does not reasonably expect to issue reimbursement bonds to finance the subject project costs, and city officials are hereby authorized to consult with bond counsel concerning the requirements of the regulations and their application in particular circumstances. 
(4)  The council shall be advised from time to time on the desirability and timing of the issuance of reimbursement bonds relating to project expenditures for which the city has made declarations. 
(Code 1991, § 3.206) 
Sec. 2-122. - Uniform chart of accounts. 
    The uniform chart of accounts, as recommended by the state department of revenue, shall be used as the principal method of charting accounts, provided: 
(1)  It may not be necessary to utilize all accounts during any one budget year. 
(2)  Accounts may be added and deleted with the approval of the council. 
(3)  A specific name, purpose and term may be established or modified for any account, as approved by the council. 
(Code 1991, § 3.208) 
Sec. 2-123. - Non-lapsing continuing appropriation accounts. 
    The following non-lapsing continuing appropriation accounts are hereby established for the following purposes: 
(1)  Administration for: 
a.  The replacement of office equipment and furnishings in the administrative offices. 
b.  The maintenance and repair of the municipal buildings. 
c.  The condemnation of dilapidated property or other property designated for a public use through the condemnation process. 
(2)  Police department for: 
a.  The replacement of office equipment and furnishings in the police department. 
b.  The replacement of police squad vehicles. 
c.  The maintenance, repair and replacement of the emergency warning system. 
(3)  Fire department for: 
a.  The replacement of office equipment and furnishings in the fire department. 
b.  The major repair and replacement of firefighting equipment. 
c.  The replacement of fire department vehicles. 
(4)  Street department for: 
a.  The replacement of equipment used in the repair, maintenance, construction of streets and associated appurtenances. 
b.  The construction or reconstruction of streets and associated appurtenances. 
c.  The repair, replacement and/or new construction of curbs, sidewalks, storm sewer, bridges and dams. 
(5)  Library for: 
a.  The replacement of office equipment and furnishings at the library. 
b.  The construction of a new library, including site acquisition, architectural fees and similar expenses. 
(6)  Park improvements for: 
a.  The repair, replacement and/or new construction of park facilities and equipment. 
b.  Capital expenditures for the summer recreation programs. 
(7)  Industrial park for those expenditures incurred to foster industrial growth and development within the municipality. 
(8)  Snow removal. For the removal of snow and ice from municipal roadways. 
(Code 1991, § 3.209) 
Sec. 2-124. - Treasurer's bond. 
(a)  Bond eliminated. The city elects not to require the bond on the city treasurer provided for by Wis. Stats. § 70.67(1). 
(b)  City liable for default of city treasurer. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.67(2), the city shall be obligated to pay, if the city treasurer shall fail to do so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid by the city treasurer to the county treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1097 , 12-12-2017) 
Secs. 2-125-2-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-145-2-171. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-172. - Removal of members. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council, may remove for cause and replace any member of any board or commission. The replacement shall only serve for the remainder of the term of the removed member. For purposes of this section, the term "cause" shall include, but not be limited to, the failure to attend three consecutive scheduled meetings as authorized by the affected board or commission. 
(Code 1991, § 3.414) 
Sec. 2-173. - Library board. 
(a)  Creation. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 43.54, there is hereby created a city library board. 
(b)  Members, appointment, and term. Members of the library board shall be appointed and shall hold office pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 43.54. 
(c)  Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to members of the library board except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 43.54. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The board shall exercise the powers and duties enumerated in state statutes, the state administrative code and this Code. 
(Code 1991, § 3.401) 
Sec. 2-174. - Board of police and fire commissioners. 
(a)  Creation . Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13(2)(a), there is hereby created a city board of police and fire commissioners. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The board of police and fire commissioners is authorized to exercise the optional powers enumerated in Wis. Stats. § 62.13(6). 
(Code 1991, § 3.403) 
Sec. 2-175. - Board of public works; abolished. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.14(1), the city hereby dispenses with the board of public works. 
(Code 1991, § 3.404) 
Sec. 2-176. - Park board. 
(a)  Creation. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 27.08, there is hereby created a city board of park commissioners. 
(b)  Members, appointment and term . The board shall be composed of seven members appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. One of the mayor's appointments shall be involved with the senior citizens of the city. Appointees shall serve staggered terms of three years each. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as regular appointments are made. 
(c)  Compensation. Such compensation shall be paid to the members as may be set by the council by separate ordinance. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The park board shall exercise the powers and duties enumerated in state statutes and the state administrative code and shall carry out the directives of the council. 
(Code 1991, § 3.405) 
Sec. 2-177. - City tree board. 
(a)  Creation and establishment of the city tree board. There is hereby created and established a city tree board, which shall consist of five members, who possess knowledge and/or experience in arboriculture, horticulture, or landscaping; who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the common council. One of the five members shall be an employee of the city recommended by the director of public works; who shall serve as a liaison between the city tree board and the common council of the city. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(c)  Compensation. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  Comprehensive tree plan. It shall be the responsibility of the board or designee to study, investigate, develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the common council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the city. 
(2)  Budget. The board shall submit a budget request to the director of public works each year as part of the city's annual budget process. The request should identify both operational and capital expenses for the upcoming year, as well as an equipment replacement plan. The board shall make itself available to discuss budget requests with the city administrator and/or finance and purchasing committee as needed. 
(3)  Arbor Day recognition. Each year the board shall consider, develop, organize and participate in appropriate activities and events recognizing National Arbor Day. The board may coordinate efforts with other local organizations and individuals at its discretion. 
(4)  Other duties and responsibilities. The board, when requested by the common council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommendation upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(e)  Operation. The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a permanent journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. The board shall meet on a regular basis at least once every two months. The chair has the authority to call additional meetings as needed. 
(f)  Review by common council. 
(1)  Right to review. The common council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree board. 
(2)  Right to appeal. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the city tree board to the common council who may hear the matter and make the final decision. 
(3)  Plan approval. Plans that include planting trees in the boulevard along any city street shall be brought before the council for approval. 
(Code 1991, § 3.406) 
Sec. 2-178. - City plan commission. 
(a)  Creation. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23, there is hereby created a city plan commission for the city. 
(b)  Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to the members of the plan commission. 
(Code 1991, § 3.407) 
Sec. 2-179. - Board of review. 
(a)  Members. The board of review shall consist of the mayor, the city administrator and the entire council. In compliance with Wis. Stats. § 70.46(4), the city administrator shall be the voting member who, within two years of the board's first meeting, has attended a training session pursuant to Wis. 
Stats. § 73.03(55). If, for any reason, the city administrator is unable to attend a meeting of the board of review, or has not received the proper training required by Wis. Stats. § 70.46(4), then the city administrator shall designate an alternate city official, who has obtained the proper training, to attend the board of review meeting in place of the city administrator. 
(b)  Compensation. Such compensation shall be paid to the mayor and alderpersons as may be established by separate ordinance. No compensation beyond his regular salary shall be paid to the clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 3.408) 
Sec. 2-180. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  Creation. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), there is hereby created a zoning board of appeals for the city. 
(b)  Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to members of the zoning board of appeals. 
(Code 1991, § 3.409) 
Sec. 2-181. - City housing authority. 
    This section shall confirm and ratify that the city housing authority has been duly and properly created by prior resolution and is now transacting business, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1201. 
(Code 1991, § 3.411) 
Sec. 2-182. - Board on tourism. 
(a)  Creation. A board is hereby created for the over sight of the tourism imposed pursuant to section 34-1. 
(b)  Members, appointment and term. This board shall be composed of seven members, who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. One member shall be a member of the common council, and shall serve a one-year term. The remaining six members shall serve staggered three-year terms so that two members are appointed each year; provided, however, the following terms will be observed for the first appointments: two members will serve for one year, two members will serve for two years, and two members will serve for three years. Of these six members, a minimum of three members shall be representatives of the area hotel and motel, restaurant, or tourism industry. A member need not be a resident of the city provided either he is the owner of a business located in the city, or he is employed by a business located in the city. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The board shall exercise the powers and duties enumerated in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, and shall oversee the administration of the tourism collected. The board shall annually appoint a chairperson and a secretary at their first meeting each May, and shall comply with the state open meeting law, and shall record and retain minutes of all meetings and actions. 
(d)  Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to the members for their work on this board. 
(Code 1991, § 3.505; Ord. No. 2015-1079, 3-10-2015) 
Secs. 2-183-2-202. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-203. - Committee powers and duties. 
    Committees shall analyze, investigate and review such matters as may be referred to them by the council, mayor or administrator, and shall promptly submit recommendations thereon. Recommendations shall be approved by a majority of the committee and shall state a definite action or answer to each matter referred to the committee. A committee may require any officer or employee of the city to confer with it and supply information in connection with any matter pending before it. No committee has the power to take final action on any matter, except as specifically provided by this Code or state law. 
(Code 1991, § 3.504) 
Sec. 2-204. - Standing committees. 
(a)  Creation. The following standing committees are hereby established and given the following duties and powers: 
(1)  The finance and purchasing committee shall be primarily responsible for formulating the annual budget and reviewing the purchasing of supplies and equipment, and such other matters as may be referred to it by the council. 
(2)  The health, welfare, and sustainability committee shall be primarily responsible for the monitoring of the health and welfare of the city, including enforcement of chapter 24, oversight of housing and property rehabilitation programs, and to make recommendations to the council concerning issues relating to building maintenance, public nuisances, and issues affecting environmental sustainability and such other matters as may be referred to it by the council. The committee shall also administer the various federal and state housing programs and grants awarded to the city. Such administration shall include the review, ranking, approval and disapproval of loans, the disbursement of grant funds, including new funds and revolving funds, the preparation, recording and preserving of necessary documents, and such other duties and procedures as may be imposed from time to time by the state department of housing or any other granting authority. 
(3)  The ordinances, licenses and permits committee shall be primarily responsible for the analysis of ordinances and the review, issuance or termination of licenses and permits, and such other matters as may be referred to it by the council. 
(4)  The public works committee shall carry out the statutory duties and responsibilities of a board of public works as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.14, and such other matters as may be referred to it by the council. 
(5)  The personnel and negotiating committee shall be primarily responsible for the monitoring of personnel matters and the handling of union contract negotiations and such other matters as may be referred to it by the council. 
(b)  Committee appointments. Standing committees shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. The appointments shall be made at the annual organizational meeting of the city. Each committee shall consist of at least three alderpersons and each committee shall elect its own chairperson. 
(Code 1991, § 3.501) 
Sec. 2-205. - Select committees. 
(a)  Creation. The mayor or the council may create, at any time, a committee for a special purpose. 
(b)  Appointment. Select committees created by the mayor shall be appointed by the mayor, and the select committees created by the council shall be appointed by the council. Select committees may include such number of city officers, employees or citizens as the appointing authority may decide. 
(c)  Termination. Any select committee may be terminated at any time by the appointing authority. Any member of any select committee may be removed and replaced at any time by the appointing authority. 
(Code 1991, § 3.502) 
Secs. 2-206-2-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-236-2-263. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Police departments, Wis. Stats. § 162.13; law enforcement agency policies on use of force and citizen complaint procedures, Wis. Stats. § 66.0511; police pay when acting outside of city, Wis. Stats. § 66.0513. 

Sec. 2-264. - Police department created. 
    The police department for the city is hereby created, consisting of a chief of police and such other officers, assistants and patrol officers as may be appointed from time to time pursuant to state statutes (e.g., Wis. Stats. § 62.13), and the ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 5.01) 
Sec. 2-265. - Parking attendant. 
(a)  Creation. The position of parking attendant is hereby created. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The parking attendant shall have the power and duty to enforce all provisions of this Code which regulate the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and violations of ordinances at the city boat launches, and is authorized to issue citations for such violations. 
(Code 1991, § 5.05) 
Sec. 2-266. - Duties and powers of department. 
    Every member of the police department shall: 
(1)  Familiarize himself with the ordinances of the city and state statutes, and attend to the enforcement of such ordinances by all lawful means. 
(2)  Help prevent crimes, misdemeanors, felonies and ordinance violations, and help protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the city and its inhabitants. 
(3)  Report all street and sidewalk obstructions, unlighted streetlamps, unlawful street signs or signals, defective or dangerous streets and sidewalks, and all other health or safety hazards to the appropriate city official responsible for their repair or service. 
(4)  Maintain order at the scene of a fire or any other fire response within the city. 
(5)  See that the necessary permits and licenses issued by the state or city are in the possession of or properly displayed by any person engaged in an activity or business within the city for which such permit or license is required, and see that the terms and conditions of such permits and licenses are complied with, and report violations to the appropriate city official. 
(6)  Perform such other lawful duties as ordered by the chief of police, the board of police and fire commission and the mayor or common council. 
(Code 1991, § 5.06) 
Secs. 2-267-2-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Fire departments, Wis. Stats. § 62.13(8). 

Sec. 2-296. - Fire department created. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13(8), the fire department for the city is hereby created, and the members of the existing fire department are hereby recognized as members of the official fire department of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 6.01) 
Sec. 2-297. - Bylaws. 
    The fire department is authorized and directed to adopt bylaws for the control, management, government and regulation of its business and proceedings. Said bylaws shall become effective and operative after adoption by a two-thirds vote of the members of the department, and upon approval by the board of police and fire commissioners. All amendments shall be adopted in the same manner. 
(Code 1991, § 6.02) 
Sec. 2-298. - Membership and organization. 
(a)  Size. The fire department shall consist of not less than 22 active members. 
(b)  Members. 
(1)  Any person desiring to be a member may file with the city clerk or secretary of the fire department an application in such form and providing such information as the fire department may require. 
(2)  Each member shall either be a resident of the city or reside within five miles of city hall. 
(3)  Members shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to education, training, experience and general fitness for the position, and based upon the needs of the department. The procedures of Wis. Stats. § 62.13 shall be followed in making appointments. 
(4)  Upon appointment as a member and prior to performing any duties as a member, each member shall file a certificate of physical examination providing such information to the satisfaction of the department that the member is physically fit and able to perform his duties. 
(c)  Officers. 
(1)  There shall be one chief, one assistant chief and one secretary-treasurer for the fire department, and one captain and one lieutenant for each company within the department. 
(2)  The chief and all officers shall be appointed Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 
(d)  Companies. The fire department may be divided into such companies as the chief may deem necessary. 
(Code 1991, § 6.04) 
Sec. 2-299. - Police powers. 
    In addition to the powers set forth in Wis. Stats. § 213.095 and all other statutory powers, firefighters shall have the following police powers: 
(1)  The chief and all officers in command at any fire are hereby vested with full and complete police authority at fires. Any officer may cause the arrest of any person failing to give the right-of-way to the fire department in responding to a fire. 
(2)  It shall be lawful for any firefighter while acting under the direction of the chief or other officer in command, to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire, and to perform any act authorized by an officer pursuant to the officer's general police powers. 
(Code 1991, § 6.06) 
Sec. 2-300. - Emergency response fees. 
(a)  Establishment. The city fire department shall charge an "emergency response fee" to the owners of real property, to the owners of personal property and/or to the persons or entities responsible for causing an emergency or other event, for which emergency services are provided by the fire department within the city. This fee is a charge for service and is applied based on protective services being rendered independent of whether the service was wanted or requested. Emergency services include responses to fire calls, carbon monoxide calls, and all other emergency calls and services rendered by the fire department, and shall only be applied if fire apparatus leaves the station. 
(b)  Property covered. All real and personal property located within the city shall be subject to the emergency response fee, including property which is exempt from real estate and/or personal property taxes, such as government property, church property and school property. All real and personal property located outside of the city shall be subject to such fees as may be established by the Townships Rural Fire Association ("TRFA"), which in turn shall pay the fees established by separate contract between the city and the TRFA. 
(c)  Persons liable. Each owner of real estate and each owner of personal property for which an emergency call is made by the fire department, and each person responsible for causing or starting an emergency for which an emergency call is made by the fire department, shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the fees established herein. 
(d)  Fee schedule. The schedule of fees for emergency calls shall be as established by the city. 
(e)  Information from fire department. Within a reasonable amount of time after each emergency call, but not exceeding 30 days, the fire department shall submit to the city administrator an itemized bill showing the following: 
(1)  Date of emergency call; 
(2)  Location of emergency call; 
(3)  Description of property on emergency, i.e., real estate or personal property; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the property, and the name and address of the person causing the emergency (if known); 
(5)  The name and address of any and all insurers which may be liable for the emergency response fee, or a statement that no such insurers exist, or a statement that no such insurers could be determined; 
(6)  The number of firefighters responding to the call and the time spent by each firefighter responding to the call; and 
(7)  The identity of each truck responding to the emergency call and the time spent by each truck responding to the call. 
(f)  Collection. 
(1)  Computation. Within a reasonable amount of time after receipt of the foregoing information from the fire department, but not exceeding 30 days, the city shall calculate a bill for the emergency call pursuant to the fee schedule. 
(2)  Collection from insurer. Upon computation of the emergency response fee, the city shall mail the bill to the insurer of the owner and person responsible, if known, for causing the emergency. The city shall also mail a copy of this correspondence to the owner and person responsible, if known, for causing the emergency. The city shall take such additional steps, short of litigation, as are reasonably necessary to attempt to obtain a response and payment from the insurer. 
(3)  Collection from responsible person . If no insurance exists, or if the city is unable to obtain a response or payment from an identified insurer within 90 days of the date on which the aforesaid bill was mailed to the insurer, then the city shall mail the bill to the owner and person responsible, if known, for causing the emergency. The city shall take such additional steps as are reasonably necessary to obtain a response and payment from the owner and person responsible, if known, for causing the emergency. 
(4)  Lien on real estate . All unpaid fees and accrued interest charged against the owner of real estate shall become a lien against the real estate for which the emergency response was provided and, if not paid within 90 days from the date of first billing to the owner, shall be placed on the tax roll by the city as a special charge against such real property for that year pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(5)  Collection regarding personal property . All unpaid fees and accrued interest charged against the owner of personal property shall be collected in any manner permitted by law if not paid within 90 days from the date of first billing. 
(6)  Collection from responsible person . All unpaid fees and accrued interest charged against a person responsible for commencing or causing the emergency shall be collected in any manner permitted by law if not paid within 90 days from the date of first billing. 
(7)  Alternative collection. As an alternative to and in addition to the provisions set forth above, the city may pursue any remedy available at law or in equity for the collection of unpaid emergency response fees. 
(g)  Appeals. 
(1)  The police and fire commission (PFC) is hereby authorized and appointed to hear and decide upon all appeals made by any property owner or responsible person upon whom a fee has been imposed. Any property owner or responsible person may appeal any fee by filing with the city clerk a written appeal, on forms provided by the city, within 30 days after the date of the first billing of the fee from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall include the following: 
a.  The name and address of the property owner and responsible person; 
b.  The amount of the emergency response fee being contested; 
c.  The date, location and description of the property involved in the emergency; and 
d.  A narrative summary setting forth with specificity the grounds for contesting the fee. 
(2)  The PFC shall hold a hearing within 45 days after receipt of such appeal, and shall give written notice to all interested parties at least ten days prior to such hearing. The chairperson shall administer oaths to all persons providing factual testimony to the PFC and may compel the attendance of any witness by subpoena. The appellant shall attend said hearing in person, and may also be represented by counsel. The PFC shall decide all appeals within 30 days after the conclusion of said hearing, and shall transmit a signed copy of its decision to the appellant and all other interested parties. Nothing herein shall limit the PSC from adjourning and continuing the hearing from time to time and place to place for the purpose of accommodating the attendance of interested persons, witnesses, and PFC members, or for the purpose of preparing or presenting additional facts or argument. Moreover, the PFC may adopt such additional procedural rules as it deems necessary to ensure a fair, impartial and expedient hearing on each appeal. The decision of the PFC shall be final. 
(h)  Appeal process. 
(1)  The PFC shall hold a hearing within 45 days after receipt of such appeal, and shall give written notice to all interested parties at least ten days prior to such hearing. The chairperson shall administer oaths to all persons providing factual testimony to the PFC and may compel the attendance of any witness by subpoena. The appellant shall attend said hearing in person, and may also be represented by counsel. The PFC shall decide all appeals within 30 days after the conclusion of said hearing, and shall transmit a signed copy of its decision to the appellant and all other interested parties. Nothing herein shall limit the PFC from adjourning and continuing the hearing from time to time and place to place for the purpose of accommodating the attendance of interested persons, witnesses, and PFC members, or for the purpose of preparing or presenting additional facts or argument. Moreover, the PFC may adopt such additional procedural rules as it deems necessary to ensure a fair, impartial and expedient hearing on each appeal. 
(2)  The PFC is authorized to waive or replace a fee with an alternative and more appropriate fee based on its review of the evidence. Reasons for a change to the original fee will most likely be based, but not limited to, the following criteria: 
a.  Evidence supports that no service was rendered; 
b.  Evidence supports that the service rendered does not match the applied fee as outlined in the fee schedule; 
c.  No fee on the schedule appropriately matches the service rendered. 
(3)  The decision of the PFC shall be final. 
(i)  Deadlines. Failure to comply with any of the time periods set forth above shall not invalidate the emergency response fee, nor shall it excuse the responsible person from liability therefor. 
(Code 1991, § 6.08) 
State Law reference- Collection of fees from state department of transportation, Wis. Stats. § 62.13(8). 
Sec. 2-301. - Fire inspector. 
(a)  Fire chief to be fire inspector. The fire chief shall hold the office of fire inspector with power to appoint one or more deputy fire inspectors, who shall perform the same duties and shall have the same power as the fire inspector. 
(b)  Inspection duties. It shall be the duty of the fire inspector to provide for the inspection of every public building and place of employment to determine and cause to be eliminated any fire hazard or any violation of any law relating to fire hazards or to the prevention of fires, to the extent required by Wis. Stats. § 101.14, and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 314, and the fire inspector shall further make and keep on file written reports of such inspections as may be required by the state department of safety and professional services. 
(c)  Citation authority. The fire inspector and deputy fire inspectors shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of chapter 16 using the uniform citation method set forth in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
(d)  Entering on premises. In accordance with section 24-3, no person shall deny a fire inspector free access to any property within the city with proper notice and at a reasonable time for the purpose of making fire inspections. No person shall hinder or obstruct a fire inspector in the performance of his duty or refuse to observe any lawful direction given by the inspector. The fire inspector shall be deemed a peace officer for the purpose of applying for, obtaining and executing a special inspection warrant pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(e)  Disclaimer on inspections. The purpose of the inspections under this section is to comply with the fire inspection provisions of the state codes. The inspections and the reports, findings and orders issued after such inspections are not intended as, nor are they to be construed as, a guarantee. In order to advise owners, occupants and other interested persons, a disclaimer shall be included in each inspection report as follows: "The findings of the inspection contained herein are intended to report conditions of non-compliance with code provisions that are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not involve a detailed examination of the mechanical systems or the closed premises. The city makes no warranty or representation, expressed or implied that its inspection of the property has discovered all fire code violations or all fire hazards or that this report contains a complete list of all fire code violations existing on the property inspected herein." 
(f)  Inspection fees. Fees for routine annual and semi-annual inspections shall be as established by the city. Fees for re-inspection that are necessitated by the existence of a violation ascertained during a routine inspection shall be as established by the city. 
(g)  Violation and penalty. Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 314 or chapter 1, article II of this Code, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1991, § 6.09(2)-(7), (9)) 
Secs. 2-302-2-318. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-319. - Public works department created. 
    The public works department for the city is hereby created, consisting of the director of public works and such other city employees as may be hired from time to time to serve in the department. 
(Code 1991, § 7.01) 
Sec. 2-320. - Duties and powers. 
    The department is charged with the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To carry out the maintenance, repair and construction of streets, alleys, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, bridges, street signs, traffic control devices, signs and markings, storm sewers, culverts and drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, city parks, buildings and other city property, and all machinery and equipment used by the department. 
(2)  To carry out garbage and refuse collection and disposal, snow and ice removal, and street cleaning. 
(3)  To operate the sewage treatment plant and city water system. 
(Code 1991, § 7.04) 
Sec. 2-321. - Public construction. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.15(1), the public works department is hereby authorized to perform any class of public construction or any part thereof without submitting the same for bids, provided the council authorizes the particular project by resolution. 
(Code 1991, § 7.05) 
Chapter 4 - AIRPORT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Aeronautics, Wis. Stats. ch. 114. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAUSTON-NEW LISBON UNION AIRPORT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Union airports, Wis. Stats. § 114.151. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 4-19-4-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENT 

Sec. 4-40. - Union airport established. 
    It is hereby deemed to be in the best interests of the city that the city join with the City of New Lisbon for the purpose of establishing a union airport facility for the convenience of their citizens and to further the economic growth of the area. In furtherance of that purpose and pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 114.151, the city, in cooperation with the City of New Lisbon, hereby establishes a joint airport to be known as the "Mauston-New Lisbon Union Airport." 
(Code 1991, § 10.102) 
Sec. 4-41. - Union airport commission. 
(a)  Establishment. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 114.14(1), there is hereby established a union airport commission which shall be vested with jurisdiction over the construction, improvement, equipment, maintenance and operation of the airport. 
(b)  Appointment of commissioners. The commission shall consist of five residents of the county. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 114.14(2)(a), they shall be persons especially interested in aeronautics. Their terms shall be for four years, commencing on June 1 of the year of appointment. Two commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor of the city, and two commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor of New Lisbon. The city shall appoint one commissioner each even-numbered year, and New Lisbon shall appoint one commissioner each odd-numbered year. The fifth commissioner shall be jointly appointed by the mayors of the city and New Lisbon, and if the mayors cannot agree upon a joint appointment, then this position shall remain vacant until agreement can be reached. 
(c)  Officers. The commission shall annually elect one member as chairperson, and another as secretary. The chairperson shall conduct the meetings and establish the agendas therefore. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all commission proceedings and transactions and report the same to the cities. 
(d)  Deposit of moneys. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 114.14(2)(f) and (g), all moneys appropriated for the airport by the cities, and all moneys earned by the airport, and all other moneys received by or for the airport in any manner or for any reason whatsoever, shall be deposited with the treasurer of the city, where it shall be kept in a special fund and paid out only on order of the airport commission, drawn and signed by the secretary and countersigned by the chairperson. 
(e)  Powers and duties. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 114.2, the commission shall have complete and exclusive management and control over the airport, subject to the limitations imposed by Wis. Stats. ch. 114 and this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Employees. The commission may employ an airport manager and/or other airport employees, who may be members of the commission. The duties and salary of each such person may be fixed by the commission. No commissioner shall vote on the question of his own selection as an employee, nor on the question of his own compensation. 
(2)  Contracts. The commission may make contracts with private persons, the United States or any agency for the construction, improvement, equipment, maintenance or operation of the airport, provided that contracts with private parties may not exceed a term of ten years. 
(3)  Rules and regulations. The commission may adopt rules and regulations for the use of the airport, subject to the approval of both cities before they take effect. 
(4)  Fees and charges. The commission may adopt fees and charges for the use of the airport, subject to the approval of both cities before they take effect. 
(5)  Annual report. The commission shall prepare and submit an annual report in detail to each city. Such reports shall include information on traffic and use of the airport, airport expenditures and revenues, and other information which the commission may deem pertinent to properly evaluate the operation of said facility. 
(6)  Budgets. The commission shall submit to each city an annual budget setting forth anticipated expenditures and revenues, including capital improvements, and the amount recommended to be raised by taxation for airport facilities. The budget shall be submitted each year on or before October 1. 
(7)  Leases. The commission shall prepare and adopt standard leases and agreements for the various types of airport activities and land uses authorized under this chapter, subject to the approval of both cities before they take effect. 
(8)  Buildings. The commission shall manage, control and encourage the development of the airport through private investment. For example, to encourage private persons to build private hangars and to incur substantial building costs, the commission may approve long term leases which provide for the reexamination and readjustment of rates and charges at specified periods of time during the terms of the lease. The commission shall also oversee all construction on the airport. Buildings shall be of metal or masonry construction, and all building plans shall be approved by the commission prior to construction. 
(f)  Limitations of authority. In addition to any other limitations imposed by Wis. Stats. ch. 114 or this chapter, the authority of the commission shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  Public access . In no case shall the public be deprived of equal and uniform use of the airport. 
(2)  Non-binding on cities . No act, contract, lease or other activity of the commission shall be or become a binding contract on either city unless expressly authorized by the city, and then only to the extent so expressly authorized. 
(3)  Private enterprise preference. The commission shall refrain from using public employees or public funds for the purpose of engaging in any activity or providing any service (excluding airport maintenance) that can be conducted or provided satisfactorily by private parties through proper lease arrangements. The commission shall refrain from erecting buildings with public funds which are to be used and occupied by private parties (excluding utility buildings, storage facilities and similar buildings needed solely for the maintenance and operation of the airport). 
(Code 1991, § 10.103) 
Sec. 4-42. - Union airport budget. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 114.15, the city is authorized to appropriate money in each year for the purpose of aiding and assisting in the maintenance, operation, management and improvement of the union airport. Upon receipt of an airport budget from the airport commission, representatives from the city and New Lisbon shall meet to consider the airport budget prior to each city's respective budget meetings. The cities, with input from the commission, shall finalize an airport budget, which shall be submitted to each city for final approval. Upon approval by both cities, the airport budget and each city's share thereof shall become binding upon both cities and shall be divided equally between the cities, added to the tax roll of each city, and collected by each city in the same manner as other revenues raised in connection with the general fund. 
(Code 1991, § 10.104) 
Sec. 4-43. - Termination. 
    Either city may withdraw from joint operation and control of the airport, and may relinquish its interest in the airport. Such action shall be taken by repeal of this chapter, upon 60 days notice to the other city. 
(Code 1991, § 10.105) 
Secs. 4-44-4-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC CONDUCT 

Sec. 4-75. - Airport vehicle and pedestrian traffic. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency equipment means crash, fire and rescue, or police motor vehicles and such other equipment as the airport manager or airport commissioners may designate as necessary to safeguard airport runways, taxiways, ramps, buildings and other property. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Service, maintenance and construction equipment means approved equipment normally operated by the airport owner, its agents or under contract, fixed base operator, or other governmental agencies performing official duties on landing areas, runways, taxiways and peripheral roads for the servicing, maintenance and construction of airport facilities and services or for the servicing of aircraft. The term "service, maintenance and construction equipment includes equipment owned and operated by a contractor performing work on the airport under contractual agreement with the airport commission. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn excepting aircraft. 
(b)  Operation of vehicles on runways, taxiways, and ramps. 
(1)  No vehicle shall enter, be driven, or operated upon any airport runway, taxiway, ramp, tie down area, or any area posted by signs prohibiting the entrance thereon, except as provided herein. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency equipment or service, maintenance, and construction equipment when engaged in performing normal duties. 
(3)  Aircraft owners and operators may be granted authorization by the airport commission to operate a vehicle to reach their own aircraft in a tie down area or hangar. Since there is only one access to the airport and that access intersects and crosses ramp areas and some taxiways, aircraft owners and operators that own hangars on the airport may obtain blanket authorization to reach their hangar with a vehicle by applying to the airport commission for such approval. All other authorizations granted shall apply only to a specific need request. Unless specifically authorized, aircraft owners or operators shall not drive on any runway, taxiway, or ramp and shall proceed through the tie down area at a speed not to exceed ten miles per hour. They shall not at any time park a vehicle on any area used for the movement of aircraft. 
(c)  Speed of vehicles. No vehicle shall be driven upon any road within the perimeter of the airport or upon other airport areas, in excess of the speed limit posted, nor shall the driver fail to adhere to any sign posted to regulate vehicle traffic on or about the airport. 
(d)  Pedestrian traffic on airport. 
(1)  No pedestrian shall be allowed beyond the administration area or upon the apron or aircraft tie down area unless for the purpose of embarking in or disembarking from an aircraft, or unless authorized by the airport commission or airport manager. 
(2)  Pedestrian traffic is prohibited on taxiways, runways, and outlying areas of the airport except for those employees of the airport, cities of New Lisbon and Mauston, county, state or federal government, or contractors engaged in airport construction or maintenance work, and except as allowed in designated areas during fly-in plane shows or other such events as authorized by the airport commission. 
(e)  Vehicle parking. All vehicles parked on the airport shall be parked in designated areas and in accordance with posted signs or other markings. The airport commission or agents of the commission may move, or order the removal of any vehicle improperly parked at the vehicle owner's expense. 
(Code 1991, § 10.107) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOL BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. ch. 125; local regulations of alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. § 125.10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - State statute adopted. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125 are hereby adopted and, by reference, made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by Wis. Stats. ch. 125 is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any penalty imposed by Wis. Stats. ch. 125 is not imposed or adopted by this chapter, but instead, the separate penalties prescribed herein shall be imposed; provided, however, the penalties prescribed herein shall be limited to and shall not exceed the penalties prescribed by Wis. Stats. ch. 125 for the same act. 
(Code 1991, § 12.10) 
Sec. 6-2. - Conduct prohibited. 
    In addition to all other requirements of the statutes and this Code, the following requirements shall also be observed: 
(1)  Disorderly conduct. Each licensed or permitted premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct or gambling, proscribed by this Code or state statute, shall be allowed at any time on any such premises. It shall be a violation of this section for any operator to fail to take reasonable steps to prevent, to avoid and to stop such proscribed conduct. 
(2)  Agents and employees. A violation of this chapter by an authorized agent or employee of a licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee. 
(3)  Sanitation and safety. All licensed premises shall conform to all state and local sanitary, safety and health rules, regulations and codes. 
(4)  False applications. No person or organization shall submit a false application for a license. No person or organization shall submit an application on the behalf of, or as a front for, any other person or organization. 
(5)  Inspection for enforcement. Wis. Stats. § 139.08(4) is incorporated herein by reference. 
(6)  Improper exhibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, present or engage in, or for any licensee or manager or agent of a licensee to permit any employee, entertainer or patron to perform, present or engage in, on the licensed premises, any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition, or any video, electronic or photographic reproduction of any act, demonstration, dance or exhibition, which: 
a.  Exposes human genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; 
b.  Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates human genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anal region or pubic hair regions; 
c.  Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof; 
d.  Engages in or simulates sexual intercourse and/or sexual contact (as defined in Wis. Stats. § 939.22), including the touching of any portion of the female breast or the male and/or female genitals; or 
e.  Exposes the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(7)  Exempt establishments. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the following licensed establishments: theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performance of artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude erotic dancing. 
(8)  Common terms. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "licensed premises" and "licensed establishments" mean any establishment licensed by the common council of the city to sell alcohol beverages pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 125. The term "licensee" means the holder of a retail class A, class B, or class C license granted by the common council of the city under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(Code 1991, § 12.13; Ord. No. 2017-1095 , 11-28-2017) 
Secs. 6-3-6-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Retail licenses and permits, Wis. Stats. §§ 125.25 et seq., 125.51. 

Sec. 6-25. - Classes, fees and number. 
(a)  The following classes and denominations of licenses may be issued by the city clerk under the authority of the city council upon compliance with the specified law and payment of the fee established by the city: 
(1)  Class A fermented malt beverage license under Wis. Stats. § 125.25. 
(2)  Class A cider license, per Wis. Stats. § 125.51(2). 
(3)  Class B fermented malt beverage license under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(1). 
(4)  Class B fermented malt beverage six-month license under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(5). 
(5)  Class B fermented malt beverage picnic license under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6). 
(6)  Class A intoxicating liquor license under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(2). 
(7)  Class B intoxicating liquor license under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3). 
(8)  Temporary Class B intoxicating liquor license under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(10). 
(9)  Operator's license under Wis. Stats. § 125.17(1). 
(10)  Temporary operator's license under Wis. Stats. § 125.17(4). 
(11)  Class C license under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3m). 
(b)  As of December 1, 1997, the city had 13 Class B liquor licenses. The population in 1997 was 3,609. For every 500 capita increase, the city receives one additional reserve license. 
(Code 1991, § 12.11) 
State Law reference- Alcohol liquor license fees, Wis. Stats. §§ 125.25(4), 125.26(4), 125.51(2)(d), 125.51(2)(3m)(e), 125.17(3). 
Sec. 6-26. - Additional requirements. 
    In addition to all statutory requirements, the following requirements shall be fulfilled for each license: 
(1)  Qualifications. In determining the suitability of an applicant, consideration shall be given to the moral character and financial responsibility of the applicant, the appropriateness of the location and premises proposed, and, generally, the applicant's fitness for the trust to be imposed. 
(2)  Outstanding debts. No license shall be granted for any premises for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid, or to any person delinquent in payment of such claims, including unpaid forfeiture judgments to the city and city utility bills. 
(3)  Investigation. The clerk shall notify the police department of each new application, and the department shall investigate and provide the clerk with the following information regarding each new applicant: 
a.  A copy of the applicant's criminal conviction record. 
b.  A copy of the applicant's traffic record. 
c.  A copy of the applicant's city ordinance violation record. 
d.  A record of any pending criminal charge and the circumstances of the charge. 
(4)  Referral by clerk. If the clerk does not receive any of the foregoing information from the police, the clerk shall refer the application directly to the council for action. If the clerk receives any of the foregoing information from the police, the clerk shall refer the same to the ordinances, licenses and permits committee, which shall conduct a confidential review of the foregoing information to determine the following: 
a.  Whether the applicant has habitually been a law offender as per Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5)(b); 
b.  Whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony and has not been duly pardoned as per Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5)(b); or 
c.  Whether a pending criminal charge or any conviction for any felony, misdemeanor or other offense substantially relates to the circumstances of the job permitted by the license requested as per Wis. Stats. § 111.335(1)(c). 
In making the foregoing determinations, the committee may require the applicant to appear before the committee. 
(5)  Committee report. The committee shall report its determination to the common council, along with a recommendation as to whether the application should be granted. If the committee recommends that a license not be granted, the committee shall briefly state the reasons therefore. 
(6)  Appearance. All applicants who are requesting a license for the first time shall appear before the common council to answer any questions regarding their qualifications before said license shall be issued. Applicants seeking the renewal of a license need not appear unless specifically requested by the common council. 
(7)  Operator's license application. An application form for operators' licenses, prepared by the city, shall be filed with the clerk, and shall provide the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant. 
b.  Date of birth of applicant. 
c.  Name, address and telephone number of employer. 
d.  Name and address of place of employment. 
e.  Certification that the applicant is familiar with and shall obey the requirements of all applicable statutes and regulations, and this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 12.12) 
State Law reference- Licensee qualifications generally, Wis. Stats. § 124.05(5), (6). 
Sec. 6-27. - Class B fermented malt beverage picnic license. 
    In addition to all statutory requirements, the following requirements shall be fulfilled for each Class B fermented malt beverage picnic license issued pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6): 
(1)  Signs. All organizations issued a Class B license shall post, in a conspicuous location at the main point of sale and at the point of entry, a sufficient number of signs stating that no fermented malt beverage shall be served to any underage person or to any person without proper identification. 
(2)  Fencing. Unless the council otherwise permits, all organizations shall install a fence around the area where fermented malt beverages are to be sold and consumed. No sale or consumption of fermented malt beverages shall be permitted outside of the fenced area and no underage person shall be permitted within the fenced area unless such underage person is accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age. The organization shall also continually station a person at the entrance of the fenced area for the purpose of checking age identification. There shall be only one point of ingress and egress, and the fence shall be a minimum of four feet high. If consumption is to occur indoors, a fence shall be used unless persons under the legal drinking age are not permitted to enter the building. 
(3)  Outdoor consumption. 
a.  When an organization requests a license for an outdoor area, the application shall identify the location and size of the fenced area, and the organization shall work closely with the police department in locating and setting up the fenced area. 
b.  All property owners within 100 feet of the proposed outside beer garden shall be given notice of the pendency of an application for a Class B picnic license at least three days prior to the council meeting at which such license shall be acted upon. Notice shall be given by first class mail. 
(Code 1991, § 12.15) 
Sec. 6-28. - Class B licenses off premises consumption. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(b), the city hereby authorizes all retail Class B licenses to sell intoxicating liquor in the original package or container, in multiple not to exceed four liters at any one time, to be consumed off the premises where sold; however, wine may be sold for consumption off the premises in the original package or otherwise in any quantity. 
(Code 1991, § 12.18) 
Sec. 6-29. - Limitations on licenses issued. 
(a)  Class A . 
(1)  No quota for Class A (fermented malt beverage) licenses. There shall be no quota or limitation on the number of Class A (fermented malt beverage) licenses issued by the city. 
(2)  Quota for Class A (intoxicating liquor) licenses. There shall be no quota or limitation on the number of Class A (Intoxicating Liquor) licenses issued by the city. 
(b)  Class B. Class B (fermented malt beverage) licenses shall only be issued as follows: 
(1)  Taverns. All persons holding a valid Class B intoxicating liquor license shall be entitled to a Class B fermented malt beverage license. 
(2)  Restaurants. Businesses, commonly known as restaurants, which derive at least 75 percent of their gross revenues from the sale of food prepared on the premises for immediate consumption may receive a Class B license, subject to the following additional regulations: 
a.  All licenses issued hereunder shall only authorize the retail sale of fermented malt beverages by the glass or in an open, original container for consumption on the premises where sold; 
b.  All licenses issued hereunder shall not authorize the retail sale of fermented malt beverages for consumption off the premises; 
c.  The licensed premises shall not have a bar room or a bar counter defined as a room or a counter that is primarily used for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages; and 
d.  If any court of competent jurisdiction should determine that any of the regulations set forth in subsections (b)(2)a, b or c of this section are invalid for any reason whatsoever, then this entire subsection (b)(2) shall be null and void, and all licenses issued under this subsection (b)(2) shall immediately be null, void and canceled. 
(3)  Bona fide clubs. Bona fide clubs, lodges or societies, that have been in existence for at least 12 months before the date of application, may receive a Class B license, subject to the following additional regulations: 
a.  All licenses issued hereunder shall only authorize the retail sale of fermented malt beverages by the glass or in an open, original container for consumption on the premises where sold; 
b.  All licenses issued hereunder shall not authorize the retail sale of fermented malt beverages for consumption off the premises; 
c.  All licenses issued under this subsection (b)(3) shall only authorize the retail sale of fermented malt beverages to members of the club, lodge or society; and 
d.  If any court of competent jurisdiction should determine that any of the regulations set forth in subsections (b)(3)a, b or c of this section are invalid for any reason whatsoever, then this entire subsection (b)(3) shall be null and void, and all licenses issued under this subsection (b)(3) to clubs, lodges or societies shall immediately be null, void and canceled. 
(c)  Annexations. In the event of the annexation of land to the city, if the annexed land has one or more premises with Class A (fermented malt beverage), Class B (fermented malt beverage), and/or Class A (intoxicating liquor) licenses, and if each of said premises has held said license for a period of not less than two years prior to the publication of the notice of intent to circulate the annexation petition, the city shall, upon annexation of said premises, issue the equivalent license to the licensee on said premises if requested and if the licensee and premises otherwise meet the qualifications required herein; provided, however, each such license shall be restricted in that it shall only be renewable to the same premises and cannot be moved to any other location, and provided further that, upon abandonment of said premises, the license shall be permanently retired. 
(Code 1991, § 12.17; Ord. No. 2016-1086 , 7-12-2016) 
Sec. 6-30. - Non-renewals, revocations, and suspensions. 
    In addition to all statutory procedures and requirements, the city may also revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license as provided in this section. 
(1)  Abandonment. 
a.  Whenever a licensee fails to use such license for a period of 90 consecutive days, the licensee shall be deemed to have forfeited such license. The city may request of a licensee copies of the sales reports in order to verify the use of license. Failure to provide said reports within 14 days of the request, licensee shall be deemed to have forfeited such license. The term "use" as used herein shall mean a minimum of 20 hours in a 30-day period as evidenced by the business' posted hours of operation and sales reports for the regular sale of alcohol beverages. 
b.  The clerk shall, by certified mail, notify the licensee of said forfeiture. Within 15 days of the receipt of said notice, the licensee may petition to the city council for a 180-day extension of time within which to use such license. The council shall grant such extension if the licensee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the council that the license was not used due to undue hardship or unusual circumstances beyond his control. In making its decision, the council may consider such factors as financial hardship; damage to the premises rendering it temporarily unfit for safe operation; a closing of the premises for a reasonable period to alter, repair, remodel or redecorate; closing the premises prior to a sale when such sale shall be reasonably anticipated and documented by the holder; and an illness of the licensee with proof of such illness. The granting of an extension shall not be unreasonably denied, however, the decision of the council shall be final and no further extensions shall be authorized. 
c.  If the premises shall be destroyed or damaged by fire or other natural causes, and cannot be reasonably repaired or rebuilt within the 180-day extension, the council, upon a showing that the licensee is making substantial efforts to repair the premises and reopen for regular business, may grant one additional extension of 90 days. The term "substantial efforts" shall include, but not be limited to, a showing that the licensee has employed someone to make the necessary repairs, that work is being done, and that repairs will be completed within the period of the extension. 
(2)  Failure to pay. Whenever a grantee of any of the licenses listed above shall not pay for such license and physically obtain such license from the city clerk office within 30 days after such license is granted, such grantee shall be deemed to have forfeited such license and the clerk shall, by certified or registered mail, notify the grantee thereof. 
(3)  Point values for violations, revocations and suspensions. In order to form a basis for suspension, revocation, non-issuance, or nonrenewal, the following demerit system is hereby established to identify habitually troublesome license holders who have repeatedly violated state statutes or city ordinances, or the similar ordinances of any other state jurisdiction issuing licenses pursuant to Wis. Stats., ch. 125, for the purpose of recommending suspension, revocation, non-issuance, or nonrenewal of the license to the common council and appropriate action thereby. 
(4)  Point schedule. The scale of demerit points is listed according to the type of alcohol beverage violation. This demerit point system is used to identify habitually troublesome liquor license holders, which have repeated violated state statutes and city ordinances at their premise, for the purpose of recommending suspension or revocation of their alcohol beverage licenses. 
Type of Violation Point Value 1. Underage person on premises. 10 2. No licensed bartender on premises. 25 3. On premise nuisance violation including but not limited to excessive noise property maintenance, failure to maintain order, or disorderly conduct. 10 4. Improper exhibitions. 25 5. Open after closing hours. 25 6. Assault on a police officer by an employee. 100 7. Refusal to allow police to search premises or refusal to cooperate with lawful police investigation. 100 8. Sale of alcohol beverages without license or permit. 100 9. Sale of controlled substances on premises. 100 10. Intoxicated employees. 25 11. Leaving with open containers. 10 12. Other violations of state law or city code. 25  
(5)  Determination of demerit points. In determining the accumulated demerit points against a licensee within 12 months, the city shall use the date each violation was committed as the basis for the determination. 
(6)  Counseling, suspension or revocation of license. Any licensee who is convicted of a violation of state law or the city code shall be required to appear before the ordinance, license, and permits committee at its next regularly scheduled meeting to discuss the offense and the steps the licensee will take to avoid future violations. 
a.  The ordinance, license, and permits committee shall call before it for purposes of a revocation or suspension hearing all licensees which have accumulated 100 points in a 12-month period as a result of court-imposed convictions. If the demerit point accumulation, calculated from the date of violation, exceeds 100 points in a 12-month period, or 150 points in a 24-month, the first suspension shall be for not less than seven days, any subsequent suspension shall be for not less than 30 days. 
b.  If the license is revoked, no other license shall be granted to such licensee for such premises for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation. 
c.  If multiple citations are issued in connection with a single event or incident, demerit points shall be assigned as follows: 
Three or fewer citations\1 offense 
Six or fewer citations\2 offenses 
Nine or fewer citations\3 offenses 
Ten or more citations\the actual number of offenses 
(Code 1991, § 12.14; Ord. No. 2017-1095 , 11-28-2017) 
State Law reference- Revocation, suspension, nonissuance or nonrenewal of license, Wis. Stats. § 125.12. 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals generally, Wis. Stats. chs. 172-174; cruelty to animals, Wis. Stats. ch. 951; animal health, Wis. Stats. ch. 95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling means any building that contains one or more dwelling units and any land included with that building in the same entry on the tax roll. 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or any part of a building, used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others. 
(Code 1991, § 12.40) 
Sec. 8-2. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  No person owning or in charge of any horse, mule, cattle, sheep, goat, swine, geese, chickens or other domestic livestock, poultry or fowl, or any wild, dangerous, vicious, poisonous or carnivorous animal, insect or reptile, shall keep such animals or permit such animals to run at large in any part of the city. 
(b)  The prohibitions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where husbandry is a permitted use in the zoning district, or where the creatures are in the care, custody or control of a veterinarian for treatment; agricultural fairs; 4-H club shows or events; a display for judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival, circus or other show; licensed pet shops; licensed nature preserve or zoological gardens; provided: 
(1)  This location conforms to the provisions of chapter 114. 
(2)  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors and disease. 
(3)  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent escape. 
(4)  No person lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(Code 1991, § 12.41) 
Secs. 8-3-8-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs, Wis. Stats. ch. 174. 

Sec. 8-23. - Dogs and cats limited. 
    Dogs and cats are permitted to be kept in the city subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Dogs. The maximum number of dogs which may be kept at a dwelling containing one dwelling unit is two, and the maximum number of dogs which may be kept at a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units is one dog per dwelling unit. 
(2)  Cats. The maximum number of cats which may be kept at a dwelling containing one dwelling unit is three, and the maximum number of cats which may be kept at a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units is one cat per dwelling unit. 
(3)  Kennels. Kennels may only be kept or operated in those parts of the city which are zoned C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2, I-3, A, or CON. No kennel license shall be issued for the keeping or operation of a kennel in any residential district in the city. The kennel license fee shall be set pursuant to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 174.053. Prior to the issuance of a kennel license, the city health inspector or other person designated by the city council shall inspect and approve the premises where the dogs or cats are to be kept. The kennel license shall be issued for a specific location, and movement of the kennel to a new location shall require the issuance of a new license. 
(Code 1991, § 12.42) 
Sec. 8-24. - Dog licenses. 
(a)  License required. A dog license is necessary for the keeping of any dog over five months of age. 
(b)  Procedure. The rules regarding the payment of a cat license tax and the obtaining of the cat license shall be the same rules applicable to dogs under Wis. Stats. § 174.05(1), (4) and (5). 
(c)  Tax. The dog license tax shall be as established by the city pursuant to the minimum tax requirements of Wis. Stats. § 174.05. Late fees shall also be assessed pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 174.05. 
(d)  Issuance. Upon payment of the required cat license tax and any late fees, and upon presentation of evidence that the dog currently immunized against rabies, the clerk shall complete and issue to the owner a license for the dog on forms provided by the city. The clerk shall keep a duplicate copy of the license on file. 
(e)  Tag. After issuing the license, the clerk shall deliver to the owner a tag of durable material. The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar, which shall be kept on the dog for which the license is used at all times, but this requirement does not apply to a dog during competition, to a dog securely confined indoors, or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. If a tag is lost, a new tag shall be furnished to the owner by the clerk upon the payment of a fee established by the city. 
(Code 1991, § 12.43) 
Sec. 8-25. - Cat licenses. 
(a)  License required . A cat license is necessary for the keeping of any cat over five months of age. 
(b)  Procedure . Except as otherwise specifically provided below, the rules regarding the payment of a cat license tax and the obtaining of the cat license shall be the same rules applicable to dogs under Wis. Stats. § 174.05(1), (4) and (5). 
(c)  Tax . The cat license tax, including any fee for late applications, shall be as established by the city. 
(d)  Issuance . Upon payment of the required cat license tax and any late fees, and upon presentation of evidence that the cat is currently immunized against rabies, the clerk shall complete and issue to the owner a license for the cat on forms provided by the city. The clerk shall keep a duplicate copy of the license on file. 
(e)  Tag. After issuing the license, the clerk shall deliver to the owner a tag of durable material. The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar, which shall be kept on the cat for which the license is used at all times, but this requirement does not apply to a cat during competition, to a cat securely confined indoors, or to a cat securely confined in a fenced area. If a tag is lost, a new tag shall be furnished to the owner by the clerk upon the payment of a fee established by the city.. 
(Code 1991, § 12.44) 
Sec. 8-26. - General regulations. 
    The following regulations will apply to each dog or cat within the city. 
(1)  Running at large. No owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall permit such dog or cat to run at large at any time within the city. A dog or cat is considered to be running at large if it is off the premises of its owner and not under the control of the owner or some other person. 
(2)  Public grounds. No person shall take or permit his dog or cat to remain upon any public boulevard, school ground, cemetery, playground or park within the city, unless at that time the dog or cat is on a leash or is entered in a contest or fair which has been approved by the city council. 
(3)  Feces. Any person who allows any dog or cat owned or kept by him to defecate on the private property of another or upon any public property shall cause the feces to be removed immediately. 
(4)  Under control. No dog or cat, whether licensed or unlicensed, muzzled or unmuzzled, shall be allowed upon the streets of the city or in public places, such as hotels, restaurants, theaters, stores and the like, unless on a suitable and dependable leash. A female dog or cat in heat must be under the control of the owner and on the owner's property at all times. 
(5)  Rabies. Any dog or cat having rabies, or suspected of having rabies, shall be reported to the police department within 24 hours by any person having knowledge or a suspicion of the same. 
(6)  Noisy or vicious animals. 
a.  No person shall keep or harbor in the city any dog or cat which by loud frequent or habitual barking, meowing, yelping or howling, or by constant threat of attacking and biting persons, property or animals shall cause annoyance to the neighborhood or to people passing upon the street. 
b.  Whenever a dog or cat shall bite any person, notice thereof shall be reported to the police department as soon as possible after a person becomes aware of such event. 
c.  No vicious dog shall be allowed off the premises of its owner unless on a leash held by a member of the owner's immediate family over 16 years of age. For purposes of enforcing this subsection, a dog shall be deemed to be vicious if it does any one of the following: 
1.  It bites a person on or off the dog owner's premises or inflicts serious injury to another animal on or off the dog owner's premises, provided that the dog was not provoked into committing the act; or 
2.  While off the dog owner's premises, the dog displays a mean or vicious disposition toward a person, on two or more occasions during a 12-month period, provided that the dog was not provoked into such a display. A "mean or vicious disposition" may be displayed in many ways, including, but not limited to, by the dog chasing a person under circumstances where the person reasonably believes that the dog may do harm to the person, or by the dog growling at a person, or by the dog threatening or attempting to bite a person. 
Any dog determined to be vicious may be seized by the police, and retained at the owner's expense until the circuit court determines whether the dog is vicious, as defined in subsections (6)c.1 and 2 of this section. If the dog is determined to be vicious, the dog shall be permanently removed from the city or destroyed, at the owner's expense, and the dog owner shall be liable for all costs associated with the impoundment of the dog, the removal or destruction of the dog, and the court costs. 
(Code 1991, § 12.45) 
Sec. 8-27. - Stray dogs 
    Stray dogs captured or restrained within the city shall be handled pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 174. 
(Code 1991, § 12.46) 
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, Wis. Stats. chs. 5-12. 

Sec. 10-1. - Election years. 
    Councilmembers serving even-numbered aldermanic districts shall be elected in spring election of even-numbered years. Councilmembers serving odd-numbered aldermanic districts shall be elected in spring election of odd-numbered years. The mayor shall be elected in spring election of even-numbered years. The aldermanic districts referenced in section 10-2 shall become effective with the spring general election held in April 2012. 
(Code 1991, § 2.05) 
State Law reference- Terms of office, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(5). 
Sec. 10-2. - Aldermanic districts. 
    The city shall be divided into seven aldermanic districts with boundaries as provided by ordinance and on file at the city hall. 
(Code 1991, § 2.02) 
State Law reference- Aldermanic districts, Wis. Stats. § 62.08. 
Sec. 10-3. - Voting districts. 
    The seven aldermanic districts identified in section 10-2 are voting districts for the city. 
(Code 1991, § 2.03) 
Sec. 10-4. - Voting wards. 
(a)  Because all aldermanic districts are within the county supervisory district boundaries, no overlap of boundaries exists; therefore the creation of voting wards is not required. 
(b)  Per county Ordinance No. 11-03, county supervisory district boundaries within the city are identified as follows: 
(1)  County supervisory district #1 consists of aldermanic district #6 and aldermanic district #7. 
(2)  County supervisory district #2 consists of aldermanic district #1 and aldermanic district #2. 
(3)  County supervisory district #3 consists of aldermanic district #4 and aldermanic district #5. 
(4)  County supervisory district #4 consists of aldermanic district #3. 
(Code 1991, § 2.04) 
State Law reference- Wards, Wis. Stats. § 5.15. 
Sec. 10-5. - Polling places and polling machines. 
(a)  Polling place. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 5.25, the polling place for all electors in the city and for all elections shall be city hall, located at 303 Mansion Street. 
(b)  Polling machines. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 5.76, the city hereby authorizes the use of paper ballots and the Accu-Vote electronic touch screen tabulation equipment. 
(Code 1991, § 3.101) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, Wis. Stats. ch. 323. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Key lock box entry system. 
(a)  Key lock box system required. When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or firefighting purposes, the fire chief and/or the police chief may require the owner, lessee, tenant, or other party in control of said structure or area to install a key box in an accessible location approved by the fire chief and/or police chief. 
(b)  Structures covered by this section include: 
(1)  Commercial and/or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm system or automatic fire suppression system, or such structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency; 
(2)  Any mercantile, commercial or business occupancy in excess of 5,000 square feet; 
(3)  Multifamily residential structures of four or more dwelling units that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units; 
(4)  Multifamily units containing four or more dwellings which are served by a manual fire alarm system; 
(5)  Places of assembly, governmental structures and nursing care facilities; and 
(6)  Other structures as deemed necessary by the fire chief and/or police chief. 
(c)  Exemptions to this section include: 
(1)  Any building or site with 24-hour, seven day a week on-site staff or guard service. 
(2)  Any building for which the owner and occupant thereof file a written application with the fire chief, requesting that the building be exempt, and acknowledging that the fire and/or police departments may use force to enter the building, thereby potentially causing damage to the building, in order to respond to an emergency and/or carry out the duties of the fire and/or police departments. 
(d)  Purchase, installation and maintenance of key lock box . The type of key lock box system to be implemented within the city shall be a Knox company Knox-box fire/police rapid entry product series 3200 key lock box or series 4400 key vault. Installation shall be supervised by the fire chief or his designee. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, tenant or other party in control of a structure or area to: 
(1)  Complete a product order form, supplied by the city, specifying the model of key box to be installed, and to submit payment for the product to the city with the completed order form. 
(2)  Arrange for fire department personnel to inspect access keys at the time of key box installation and to lock said keys inside the key lock box. 
(3)  Assume all costs involved in the installation of the key box. 
(4)  Keep the key box in good repair. 
(5)  Ensure that all keys contained in key box are those currently in use in the structure or area. If keys are changed, arrangements must be made for fire department personnel to visit the facility, open the box, inspect the change of keys, and then lock the box. 
(e)  Key lock box location. 
(1)  The key lock box shall be located within three feet of the recognized public entrance, adjacent to the fire annunciator panel, on the exterior of the structure, or above the fire department connection (FDC), when occupancy is serviced by fire sprinkler system with internal control valves and wall mounted FDC. 
(2)  The key lock box shall be located at a height of not less than six feet and not more than eight feet above final grade. 
(3)  No steps, displays, signs or other fixtures, or structure protrusions shall be located under the box which could allow intruders to access the box without assistance, or hinder access to the box during emergency response. 
(4)  Flush mounted or surface recessed installation will be permitted, provided that the key box is clearly marked. 
(5)  The fire chief is authorized to modify the foregoing requirements on a case-by-case basis. 
(f)  Key lock box contents . The box shall contain the keys for the areas listed in this section as they apply to each structure. The keys shall be labeled so as to be easily identified in the field. 
(1)  Commercial, industrial and mixed occupancy structures. 
a.  The main entrance door, mixed occupancies and strip shopping center keys shall be provided only for occupancies where system control valves or fire alarm system panels exist. 
b.  Alarm room and/or fire alarm control panel. 
c.  Electrical rooms, mechanical rooms, and sprinkler control rooms. 
d.  Special keys or tools to reset pull-stations or other fire protection devices. 
e.  Elevator keys. 
f.  A plot map of the premises showing pertinent information, as requested by the fire chief. 
g.  All areas specified by the fire chief during the plan review process. 
(2)  Multifamily units (four or more dwellings). 
a.  Alarm room and/or area where alarm panel is installed. 
b.  Alarm panel. 
c.  Any special keys or tools to reset pull-stations. 
d.  All areas specified by the fire chief during the plan review process. 
(g)  Installation and enforcement dates. 
(1)  New construction. All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have the key lock box installed and operational within ten days of the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(2)  Existing structures. All structures in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and subject to this section shall have six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived to have a key lock box installed and operational or be subject to the penalties outlined in subsection (i) of this section. 
(h)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  Employees of the city may not be involved in the sale, promotion or installation of the key lock box system. 
(2)  Removal of any key by any person, other than fire department or police department personnel who are acting in the course of their official fire or police department duties, shall be a violation of this Code. 
(3)  Tampering with or causing damage to any key lock box on any building by any person, other than fire department or police department personnel who are acting in the course of their official fire or police department duties, shall be in violation of this Code. 
(i)  Penalties. Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in chapter 1, article II. 
(Code 1991, § 6.07) 
Secs. 12-2-12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, Wis. Stats. ch. 323; local government emergency management powers and duties, Wis. Stats. § 323.14. 

Sec. 12-21. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disaster means a severe or prolonged, natural or human-caused, occurrence that threatens or negatively impacts life, health, property, infrastructure, the environment, the security of this state or a portion of this state, or critical systems, including computer, telecommunications, or agricultural systems. 
    Emergency management means all measures undertaken by or on behalf of the state and its subdivisions to do any of the following: 
(1)  Prepare for and minimize the effect of a disaster or the imminent threat of a disaster. 
(2)  Make repairs to or restore infrastructure or critical systems that are destroyed or damaged by a disaster. 
(Code 1991, § 3.601) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 323.02. 
Sec. 12-22. - Director of emergency management. 
(a)  Appointment. 
(1)  The office of director of emergency management is hereby created. The director shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council and shall receive such salary as may be authorized by the council. He shall take and file an official oath. 
(2)  Deputy and assistant directors may be appointed by the director, subject to the approval of the emergency management commission as may be deemed necessary, and such appointees shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the council. 
(b)  Duties and authority of director. 
(1)  The director shall be the executive head of the emergency management organization and shall have direct responsibility of the organization, administration and operation of the organization, subject to the direction and control of the mayor and council. He shall coordinate all activities for emergency management within the city and shall maintain liaison and cooperate with emergency management agencies and organizations of other political subdivisions and of the state and federal government, and shall participate in county and state civil defense activities upon request, and shall have such additional authority, duties and responsibilities as authorized by this division and as may from time to time be required by the council. 
(2)  The director shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for the emergency management of the city and shall present such plan to the council for its approval. When the council has approved the plan by resolution, all municipal agencies and emergency management forces of the city shall perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner. 
(Code 1991, § 3.602) 
State Law reference- Emergency management directors, Wis. Stats. § 323.15. 
Sec. 12-23. - Utilization of existing services and facilities. 
    In preparing and executing the emergency management plan, the director shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable; and the officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the director. 
(Code 1991, § 3.604) 
Sec. 12-24. - Emergency regulations. 
    Whenever necessary to meet an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the council, the mayor and, in his absence, the president of the council and, in his absence, the director, may by proclamation promulgate and enforce such orders, rules and regulations relating to the conduct of persons and the use of property as shall be necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, preserve lives and property and to ensure the cooperation necessary in emergency management activities. Such proclamations shall be posted in three public places and may be rescinded by the council by resolution at any time. 
(Code 1991, § 3.605) 
Sec. 12-25. - Mutual aid agreements. 
    The director may, subject to approval of the council, enter into mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions. Copies of such agreements shall be filed with the state director of emergency management. 
(Code 1991, § 3.607) 
Sec. 12-26. - Declaration of emergencies. 
(a)  The director shall issue all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a state of emergency and shall issue such disaster warnings or alerts as shall be required for emergency management upon the declaration of an emergency by the governor, the mayor, president of the council or the director in the absence of the mayor and council president, or by the council. 
(b)  The emergency management organization shall take action in accordance with the emergency management plan only after the declaration of an emergency and the issuance of official disaster warnings. Such state of emergency shall continue until terminated by the issuing authority, provided that any such declaration not issued by the governor may be terminated at the discretion of the council. 
(Code 1991, § 3.608) 
Sec. 12-27. - Interference prohibited. 
    No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to this division, or do any act forbidden by any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this division. 
(Code 1991, § 3.609) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE WELLS 

Sec. 14-19. - Private well permit and abandonment. 
(a)  Purpose. To protect public health, safety and welfare and to prevent contamination of groundwater by assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells or wells which may act as conduits for contamination of groundwater or wells which may be illegally cross-connected to the city municipal water system, are properly maintained or abandoned. 
(b)  Applicability. This section applies to all wells located on premises served by the municipal water system. Utility customers outside the jurisdiction of the municipal system may be required under contract agreement or utility rule to adopt and enforce equivalent ordinances within their jurisdictions for purpose stated in section (a) above. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Municipal water system means a community water system owned by a city, village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district, public inland lake and rehabilitation district, municipal water district or a federal, state, county, or municipal owned institution for congregate care or correction, or a privately owned water utility serving the foregoing. 
(2)  Noncomplying means a well or pump installation which does not comply with the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code NR 812.42, Standards for Existing Installations, and which has not been granted a variance pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code NR 812.43. 
(3)  Pump installation means the pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps. 
(4)  Unsafe means a well or pump installation which produces water which is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances which exceed the drinking water standards of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 140 or 809, or for which a health advisory has been issued by the DNR. 
(5)  Unused well or pump installation means one which is not used or does not have a functional pumping system. 
(6)  Well means a drill hole or other excavation or opening deeper than it is wide that extends more than ten feet below the ground surface constructed for the purpose of obtaining groundwater. 
(7)  Well abandonment means the proper filling and sealing of a well according to the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code NR 812.26. 
(d)  Abandonment required. All wells on premises served by the municipal water system shall be properly abandoned in accordance with the terms of this section and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 812 no later than 90 days from the date of connection to the municipal water system, unless a valid well operation permit has been issued to the well owner by the city under terms of this section. 
(e)  Well operation permit. Owners of wells on premises served by the municipal water system wishing to retain their wells for any use shall make application for a well operation permit for each well no later than 90 days after connection to the municipal water system. The city may grant a permit to a private well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed two years providing all conditions of this section are met. A well operation permit may be renewed by submitting an application verifying that the conditions of this section are met. The city or its agent may conduct inspections and water quality tests or require inspections and water quality tests to be conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain or verify information necessary for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the city. All initial and renewal applications must be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by the city. 
    The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit: 
(1)  The well and pump installation shall meet the standards for existing installations described in Wis. Admin. Code NR 812.42; 
(2)  The well and pump system shall be evaluated by a licensed well driller or pump installer and certified on the Wisconsin Well and Pressure System Inspection Form 3300-221 to comply with Wis. Admin. Code NR 812.4, prior to issuing the initial permit and no less than every ten years afterwards. 
(3)  The well and pump shall installation have a history of producing bacteriologically safe water evidenced by at least one coliform bacteria sample taken prior to the issuance of each permit and each renewal thereof. In areas where the DNR has determined that groundwater aquifers are contaminated with substances other than bacteria, additional chemical tests may be required to document the safety of the water. Laboratory analysis by a certified laboratory shall be completed and submitted with the permit application. No exception to this condition may be made for unsafe wells, unless the DNR approves, in writing, the continued use of the well; 
(4)  There shall be no cross-connections between the private well's pump installation or distribution piping and the municipal water system; 
(5)  The water from the private well shall not discharge into a drain leading directly or indirectly into the city sanitary sewerage system unless properly metered and authorized by the city; 
(6)  The private well shall have a functional pumping system. 
(7)  The proposed use of the private well shall be justified as reasonable in addition to water provided by the municipal water system. 
(8)  Payment of a permit fee or a renewal fee in the amount established by the city. 
(f)  Abandonment procedures. 
(1)  All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section shall be done according to the procedures and methods of Wis. Admin. Code NR 812.26. All debris, pumps, piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment. 
(2)  The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall be required to obtain a well abandonment permit prior to any well abandonment and shall notify the city clerk at least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the well may be observed or verified by the director of public works, or his designee. 
(3)  An abandonment report form, supplied by the DNR, shall be submitted by the well owner to the clerk and to the DNR within 30 days after completion of the well abandonment. The form must be completed by the licensed well driller, pump installer, or certified operator performing the abandonment. 
(g)  Penalties. Any well owner failing to comply with this section more than ten days after receiving written notice of violation, shall upon conviction, shall be assessed the penalties prescribed in chapter 1, article II, and the cost of prosecution. Each day of violation is a separate offense. The city may cause the well abandonment to be performed and the expense to be assessed as a special tax against the property 
(Code 1991, § 8.110; Ord. No. 2016-1087 , 8-23-2016) 
State Law reference- Well abandonment, Wis. Stats. § 280.30. 
Sec. 14-20. - Groundwater monitoring wells and borehole requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent contamination of groundwater and to protect public health, safety and welfare by assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying groundwater monitoring wells or boreholes are properly designed, located, constructed, used and abandoned. 
(b)  Applicability. This section applies to all groundwater monitoring wells and boreholes located within the city, regardless of whether the premises upon which such well is located is served by the city water utility. 
(c)  Definitions. The definitions set forth in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 141, including all modifications and amendments thereto, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(d)  Code adopted . The requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 141, including all modifications and amendments thereto, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(e)  Records . Copies of all documents filed with or received from the department of natural resources pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 141 shall be provided to the city within ten days of filing with or receipt from the DNR. 
(f)  Wells and boreholes affecting city property. 
(1)  No groundwater monitoring well or borehole may be installed, used or maintained on any city property or within any city right-of-way or city easement without the express written permission of the city, in addition to any permit required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 141 or other state or federal laws. 
(2)  With respect to all wells or boreholes constructed, used or maintained on city property, city right-of-way or city easements, the city reserves the right to: 
a.  Require immediate closure and repair of the well or borehole should the well or borehole pose a threat, in the sole discretion of the city, to city health or welfare or city development, maintenance or repair. 
b.  Require all wells and boreholes installed in the right-of-way to be flush mounted. 
c.  Impose a charge for use of city property, right-of-way or easement. 
d.  Receive results of all tests, including the sampling and analysis of soil or groundwater, generated from such wells or boreholes, upon written request from the city. 
e.  Use such test wells or boreholes for the purpose of obtaining independent samples for testing by the city. 
f.  Abandon and close such wells or boreholes if the owner thereof fails to do so upon request by the city, and to assess the expense thereof as a special tax against the owner and any and all property of the owner. 
g.  Impose such other conditions as the city may deem appropriate and necessary. 
h.  Require the owner and the contractor to indemnify the city from liability for claims and damages arising out of the installation, use or maintenance of the wells or boreholes. 
i.  Require the owner and the contractor to supply such performance bonds and insurance as the city may deem appropriate to ensure compliance with this section. 
(3)  The applicant shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 141 regarding monitoring well or borehole abandonment. 
(4)  The applicant shall perform surface restoration. 
a.  Existing hard surface. All abandoned wells or boreholes within the city right-of-way where a hard surface such as asphalt or concrete pavement exists shall be sealed to match the existing surrounding surface. The well opening must be re-drilled at the original borehole diameter to a minimum depth of two feet below finish surface. The re-drilled borehole, or uppermost two feet of new borehole, shall be filled with filter pack sand or No. 2 crushed base course and compacted in six-inch lifts to a minimum of 98 percent Standard Proctor (ASTM D698) up to pavement subgrade elevation. Pavement shall be installed in accordance with industry standards to match the thickness and type of the surrounding finish surface. 
b.  Existing soft surface. All abandoned wells or boreholes within the city right-of-way where a soft surface such as turf, gravel, or sand exists shall be sealed to match the existing surrounding surface. The well opening must be re-drilled at the original borehole diameter to a minimum depth of two feet below finish surface. The re-drilled borehole, or uppermost two feet of new borehole, shall be filled with suitable fill material compacted to 95 percent Standard Proctor to subgrade elevation. Finish material of the same type and consistency as the surrounding soft surface shall be installed in accordance with industry standards. 
(Code 1991, § 8.111) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire safety generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 101. 

Sec. 16-1. - Fire codes. 
(a)  State codes. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. § 101.14, Fire Inspections, Prevention, Detection and Suppression, and the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPF 314 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Licenses or permit withheld . No license shall be granted or renewed for the operation of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is required by any provisions of this Code, nor shall any occupancy permit be issued for any property that contains any outstanding violation of this section. 
(c)  Violation and penalty. Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 314 or chapter 1, article II of this Code, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1991, § 6.09(1), (8), (9)) 
Chapter 18 - HUMAN RIGHTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local fair housing ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.1011; open housing, Wis. Stats. § 160.50. 

Sec. 18-19. - Statutory authorization. 
    This common council of the city hereby adopts Wis. Stats. § 106.50. 
(Code 1991, § 19.01) 
Sec. 18-20. - Declaration of policy. 
    The common council of the city recognizes its responsibilities and endorses the concept of fair and open housing for all persons and prohibition of discrimination herein. 
(Code 1991, § 19.02) 
Sec. 18-21. - Implementation of policy. 
    The officials and employees of the city shall assist in the orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing within the city by implementing the authority and enforcement procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. § 106.50. 
(Code 1991, § 19.03) 
Sec. 18-22. - Complaint procedures. 
    The municipal clerk, or his designee, shall maintain forms to be filed under Wis. Stats. § 106.04, as amended, and shall assist any person alleging a violation thereof in the city to file complaint thereunder with the state department of work force development, equal rights division, for enforcement of Wis. Stats. § 106.50. 
(Code 1991, § 19.04) 
Chapter 20 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Non-intoxicating beverages. 
    Licenses for non-intoxicating beverages shall be issued pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0433(1) and the fee therefor shall be as established by the city. 
(Code 1991, § 12.102) 
Sec. 20-2. - Soda water beverages. 
    The city hereby elects not to regulate or issue licenses for the sale of soda water beverages under Wis. Stats. § 66.0433(2). 
(Code 1991, § 12.103) 
Sec. 20-3. - Amusement devices. 
(a)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement device means any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token or thing of monetary value, operates or may be operated, manually or otherwise, for use as a game, contest or the production of any form of recorded or transcribed music or voice, or other amusement of any kind or description and which contains no automatic payoff devices for the return of coins, slugs, checks, tokens or other merchandise or things of monetary value or which does not provide any such payoff by any other means or manner and which machine or device is not readily convertible into a gambling device and is in no way obscene or offensive to the public. All types, kinds, makes and forms of pin ball machines, mechanical record players or juke boxes are specifically included under this definition and within the terms of this section. 
    Operator means any person owning, operating, using, leasing or otherwise possessing one or more amusement devices installed or set up for use within the city. 
    Possessor means any person in or on whose premises an amusement device is installed or set up for operation or otherwise made available for operation or use. 
(b)  Registration required. No operator or possessor shall set up, place, install or maintain any amusement device in or upon any premises within the city without first having registered such amusement device and paid the registration fee provided herein. 
(c)  Application. Any owner or operator of any amusement device wishing to set up, place, install or maintain such amusement device on any premises within the city or any possessor allowing the same to be done shall first make written application for the registration of such amusement device to the city clerk, on forms provided by the city, submitting all information requested by the clerk to satisfy the requirements of this section and to properly identify such amusement device. 
(d)  Fee. An application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee per device in such amount as is established by the city. 
(e)  Inspection . Upon application for registration under this section, the police department may promptly inspect each amusement device sought to be registered and report the results of such inspection to the city clerk. 
(f)  Issuance . Upon approval of such amusement device by the police department, the city clerk shall issue a registration for the same and a certificate, which shall be displayed in such a manner as to be easily viewed by the public at all times. Separate application and registration shall be required for each amusement device maintained within the city. 
(g)  Denial . If the police department fails to approve any amusement device, such device shall be immediately removed from public view or access. 
(h)  Gambling prohibited . No owner, operator or possessor shall permit the wagering of money, goods or merchandise upon the result of the game, machine played or upon the skill of any player, nor pay any money, goods, merchandise or tokens to any person playing or operating any amusement device. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit gambling in any form or manner, and all other ordinances of the city relative to gambling and the keeping of gambling devices shall apply to any device required to be registered under this section. 
(i)  Consent to entry . The possessor of any amusement device shall be held responsible for full compliance with the requirements of this section and for any violation of this section which may occur on his premises, whether he participated in such violation or not, and application for a registration under this section is deemed to be consent to the entry of any police officer on any premises upon which is contained any amusement device registered under the provisions of this section at any time. 
(Code 1991, § 12.50) 
Secs. 20-4-20-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DIRECT SELLERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser or solicitor means any person who goes from place-to-place within the city soliciting orders for future delivery of goods or property, or for future performance of services. 
    Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary partnership, association or corporation for which there is provided proof of tax exempt status pursuant to section 501(c)(3) or (4) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. 
    Direct seller means any person who is a canvasser, solicitor, peddler, transient merchant or permanent merchant. 
    Goods means the statutory definition for "goods" provided in Wis. Stats. § 402.105, incorporated herein by reference. The term "goods" also includes all new and used items. 
    Peddler means any person who goes from place-to-place within the city, offering for sale and/or selling goods which he carries with him or services which he intends to perform immediately upon request. 
    Permanent merchant means any person who sells goods or services, or takes sales orders for the future delivery of goods or services, at a fixed location in the county, and who either: 
(1)  Owns, in full or in part, the real estate upon which the business is conducted; 
(2)  Leases, in writing, for a term of at least six months, the real estate upon which the business is conducted; or 
(3)  Has leased in the past, for at least six months, real estate in the city upon which the business has been conducted. 
    Transient merchant means any person who engages, at a fixed location in the city, in the temporary business of selling goods or services, or the temporary business of taking sales orders for the later delivery of goods or services. 
(Code 1991, § 12.21) 
Sec. 20-26. - Purpose. 
    The residents of the city are frequently solicited by strangers to purchase merchandise or services, or to make contributions. Such solicitations occur from merchants who go door-to-door or set up booths throughout the city. To protect the tranquility, privacy and safety of its citizens and to prevent fraudulent practices by transient merchants, the city deems it advisable to regulate direct sellers as prescribed herein. 
(Code 1991, § 12.20) 
Sec. 20-27. - Special events. 
    The common council may temporarily suspend, by resolution, the application of all or part of this article to special events, such as parades, fairs, community-wide events, city festivals, etc. 
(Code 1991, § 12.28) 
Sec. 20-28. - Records. 
    Violations of this article shall be reported to the clerk, who shall keep a record thereof. 
(Code 1991, § 12.26) 
Sec. 20-29. - Regulations and prohibited practices. 
(a)  Hours . A direct seller shall be prohibited from calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except by appointment. 
(b)  Prohibited places . A direct seller shall be prohibited from calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on the premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having apparent authority over such premises. 
(c)  Misrepresentations . A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any goods or services offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the identity of the organization he represents. 
(d)  Sidewalks and streets. No direct seller shall transact business or conduct sales on the public sidewalks, public streets or any other public property, without the prior approval of the common council. 
(e)  Noise. No direct seller shall make any loud or unnecessary noises contrary to ordinance or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers. 
(f)  Litter . No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he is conducting business. 
(g)  Disclosure requirements. 
(1)  After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he offers to sell. 
(2)  Each direct seller shall be subject to, and shall comply with, the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 423, which are incorporated herein by reference, including the right of the buyer to cancel the transaction under certain circumstances and including the direct seller's obligation to give the customer notice of the right to cancel. 
(3)  If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(h)  Location restrictions. 
(1)  Door-to-door . All direct sellers, in particular canvassers, peddlers and solicitors, who go door-to-door in the city, shall not solicit a premises while another direct seller is on said premises. 
(2)  Fixed location . All direct sellers, in particular transient merchants, who establish a fixed location in the city from which to conduct their business, shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  No direct seller shall use, erect or establish any structure, stand or booth which cannot be dismantled and removed from the premises in 20 minutes. 
b.  Any structure, stand or booth used, erected or established by a direct seller shall be dismantled and removed at the end of each business day, but in any event not later than 9:00 p.m. 
c.  No more than two direct sellers at a time shall be permitted to conduct business from the same privately owned lot or parcel, unless the business of the direct seller is completely conducted indoors or unless the land owner obtains a flea market permit, or unless the direct seller is involved in the sale of farm produce at the farmers market. 
d.  All stands, booths, structures and fixed locations, which are used, erected or established by a direct seller, shall only be located in the C-1 or C-2 zoning districts in the city. 
e.  No stand, booth, structure or fixed location shall be used, erected or established by a direct seller on private property without the express written permission of the owner or manager of the private property. 
(Code 1991, § 12.25) 
Secs. 20-30-20-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 20-47. - Permit required. 
    No direct seller shall engage in direct sales within the city without receiving a permit for that purpose as provided herein. 
(Code 1991, § 12.22) 
Sec. 20-48. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(1)  Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes. 
(2)  Any person selling goods at wholesale to retail dealers in such goods. 
(3)  Any permanent merchant selling goods or services at his fixed business location. 
(4)  Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who delivers goods which were purchased or ordered at the permanent merchants' place of business. 
(5)  Any permanent merchant who sells or delivers goods or services, or takes orders for future delivery of goods or services, at the home or business of a customer, provided the customer initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by the permanent merchant. 
(6)  Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. 
(7)  Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of such organization, provided that there is submitted to the clerk proof that such charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. § 202.12. Any charitable organization not registered under Wis. Stats. § 202.12 or which is not exempt from that statute's registration requirements, shall be required to register under this division. 
(8)  Any transient merchant who participates in the farmers market sponsored by the chamber of commerce, provided such transient merchant shall only be exempt while engaging in business at the location and during the hours established by the chamber of commerce for the farmers market, and further provided that such transient merchant is registered with and approved by the city chamber of commerce. 
(Code 1991, § 12.23) 
Sec. 20-49. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Application . Applicants for permits shall complete and return to the clerk an application form containing the following information: 
(1)  Name, permanent address and telephone number and temporary address, if any; 
(2)  Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold; 
(4)  Temporary address and telephone number from which business shall be conducted, if any; 
(5)  Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered and any services offered; 
(6)  Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable; 
(7)  Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct of his business; 
(8)  Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where applicant conducted similar business; 
(9)  Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving the city; and 
(10)  Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant business within the last five years, the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(b)  Additional documentation . Applicants shall present to the clerk for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(2)  A state certificate of examination and approval from the seller of weights and measures where applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities. 
(3)  A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law. Such certificate shall state that the applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, and shall be dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is made. 
(c)  Application form. At the time the application form is returned to the clerk, a nonrefundable fee in the amount established by the city shall be paid to the clerk to cover the cost of processing such application. 
(d)  Appointment of agent . The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the clerk as his agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant in the city, if the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. 
(e)  Investigation . Upon receipt of a complete application, the clerk shall refer it to the chief of police who shall make a complete investigation of the statements made in the application. The investigation of the chief of police shall determine any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; that complaints of a material nature have not been received against the applicant by authorities in any of the last municipalities in which the applicant conducted similar business; that the applicant has not been convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; and that the applicant did not fail to comply with any applicable provision of subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)  Referral by clerk. If the clerk does not receive any of the foregoing information from the police, the clerk shall refer the application directly to the council for action. If the clerk receives any of the foregoing information from the police, the clerk shall refer the same to the ordinances, licenses, and permits committee, which shall conduct a confidential review of the foregoing information to determine the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling. 
(g)  Appearance . All direct seller permit applicants who are requesting a permit for the first time shall appear before the common council to answer any questions regarding their qualifications before said permit shall be issued. Applicants seeking the renewal of a permit need not appear unless specifically requested by the common council. 
(Code 1991, § 12.24) 
Sec. 20-50. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit may be immediately summarily revoked by the city clerk if the applicant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for a permit; made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales; violated any provision of this article; or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling. 
(b)  Written notice of the revocation shall be served either personally or by mailing the notice (registered mail) to the address provided on this application form. Such notice shall contain a statement of the acts upon which the revocation is based. Issuance of such notice of revocation shall immediately terminate the permit and no further sales activity shall be conducted by the applicant thereafter. 
(Code 1991, § 12.27) 
Secs. 20-51-20-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GARAGE SALES AND FLEA MARKETS 

Sec. 20-74. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Flea market means any sale, open to the public, conducted on any single lot or parcel in the C-1 or C-2 zoning districts, at which three or more transient merchants participate, for the purpose of selling, at retail, new or used goods or services. 
    Garage sale means any sale, open to the public, conducted from or on property located outside of a commercial zoning district for the purpose of selling, at retail, used goods. The term "garage sale" shall include sales commonly called "rummage," "lawn," "yard," "porch," "basement," "backyard" or "patio" sales. 
    Goods means the statutory definition for "goods" provided in Wis. Stats. § 402.105, which is incorporated herein by reference. 
    Transient merchant . See definition in section 20-25. 
(Code 1991, § 12.30) 
Sec. 20-75. - Special events. 
    The common council may temporarily suspend, by resolution, the application of all or any part of this article to special events, such as parades, community-wide events, city festivals, festivals by religious, charitable or nonprofit organizations, etc. 
(Code 1991, § 12.34) 
Sec. 20-76. - Garage sale regulations. 
    Garage sales conducted contrary to the following regulations are prohibited: 
(1)  Permit. No permit or license is required for a garage sale in the city. 
(2)  Number. No more than two garage sales per calendar year shall be conducted on the same lot or parcel, and each separate garage sale shall not exceed three consecutive days in length. 
(3)  Hours. All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(4)  Sidewalks and streets . No garage sale shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. 
(5)  Noise. No garage sale shall make any loud or unnecessary noises contrary to ordinance or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers. 
(6)  Litter . No garage sale shall allow or cause rubbish or litter to accumulate on adjacent public or private property. The failure to remove signs shall constitute littering. 
(7)  No services. No services shall be sold or offered for future sale at any garage sale. 
(8)  Signs . All garage sale signs shall conform with chapter 114, article VII and with the following: 
a.  Garage sale signs may not be erected earlier than 24 hours prior to the start of the sale. 
b.  Garage sale signs must be removed within two hours after the close of the sale on the last day of the sale. 
(Code 1991, § 12.31) 
Sec. 20-77. - Flea market permit procedure. 
    No flea market shall be conducted in the city unless the owner or occupant of the property upon which the flea market is to be conducted first applies for and receives a permit as provided herein. 
(1)  Application . Applicants for permits shall complete and return to the clerk an application form containing the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the land where the flea market is to be conducted. 
b.  The name, address and telephone number of the occupant of the land where the flea market is to be conducted, if different from the owner. 
c.  The names and addresses of the owners and occupants of adjacent properties. For purposes of this section, the term "adjacent property" shall include property located directly across any street or alley. 
d.  The dates during which the flea market shall be open. 
e.  The estimated number of direct sellers at the flea market. 
f.  A drawing showing the following items: 
1.  Size of the property. 
2.  Location and size of buildings on the property. 
3.  Adjacent streets, alleys and exits to and from the property. 
4.  Proposed area for customer parking. 
5.  Proposed location for booths and stands of direct sellers. 
(2)  Fee . At the time the application form is returned to the clerk, a nonrefundable fee in the amount established by the city shall be paid to the clerk. 
(3)  Plan commission . Upon the satisfactory preparation and execution of the application and payment of the fee, the clerk shall refer the application to the plan commission, which shall review the application, the site, existing and proposed structures, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic patterns and all other factors deemed relevant to the conducting of a flea market on the premises. After its review, the plan commission shall determine if the flea market meets the standards set forth below, and based upon said standards, shall make a recommendation to the council that the flea market either be approved or disapproved. If the plan commission approves the flea market, it may attach various conditions to its approval. If disapproved, the plan commission shall state the reasons for disapproval. Notice shall be given to the applicant and the owners and occupants of adjacent properties of any meeting of the plan commission at which the flea market application shall be discussed. The plan commission shall act on the application within 30 days after it is filed with the clerk. If the plan commission fails to act within 30 days, the application should be forwarded to the common council without the plan commission's recommendation. 
(4)  Common council . The plan commission's decision shall be referred to the council, which may take immediate action or conduct additional study and review. Within 30 days after the referral the common council shall either approve or disapprove of the application based upon compliance with the following standards. If approved, the council may attach various conditions to its approval. 
(5)  Standards . Before approving any flea market, the plan commission and the council shall find and determine that: 
a.  The flea market is consistent with the purpose, spirit and intent of chapter 114, and is in conformity with any adopted master plan. 
b.  The flea market is accessible from public roads and sidewalks that are adequate to carry the vehicular and pedestrian traffic that can be expected to be generated. 
c.  The flea market has adequate parking. 
d.  The flea market location does not create a traffic hazard or traffic congestion. 
e.  The flea market is in fundamental harmony with existing surrounding uses, and it will not cause an economic hardship to surrounding businesses. 
(6)  Conditions. When the plan commission or the council approves a flea market permit, the commission or the council may attach various conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, maintenance and operation of the flea market, in addition to those proposed by the applicant or this article. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, location of booths, parking restrictions, merchant restrictions, set back requirements, hours of operation, etc. 
(7)  Issuance of permit . Upon approval by the common council, the clerk shall issue a permit for a flea market, which shall contain any conditions placed thereon by the council. Such permits shall be valid for the period requested in the application, but in any event, no longer than one year. 
(8)  Revocation of permit. 
a.  A flea market permit may be revoked by the city if the applicant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for a permit; violated any provision of this section before or after issuance of the permit; or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to operate a flea market. 
b.  Prior to revocation of a flea market permit, the city shall provide the permit holder with notice thereof and the basis for the potential revocation. A hearing shall subsequently be held before the common council, at which the permit holder shall be given the opportunity to respond to the revocation notice. After hearing all the pertinent facts and the arguments of all interested persons, the council shall decide whether the permit is to be revoked. 
(Code 1991, § 12.32) 
Sec. 20-78. - Flea market regulations. 
(a)  Hours . All flea markets shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  Sidewalks and streets. No flea market shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. 
(c)  Noise. No flea market shall make any loud or unnecessary noises contrary to ordinance, nor use any sound amplifying device to attract customers. 
(d)  Litter. No flea market shall allow or cause rubbish or litter to accumulate on adjacent public or private property. 
(e)  Direct seller permits . Each direct seller who participates in the flea market must have a direct seller's permit from the city. The flea market permit holder shall be responsible to see that each direct seller has a direct seller's permit from the city. Failure of any direct seller to have a proper permit shall constitute a violation of this section by the direct seller and the flea market permit holder. 
(f)  Signs. All signs must conform with chapter 114, article VII and with the following: 
(1)  Flea market signs may not be erected earlier than 24 hours prior to the start of the sale. 
(2)  Flea market signs must be removed within two hours after the close of the market on the last day of the market. 
(Code 1991, § 12.33) 
Secs. 20-79-20-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND ARTICLE DEALERS 

Sec. 20-100. - State statute adopted. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 134.71 are hereby adopted and, by reference, made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by Wis. Stats. § 134.71 is required or prohibited by this article. Any penalty imposed by Wis. Stats. § 134.71 is not imposed or adopted by this article, but instead, the separate penalties prescribed herein shall be imposed; provided, however, the penalties prescribed herein shall be limited to and shall not exceed the penalties prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 134.71 for the same act. 
(Code 1991, § 12.70) 
Sec. 20-101. - License application and investigation. 
(a)  Applications. License applications, furnished by the city clerk, shall be prepared and filed with the clerk pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 134.71(5). 
(b)  Investigation. The city police department shall conduct the investigation required by Wis. Stats. § 134.71(6). 
(c)  Referral by clerk. If the clerk does not receive any information from the police regarding the applicant's conviction record, the clerk shall refer the application directly to the council for action. If the clerk receives any information from the police showing that the applicant has a conviction record, then the clerk shall refer the same to the ordinances, licenses and permits committee, which shall conduct a confidential review of such information to determine whether any of the criteria of Wis. Stats. § 134.71(7)(a)1 have been met. In making the foregoing determination, the committee may require the applicant to appear before the committee. 
(d)  Committee report . The committee shall report its determination to the common council, along with a recommendation as to whether the application should be granted. If the committee recommends that a license not be granted, the committee shall briefly state the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1991, § 12.71) 
Secs. 20-102-20-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAXICABS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority relative to taxicabs, Wis. Stat. § 349.24. 

Sec. 20-131. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; to ensure that taxicabs are operated by responsible, competent drivers; and to promote and protect the public safety. 
(b)  Compliance. 
(1)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no taxicab or taxicab business shall be operated within the city until the terms, conditions and procedures of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  This article shall not apply to any person who has received a taxicab license in any other municipality for the purpose of carrying taxicab passengers for hire from one municipality to the other, provided this exception does not apply to any taxicab which conducts 50 percent or more of any week's business within the limits of the city. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person applying for a license. 
    Licensee means a person who has received a license from the city. 
    Taxicab means any motor vehicle used for the purpose of transporting persons for hire within the city, excluding emergency vehicles and school buses. 
(Code 1991, § 14.70) 
Sec. 20-132. - Licensing requirements for operators. 
(a)  License required. No person may operate a taxicab or taxicab business within the city unless such a person has first obtained a taxicab operator's license from the city. 
(b)  Requirements . A taxicab operator's license may be issued by the common council to any applicant who satisfies the following requirements: 
(1)  The person must be an adult resident of the state. 
(2)  The person must have a valid state driver's license. 
(3)  The person must have a good driving record. 
(4)  The person must not have been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or other offense, the circumstances of which substantially relate to the circumstances of operating a taxicab. 
(5)  The person must comply with all other terms, conditions and procedures of this article. 
(Code 1991, § 14.71) 
Sec. 20-133. - Licensing requirements for vehicles. 
(a)  License required . No vehicle may be operated as a taxicab in the city unless said vehicle has been issued a taxicab vehicle license. 
(b)  Requirements . A taxicab vehicle license may be issued by the clerk for any vehicle which satisfies the following requirements: 
(1)  The vehicle must have automobile liability insurance for operating as a taxicab, with the limit of not less than $100,000.00, exclusive of interest and costs, for bodily injury to or death of one person in any accident, and with the limit of not less than $200,000.00, exclusive of interest and costs, for bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and with the limit of not less than $25,000.00, exclusive of interest and costs, for injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
(2)  The vehicle to be used as a taxicab must comply with the safety requirements and other provisions of the laws of the state concerning motor vehicles. 
(3)  The owner/applicant must comply with all other terms, conditions and procedures of this article. 
(Code 1991, § 14.72) 
Sec. 20-134. - Licensing procedure for operator's licenses. 
(a)  Who must apply . Each person engaged in the operation of a taxicab within the city must apply for and obtain a taxicab operator's license. 
(b)  Applications. An application for a taxicab operator's license shall be made to the city clerk and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Driver's license number. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any. 
(4)  Photocopy of driver's license. 
(5)  Photocopy of proposed rate schedule. 
(6)  Photocopy of the vehicle license for each vehicle intended to be used as a taxicab. 
(7)  Any additional information which the common council deems pertinent to its issuance of a taxicab license. 
(c)  Fees. Whenever an application is submitted to the city clerk, the applicant shall pay to the clerk a nonrefundable fee, the amount of which shall be as established by the city. 
(d)  Investigation. The clerk shall submit each application to the police department which shall investigate and provide the clerk with the following information regarding each new applicant: 
(1)  A copy of the applicant's criminal record. 
(2)  A copy of the applicant's traffic record. 
(3)  A copy of the applicant's city ordinance violation record. 
(4)  A record of any pending criminal charge and the circumstances of the charge. 
(e)  Referral by clerk . If the clerk does not receive any of the foregoing information from the police, the clerk shall refer the application directly to the council for action. If the clerk receives any of the foregoing information from the police, the clerk shall refer the same to the ordinances, licenses and permits committee, which shall conduct a confidential review of the foregoing information to determine whether a pending criminal charge or any conviction for any felony, misdemeanor or other offense substantially relates to the circumstances of the job permitted by the license requested, as per Wis. Stats. § 111.335. In making the foregoing determination, the committee may require the applicant to appear before the committee. 
(f)  Committee report. The committee shall report its determination to the common council, along with a recommendation as to whether the application should be granted. If the committee recommends that a license not be granted, the committee shall briefly state the reasons therefor. 
(g)  Hearing . After receipt of the application for a taxicab operator's license, the common council shall conduct a hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant, by certified mail, not less than seven days before the date fixed for the hearing. The applicant shall be required to appear at the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant or any other interested person may present testimony in person, by agent or by attorney. The hearing shall be open to the public, but special public notice of the hearing need not be published or posted. 
(h)  Decision . Within 30 days after the hearing, the common council will act upon the application. Failure of the council to act within such period shall be deemed an approval of the application. Upon the approval by the council, a taxicab license shall be issued by the city clerk. 
(i)  Issuance of license . Upon the satisfaction of the foregoing provisions, the city clerk shall issue a taxicab operator's license to the applicant. Said license shall permit the person named in the license to operate the vehicle identified in the license as a taxicab, and to charge the rates set forth in the approved rate schedule. 
(j)  Length of license and renewals. A taxicab operator's license shall permit the licensee to operate a taxicab in the city for a period of one year. Prior to the expiration of the license, the licensee shall submit a new application for a taxicab operator's license and shall follow the procedure set forth above to obtain a new license. The submission of an application to renew a license shall automatically extend the old license until the council approves or rejects the application. 
(Code 1991, § 14.73) 
Sec. 20-135. - Licensing procedure for vehicle licenses. 
(a)  Who must apply . Each person who owns a vehicle used for a taxicab within the city must apply for and obtain a taxicab vehicle license. 
(b)  Application . An application for a taxicab vehicle license shall be made to the city clerk and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant/owner. 
(2)  The license plate number, vehicle identification number, and general description of the vehicle intended to be used as the taxicab. 
(3)  Photocopy of vehicle certificate of title. 
(4)  The name and address of the proposed insurer for the taxicab, and the amount of insurance coverage. 
(5)  Proof of insurance coverage required herein. 
(6)  Any additional information which the common council deems pertinent to its issuance of a taxicab license. 
(c)  Fees . Whenever an application is submitted to the city clerk, the applicant shall pay to the clerk a nonrefundable fee, the amount of which shall be as established by the city. 
(d)  Inspection of vehicles. Upon filing of the application, the applicant shall submit each proposed taxicab vehicle to the chief of police of the city, who shall conduct an inspection of said vehicle and who shall certify to the city clerk, in writing, that the vehicle complies with the safety requirements and other provisions of the laws of the state concerning motor vehicles. If the vehicle fails to comply with such requirements, the chief of police shall inform the applicant, in writing, of the specific violations. The applicant shall then be afforded 30 days in which to repair or correct the violations, and to resubmit the vehicle for re-inspection by the chief of police. No taxicab license may be issued by the city clerk until a written certification from the chief of police is received. 
(e)  Proof of insurance . The applicant shall submit proof to the city clerk establishing that the applicant has obtained insurance as required herein. 
(f)  Issuance of license . Upon the satisfaction of the foregoing provisions, the city clerk shall issue a taxicab vehicle license to the applicant. Said license shall permit the vehicle identified in the license to be used as a taxicab. 
(g)  Length of license and renewals. A taxicab vehicle license shall be valid for a period of one year. Prior to the expiration of the license, the licensee shall submit a new application for a taxicab vehicle license and shall follow the procedure set forth above to obtain a new license. The submission of an application to renew a license shall automatically extend the old license for 30 days. 
(Code 1991, § 14.74) 
Sec. 20-136. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  Change of vehicles . If a licensee desires to change the vehicle being used as a taxicab, before such change can be made, the licensee must submit a new application for a taxicab vehicle license and must obtain a new license on the new vehicle pursuant to the procedure required herein. 
(b)  Change of rates . If a licensee desires to change the rates being charged for taxicab service, before such a change can be made, the licensee must submit an application for a change in the taxicab rate schedule, and must obtain approval thereof from the council. 
(c)  Revocation. 
(1)  A taxicab license may be revoked by a majority vote of the common council upon the failure of the licensee to comply with any provision of this article. 
(2)  A taxicab license shall be immediately suspended upon the occurrence of any of the following events: 
a.  The conviction of the licensee of any law of the state or any ordinance of the city pertaining to the operation of motor vehicles. 
b.  The lapsing of insurance as required by this article; provided, however, that the license may be reinstated upon the submission of evidence to the city clerk that the required insurance has been obtained. 
c.  A determination by the chief of police of the city that the licensed vehicle no longer complies with the safety requirements of the laws of the state; provided, however, that the license may be reinstated by the city clerk upon written certification from the chief of police that the violation has been repaired or corrected. 
(Code 1991, § 14.75) 
Chapter 22 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, Wis. Stats. ch. 755. 

Sec. 22-1. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. ch. 755, there is hereby created and established a joint municipal court to be designated "Mauston Area Municipal Court" (hereinafter MAMC) for the city, the City of New Lisbon, the Village of Necedah, the Township of Germantown, the Township of Necedah, and the Village of Lyndon Station (hereinafter "participating municipalities"); said court originally operative and functioning on January 10, 2012. 
(Code 1991, § 26.101; Ord. No. 2016-1085 , 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 2018-2005 , 2-13-2018) 
Sec. 22-2. - Abolition. 
    The MAMC court hereby established shall not be abolished while the Wis. Stats. § 755.01(4) agreement is in effect. 
(Code 1991, § 26.108) 
Sec. 22-3. - Municipal judge. 
(a)  Qualifications . The MAMC shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided over by a municipal judge, who shall reside in one of the participating municipalities. 
(b)  Oath and bond . The judge shall, after election or appointment to fill a vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 757.02(1) and at the same time execute and file an official bond. The judge shall not act until the oath and bond have been filed, as required by Wis. Stats. § 19.01(4)(c) and the requirements have been complied with of Wis. Stats. § 755.03(2). 
(c)  Compensation. The salary for the MAMC judge shall be fixed, in lieu of fees and costs, by the common council of the city. No compensation shall be paid for any time during the term for which such judge has not executed the official oath or official bond, as required by Wis. Stats. § 19.01(4)(c) and the requirements have been complied with of Wis. Stats. § 755.03(2). 
(Code 1991, § 26.102) 
Sec. 22-4. - Elections. 
(a)  Term . The MAMC judge shall be elected at large in the spring election in odd-numbered years for a term of four years commencing on May 1, 2013. All candidates for the position of MAMC judge shall be nominated by nomination papers as provided in Wis. Stats. § 8.10, and the selection at a primary election if such is held as provided in Wis. Stats. § 8.11. Per Wis. Stats. § 8.10(6)(bm), the county clerk shall serve as filing officer for the candidates. Municipalities, who choose to join the existing MAMC, agree that the judge for the existing MAMC will continue to serve as judge until the end of his term. 
(b)  Vacancy . A permanent vacancy in the office of MAMC judge may be filled by temporary appointment of the common council of the city, in consultation with the participating municipalities as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 8.50(4)(fm). The office shall be permanently filled by special election in the manner provided for in said statute. 
(c)  Substitute and interim municipal judge. In the event that a MAMC judge is to be temporarily absent or is sick or disabled, the provision of Wis. Stats. § 800.06 shall apply. 
(d)  Electors . Electors in the city and the participating municipalities shall vote for the MAMC judge. 
(Code 1991, § 26.103) 
Sec. 22-5. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Exclusivity . The MAMC shall have jurisdiction over incidents occurring on or after January 15, 2014, as provided in article VII, § 14 of the state constitution, and Wis. Stats. §§ 755.045 and 755.05, and as other provided by the laws of the state. It shall have exclusive jurisdiction over actions in the city and the participating municipalities seeking to impose forfeitures for violations of municipal ordinances, resolutions and bylaws. 
(b)  Civil warrants . The MAMC judge may issue civil warrants to enforce matters under the jurisdiction of the municipal court under Wis. Stats. §§ 755.045(2) and 66.0119. 
(c)  Juvenile offenders . The MAMC court has jurisdiction over juvenile offenders when a participating municipality enacts an ordinance under the authority of Wis. Stats. § 938.17(2)(cm). Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 938.17(2)(cm), the MAMC judge may impose the following dispositions upon a juvenile for a violation of a participating municipality's ordinances: 
(1)  Any disposition allowed under Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(2)  Wis. Stats. § 938.343(2). 
(3)  Wis. Stats. § 938.343(3). 
(4)  Wis. Stats. § 938.343(4). 
(5)  Wis. Stats. § 938.343(10). 
(6)  Wis. Stats. § 938.344. 
(7)  Wis. Stats. § 938.261. 
Any or all of the above listed dispositions may be used in any combination when imposed by the MAMC judge. 
(Code 1991, § 26.104) 
Sec. 22-6. - Operations and procedures. 
(a)  Hours. The MAMC shall be open as determined by order of the MAMC judge. 
(b)  Employees . The court shall be staffed by such clerical personnel as are authorized by the common council of the city. Staff work priorities and standards will be developed cooperatively between the MAMC judge and the city clerk to ensure all legal and statutory deadlines and obligations will be achieved. The MAMC judge shall have final authority and determination of work priorities and standards to be implemented by the city clerk. The city clerk shall be the appointing authority, in consultation with the participating municipalities, and shall have jurisdiction over such position. Such employees are subject to direction of the city clerk. Court personnel shall be covered by a blanket bond paid for by the city. 
(c)  Location . The MAMC judge shall keep his office and hold court in an adequate facility provided by the common council of the city. However, the MAMC judge may issue process and perform ministerial functions at any place in the county. 
(Code 1991, § 26.105) 
Sec. 22-7. - Collection of forfeitures and costs. 
    The MAMC judge may impose punishment and sentences as provided by Wis. Stats. chs. 800 and 938, and as provided in the ordinances of the city and the participating municipalities. All forfeitures, fees, assessments, surcharges and costs shall be paid to the treasurer of the city within seven days after receipt of the money by the MAMC. At the time of the payment, the MAMC shall report to the treasurer the title of the action, the nature of the offenses and total amount of judgments imposed in actions and proceedings in which such moneys were collected. On or before the last day of the month following the month of collection, the participating municipalities shall be paid the amount collected on citations issued for violations in the respective municipalities, less the court costs and $5.00 processing fee. 
(Code 1991, § 26.106; Ord. No. 2018-2005 , 2-13-2018) 
Chapter 24 - NUISANCES AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City authority to preserve public and safety, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(5); nuisances generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 823. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve and protect the peace, health, safety, property and general welfare of the community; to protect, maintain and preserve property values; to abate and prevent blighted areas; and to recognize the private and public benefits resulting from the safe, sanitary and attractive maintenance of buildings, yards, and vacant areas. 
(Code 1991, § 13.02) 
Sec. 24-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basement means a space of full story height below the first floor which is not designed or used primarily for yearround living accommodations. Space partly below grade, which is designed and finished as habitable space is not defined as basement space. 
    Dwelling means any building or structure and attached appurtenances wholly or partly used or intended to be used by humans for living or sleeping. 
    Dwelling unit means any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating meals. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables and condemned food and other vegetable and animal matter. 
    Infestation means the presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
    Noxious weeds includes Canada thistle, leafy spurge, field bindweed (creeping Jenny), in any part of the city, and all plants growing in sidewalk cracks or cracks next to buildings in any area zoned commercial or industrial. 
    Nuisance vehicles means any abandoned, junked, unregistered, unlicensed, untitled, disassembled, inoperable or wrecked motor vehicles, or parts thereof, or vehicle with unsecured doors, windows, and/or trunk causing a safety hazard, which have been allowed to remain outside of any building upon public or private property for a period in excess of seven days, unless in connection with an automotive sales or repair business located in a properly zoned area and for which all applicable permits or licenses have been granted. 
    Occupant means any person living, sleeping or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person, not an owner, who has charge or care of any premises, dwelling or part thereof. 
    Owner means any person who shall be the legal record holder of title of a premises or dwelling, including the legal record holder of a land contract vendee's interest. 
    Premises means any lot, plot or parcel of land and the buildings thereon. 
    Recyclable waste means waste material that can be remanufactured into useable products and shall include by way of enumeration, but not limitation, glass, plastics, newspapers, cardboard, metals (aluminum, steel, tin, brass, etc.). 
    Refuse means all waste material, except garbage, rubbish and recyclable waste, and shall by way of enumeration, but not limitation, include grass, leaves, sticks, tree branches and logs, stumps, cement, boards, furniture or household appliances, garden debris. 
    Rubbish means waste material, except garbage, that is incidental to the operation of a building and shall include by way of enumeration, but not limitation, tin cans, bottles, rags, paper, cardboard, sweepings. 
(Code 1991, § 13.03; Ord. No. 2017-1093 , 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 24-3. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement. The police department, director of public works, building inspector, zoning inspector, health commissioner and fire inspector (hereinafter "city officials") are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and in so doing, are empowered to make the determination of whether a violation exists. They may make periodic inspections, with or without receiving a complaint, to ensure that this chapter is not violated. No action shall be taken by the city under this chapter to abate a violation unless a city official shall have inspected the premises where the violation is alleged to exist and has satisfied himself that a nuisance does exist. 
(b)  Right to inspect. The foregoing city officials shall have the power and authority to enter upon any public or private premises, dwellings, dwelling units and premises located within the city, at reasonable hours, upon 24-hour notice, for the purpose of inspecting, examining and surveying the premises to determine whether a violation of this chapter exists. Where entry is denied, the city may obtain a special inspection warrant or other legal process to obtain entry as provided by law. 
(c)  Non-hazardous conditions. If the city official determines that a violation exists, the city official shall cause the issuance of written notice to the responsible person, directing him to correct and abate the violation on or before a specified date, but not sooner than 24 hours following the service of said notice. 
(d)  Hazardous conditions. If the city official determines that a violation creates a substantial and immediate danger to public safety, the city official may cause the issuance of a written notice to the responsible person directing him to correct and abate the violation within two hours from the service of the notice. In the event the responsible person is unavailable to receive such written notice or cannot be served within a reasonable time, the city may immediately cause the abatement of the violation and thereafter shall serve written notice on the responsible person explaining that a hazardous condition existed which required immediate abatement. 
(e)  Notice provisions. The written notice required by this chapter shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name of one or more responsible person to whom the notice is being issued. 
(2)  The reasons why the notice is being issued, with specific reference to the violated code section. 
a.  If city officials have determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time, not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order, and completed within such time as the city official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances. 
b.  If the city official has determined that the building or structure must be razed and removed, the order shall require that the building be vacated, all required permits be secured and that the razing and removal be completed within the time set forth in the condemnation order pursuant to state statutes. 
c.  Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work is not completed within the time specified, the building and inspections department may order the building vacated, razed, and removed as conditions warrant through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons or firms with the cost of razing, removal and restoration of the site to an erosion free condition to be charged in full or in part against the real estate upon which the building is located, and if that cost is so charged it is a lien against the real estate and may be assessed and collected as a special tax. 
(3)  A time within which remedial action must be taken. 
(4)  A brief outline of remedial action which, if taken, will constitute compliance with this chapter. 
(5)  A brief explanation of the steps the city may take if the violation is not corrected or abated. 
(6)  Notice of the responsible person's right to a hearing as provided in subsection (j) of this section. 
(f)  Service of notice. Written notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the responsible person if a copy is served upon him personally, or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to his last known address, or posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the notice, or by any other method authorized by state law for service of process. 
(g)  Order to vacate. The building and zoning department may order vacated any building declared substandard which is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or of the occupants thereof. Every order to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided herein, be posted in plain view at or upon each entrance of the building. Removal or defacing this placard may be subject to a fine. Whenever such notice is posted, the building/zoning department shall include a list of the conditions that necessitate the condemnation of the premises for human habitation, occupancy or use. No person shall remain in or shall enter upon any building that has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building after permission is first granted and all necessary permits are issued by the building/zoning department. 
(h)  City abatement. If the responsible person to whom notice has been given fails to remove or abate the violation within the time established in the notice, the city may enter upon the premises and cause the nuisance to be removed or abated and the city shall recover the expenses incurred thereby from the owner or occupant of the premises or from the person who caused or permitted the nuisance. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the city or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(i)  Cost of abatement. An accounting of the expenses incurred by the City to remove or abate such violation shall be the penalty charged to and collected as a debt from the responsible person. Notice of the expenses shall be mailed to the last known address of the responsible person and shall be due and payable within ten calendar days from the mailing thereof. If not paid, the charges may be collected through any lawful procedure, and if notice to abate the violation was given to the owner of the real estate upon which the violation occurred, such expenses may be assessed against the real estate as a special charge or special assessment. 
(j)  Appeal and hearing. Any person affected by a notice issued hereunder may request a hearing in the matter before the health, welfare and sustainability committee. Such person shall file in the office of the city clerk, within ten days after service of the notice, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. Upon receipt of such petition, the city clerk shall notify the health, welfare and sustainability committee, which shall arrange a time and place for such hearing and give notice thereof to the petitioner and to the city officer who issued said notice. Such hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the receipt of request therefor. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why such notice should not be complied with. After such hearing, the committee may sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon the committee's interpretation of this chapter and the application of the particular facts thereto. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the committee, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the city clerk. Such records shall include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. If a petition for such hearing is not filed, any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become an order of the city. 
(k)  Time extension. Any person affected by a notice issued hereunder may request in writing, for good cause, an extension of time within which to abate a nuisance. Such requests shall be made to the officer who issued the notice and any extension shall be at the sole discretion of that officer. 
(l)  Nuisance injunction. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance as defined by this Code and/or state statutes. In addition to any other relief provided by this chapter, or this Code, the city attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any and all violations of this chapter. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction. The city attorney may request and shall be entitled to receive, on behalf of the city, reimbursement for any and all costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees, related to such injunction proceedings and any other enforcement action or litigation related to or arising from a violation of this chapter. All such penalties or costs and expenses awarded to the city by a court of competent jurisdiction related to a violation of this chapter may be applied as a special assessment or lien against the property for collection by the city. 
(m)  Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the city in accordance with state laws. 
(n)  Penalties and citations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in chapter 1, article II. 
(Code 1991, § 13.90; Ord. No. 2017-1093 , 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 24-4-24-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances generally, Wis. Stats. ch. 823. 

Sec. 24-25. - Public nuisance defined. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  Common law. Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(2)  In general. Any act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to: 
a.  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
b.  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; 
c.  Greatly offend the public morals or decency; 
d.  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct, or render dangerous for passage, any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way, or the use of public property. 
(3)  Code violations. Any place or premises within the city where city ordinances or state laws relating to the public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. 
(4)  Blighted premises. Any structure, building, improvement or premises which is a menace to public health, safety, morals or welfare in its present condition, or which endangers life or property by threat of fire or other hazard, due to any of the following reasons: 
a.  Faulty design or construction; 
b.  Failure to maintain the premises; or 
c.  The accumulation thereon of junk, garbage, or rubbish. 
(5)  Attractive nuisance. Any artificial condition existing on land which presents an unreasonable risk of harm to children, who, because of their youth, may not discover the condition or realize the risk of intermeddling or coming within the area of danger, and the utility to the possessor of maintaining the condition and the burden of eliminating the danger are slight as compared to the risk to children. Attractive nuisances shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Vacant buildings or structures which possess unsecured doors or windows; 
b.  Abandoned wells or shafts which are not securely sealed or covered; 
c.  Basements and excavations which are unprotected or unfenced; 
d.  Abandoned refrigerators or freezers which do not have the doors removed therefrom; 
e.  Structurally unsound fences and structures; 
f.  Nuisance vehicles which possess unsecured doors, windows or trunks. 
(6)  Public health. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances, affecting public health, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances: 
a.  Adulterated food. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered to the public for human consumption. 
b.  Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
c.  Breeding places for vermin, etc. Accumulation of decayed animal or vegetable matter, garbage, refuse, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing materials, scrap metal or any materials whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed. 
d.  Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can breed. 
e.  Privy vaults and garbage cans. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight. 
f.  Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds. 
g.  Air pollution. The emission or escape into the open air of such quantities of smoke, ash, dust, soot, cinders, acid or other fumes, dirt or other material of noxious gases in such place or manner that causes or is likely to cause injury, detriment or nuisance to any appreciable number of persons within the city. 
h.  Water pollution . The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water. 
i.  Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the city emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to ordinary persons, or which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the city. 
j.  Street pollution. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the city. 
k.  Animals at large. All animals running at large. An animal is considered to be running at large if it is off the premises of its owner and not under the control of the owner or some other person. 
l.  Accumulations of waste. Accumulations of garbage, refuse, rubbish or recyclable waste, which exists for more than ten consecutive days and which is not stored completely in an enclosed structure. 
(7)  Public peace and safety. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and/or safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances: 
a.  Signs, billboards, etc. All signs, billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, which are so situated or which because of color, location, brilliance or manner of operation can be construed as to endanger the public safety. 
b.  Unauthorized traffic signs. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal, or which, because of their color, location, brilliance or manner of operation, interfere with the effectiveness of any official device, sign or signal. 
c.  Obstructions of streets and excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by this Code, or which, although made in accordance with this Code, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished or do not conform to the permit issued. 
d.  Flammable liquids. Repeated or continuous violations of this Code or state law relating to the storage of flammable liquids. 
e.  Open cisterns, wells, basements or other dangerous excavations. Any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations, swimming pools or other dangerous openings, unless such places are filled, securely covered or fenced in such manner as to prevent injury, provided any cover shall be of a design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed by small children. 
f.  Abandoned refrigerators. Any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside. 
g.  Tree limbs. All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than ten feet above the surface thereof and all limbs which project over a public street less than 14 feet above the surface thereof. 
h.  Dead trees. All dead or dying trees and tree limbs, which are so situated that the tree or limb could fall on a public or private street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot, house, garage, playground equipment or other structure. A tree or limb shall be presumed to be dead or dying if 50 percent or more of the tree or limb does not have leaves on it during the growing season. 
i.  Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks, except as provided by the laws of the state. 
j.  Wires over streets. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof. 
k.  Noisy animals or fowl. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which, by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or other noise, shall greatly annoy or disturb a person of ordinary sensibilities or any considerable number of persons within the city. 
(8)  Public morals and decency. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances which may offend public morals and decency: 
a.  Disorderly houses. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purposes of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling. 
b.  Gambling devices. All gambling machines and gambling places as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 945. 
c.  Unlicensed sale of liquor or beer . All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as required by this Code, or otherwise contrary to state law. 
d.  Illegal drinking or drugs. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages, or for the purpose of consuming drugs or other illegal substances, in violation of state law. 
(9)  Buildings, structures and premises. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting buildings, structures and premises but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances regarding buildings and structures: 
a.  Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of this Code or state law. 
b.  Dilapidated structures. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use or occupancy. 
c.  Rodents. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, window, exterior door, basement hatchway and every other entrance to a structure which is not maintained to prevent the entrance and harborage of rats, mice or other vermin. 
d.  Fences. Every fence which is not kept in a reasonably good state of repair. 
e.  [Motor vehicles.] Nuisance vehicles which are not stored in a completely enclosed structure. 
(Code 1991, § 13.21; Ord. No. 2017-1093 , 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 24-26. - Public nuisance prohibited. 
    No occupant, operator or owner shall erect, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the city. 
(Code 1991, § 13.20) 
Secs. 24-27-24-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 24-56. - Property maintenance required. 
    No person, partnership or corporation shall own or occupy any dwelling, premises or building which fails to meet the minimum maintenance standards imposed by this article. Furthermore, no owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this article to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling or building, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by a city official. 
(Code 1991, § 13.30) 
Sec. 24-57. - Minimum maintenance standards. 
    All dwellings, buildings and premises shall comply with the following minimum maintenance standards: 
(1)  Water control. All courts, yards, or other areas on the premises shall be properly graded to divert water away from the building, and to prevent stagnant water from accumulating thereon. 
(2)  Weed control . All property areas shall be kept free from noxious weeds. 
(3)  Yard debris. All yard areas shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from debris, rubbish or garbage, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and animal feces. All animal feces shall be removed within 24 hours. Yards shall not be used to store appliances, furnaces, water heaters, water softeners, nuisance vehicles, building materials not used within 15 days, or any unsightly bulk items. 
(4)  Minor structures. Fences and other minor structures shall be properly maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(5)  Exterior surfaces/paint maintenance. Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative which will provide adequate resistance to weathering and maintain an attractive appearance. Any exterior surface treated with paint or other preservative shall be reasonably maintained so as to prevent chipping, cracking or other deterioration of the exterior surface or the surface treatment and to present an attractive appearance. All paint or other preservative shall be applied in a workmanlike fashion. 
(6)  Lawns and plantings . Lawns shall be maintained at a height not to exceed eight inches. Plantings shall be maintained so as not to present hazards to adjoining properties or to persons or vehicles traveling on public ways, and dead or diseased plantings and trees shall be removed. 
(7)  Safe interior structures . Every interior floor, wall and ceiling, including door and window assemblies, shall be kept in good repair, and shall be capable of affording privacy. Any hazardous sagging or bulging shall be properly repaired. 
(8)  Safe exterior structures . Every foundation, exterior wall, and floor and roof shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, and shall be kept in proper repair and shall be capable of affording privacy. Any hazardous sagging or bulging shall be properly repaired. All chimneys and breeching shall be so constructed and maintained so as to ensure that it safely and properly removes the products of combustion from the building. 
(9)  Exterior doors and windows . Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof and kept in proper repair. All exterior door and window hardware shall be installed and maintained in proper working condition. The panes and glazing on windows shall be reasonably maintained. 
(10)  Rental unit entrance doors. Each dwelling entrance door into a non-owner occupied dwelling unit shall contain an approved door viewer, except where a window in the door, or a window immediately adjacent to the doorway, provides a clear view of the entrance. 
(11)  Exterior door hinges. All doors into each dwelling unit shall be equipped with door hinges so arranged as to be inside the dwelling unit or with approved locking or captive pin hinges. 
(12)  Window sash fasteners . All basement, first and second story windows and all other windows accessible by balconies, fire escapes, trees or other existing means shall be provided with sash fasteners. 
(13)  Stairs and porches . Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(14)  Rented facilities. Every rented facility and piece of equipment or utility thereon shall be constructed, installed and maintained in proper working condition. The owner of any dwelling or apartment in which a cooking stove and/or refrigerator are furnished for the use of the tenants as part of rental agreement shall keep such cooking stove and/or refrigerator in good working condition. 
(15)  Dust control on driveways. All unpaved driveways and parking areas shall be reasonably maintained to control dust. 
(16)  Firewood. Firewood shall be stored in straight, orderly piles, which are not more than six feet in height and which are not in the front yard as defined in chapter 114. 
(17)  Signs. The maintenance requirements of section 114-258(c) are incorporated herein by reference. 
(18)  Antennas. All antennas, as defined in chapter 114, shall be maintained to comply with the provisions of chapter 114, article V. 
(19)  Accessory buildings. All accessory buildings, as defined in chapter 114, shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, and shall be maintained to be structurally sound and fit for their intended purpose. All doors and windows shall be maintained in proper working condition. 
(20)  Sidewalk cleaning and maintenance. All sidewalks shall be maintained as set forth in chapter 32. The provisions of chapter 32, section 5 shall be applicable for the enforcement of any violations under this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 13.31; Ord. No. 2017-1093 , 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 24-58-24-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL INSPECTION PROGRAM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Certain restrictions on landlords prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 66.0104. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-88. - Purpose. 
    The city recognizes a need for an organized inspection program of residential rental units within the city in order to upgrade and maintain the condition of such residential rental units so that they meet and comply with all provisions of this Code as well as all applicable safety, health, fire, building and construction requirements promulgated by the state. The city also desires to provide a more efficient system for compelling both absentee and local landlords to correct violations and to maintain, in proper condition, rental property within the city. The city recognizes that the most efficient system to provide for rental inspections is the creation of a program requiring the registration of all residential rental units within the city so that orderly inspection schedules can be made by city officials. 
(Code 1991, § 13.401) 
Sec. 24-89. - Scope. 
    The provision of this section shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof used, designed or intended to be leased, let, farmed out, demised or rented for human habitation as well as any garages or outbuildings included within such rental arrangement. 
(Code 1991, § 13.402) 
Sec. 24-90. - Fixing the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants. 
    The purpose of this section is to fix the responsibility of owners, operators, and occupants of residential buildings. The responsibilities of the owners, operators, and occupants of residential buildings are as follows: 
(1)  Owners and/or operators. 
a.  Every owner of a residential building containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining the shared or public areas of the building in a clean, proper, and sanitary condition. 
b.  Every owner shall be responsible for hanging, installation, and maintenance of all screens and double or storm doors and windows, whenever the same are required under provisions of the ordinance. 
c.  Every owner shall be responsible for the extermination of any inspects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. In all residential buildings, except for single-family dwellings and owner occupied two-family dwellings, extermination services shall be performed by a licensed exterminator. 
d.  Every owner of a lodginghouse shall make available to the occupants the names of two or more persons that may be called to arrange for emergency work. The names with the telephone numbers all be posed in a conspicuous place readily accessible to the occupants. The names with the telephone numbers shall be revised periodically to maintain accurate information at all times. 
e.  Every owner or operator shall not occupy or let to another for occupancy any space in a residential building unless it is clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, complies with the requirements of this article and the occupancy is limited to the maximum permitted thereby. 
f.  The operator of every lodginghouse shall change supplied linen and towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(2)  Occupants. 
a.  Every occupant of a residential building shall keep in a clean, proper, and sanitary condition that part of the residential building and premises thereof which he occupies and controls, except the operator of every lodginghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, ceilings, and every other part of the lodginghouse. Every occupant of a residential building shall dispose of all his refuse and garbage. 
b.  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Code 1991, § 13.403) 
Secs. 24-91-24-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 24-109. - Registration requirements. 
    No person shall hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied or let to another person for occupancy any property within the city for which a registration statement has not been properly made and filed with the building inspector or zoning administrator in accordance with the provisions of this division. Registration shall be made upon forms furnished by the building inspector or zoning administrator of the city for such purpose and shall specifically require the following minimum information: 
(1)  Name, address, social security number or driver's license number and phone number of the property; 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of the designated local property manager if the property owner or owners live outside the city; 
(3)  The street address of the property; 
(4)  The number and types of residential rental units within the property; and 
(5)  The name, phone number and address of the person authorized to make, order or direct repairs or services for the property, if in violation of city or state codes, if the person is different than the owner, owners or local manager. 
(Code 1991, § 13.404) 
Sec. 24-110. - Manner of registering. 
    All owners of rental property shall be required to submit a registration statement within 30 days of occupancy. 
(Code 1991, § 13.405) 
Sec. 24-111. - Transfer of property. 
    Every new owner of property, whether as fee owner or land contract purchaser or upon conveyance or transfer of any interest in the property, shall be required to furnish to the building inspector or zoning administrator the name, address, driver's license and telephone number of the new owner or owners, as well as the name, address and telephone number of the local manager, duly designated by the new owner or owners before closing or taking possession of the property. The new owner of the property shall be required to pay a registration fee. 
(Code 1991, § 13.406) 
Sec. 24-112. - Registration fees. 
    A one-time registration fee per owner, independent of number of properties owned, as established by the city, shall be charged for registrations required under this division. 
(Code 1991, § 13.407) 
Secs. 24-113-24-138. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 24-139. - Inspection required. 
    These inspection requirements are not intended to conflict with licensing and inspection requirements promulgated by the state. 
(1)  All single-family and multifamily residential rental units, boardinghouses, and dormitories or hotels that rent to permanent residents shall be inspected systematically in a manner and upon a schedule prescribed by the building inspector or zoning administrator, in compliance with this division and all other applicable laws. 
(2)  Where a nonresidential business or activity, or a state licensed and inspected use occupies a portion of a building and premises, which would be otherwise subject to this division, the provisions of this division shall be applicable to the residential and common or public areas of such building and premises. 
(3)  For new construction containing residential units, the building inspector or zoning administrator may conduct an inspection in accordance with this division in conjunction with or simultaneously with any inspections relating to the issuance of an occupancy permit pursuant to city codes. Upon satisfactory completion of such inspections, the building inspector or zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of inspection. In such instances there shall be no inspection fee required. 
(4)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
a.  Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses owned and/or operated by a governmental agency; 
b.  Boardinghouses, dormitories and hotels that do not rent to permanent residents; or 
c.  Nursing homes. 
(Code 1991, § 13.408) 
Sec. 24-140. - Frequencies of inspections. 
(a)  All property subject to inspection shall be inspected on a three-year schedule, although random inspections may also be performed. 
(1)  If a unit passes inspection on the first inspection of each three-year cycle, the unit may not be inspected until the next three-year cycle or until a complaint is received, until probable cause of substandard building or unit exists, or an inspection is requested by the owner, owner's agent or manager of such unit. 
(2)  If a rental unit fails inspection for any reason, the unit shall be brought into compliance, re-inspected and shall pass re-inspection. If a rental unit does not pass inspection that rental unit may be inspected during the following calendar year and each subsequent year until it passes on a single inspection. 
(b)  Neither the common areas nor the residential rental units or rooming units in newly constructed structures shall be further inspected after the completion and issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a period of three years from the date of said certificate unless a complaint is made thereof. Thereafter said areas and units shall be inspected in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1991, § 13.409) 
Sec. 24-141. - Inspection procedure. 
(a)  If, upon completion of an inspection, a property is found to be in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code, and the appropriate fee has been paid, the city shall issue a certificate of inspection for the property. 
(b)  If, upon completion of an inspection, a property is found to be in violation of one or more provisions of any applicable provisions of this Code, the city shall provide the property owner or his designated local property manager with written notice of such violations and shall set a re-inspection date before which such violation shall be corrected. If such violation has been corrected within that period, the city shall issue a certificate of inspection for the property. If such violation has not been corrected within that period, the city shall not issue the certificate of inspection and may take any action necessary to enforce compliance with all applicable provisions of this division and this Code. If such uncorrected violation does not pose an immediate threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants or other residents of the city, the building inspector or zoning administrator or the building inspector's or zoning administrator's designee may, at his sole discretion, authorize the temporary occupancy of the property for a period not to exceed 60 days while corrective action is undertaken by the property owner. 
(Code 1991, § 13.411) 
Sec. 24-142. - Requests for inspection. 
    The owner of any property subject to this division may request inspections of said property at any time, subject to the inspection fees provisions of section 24-143. 
(Code 1991, § 13.412) 
Sec. 24-143. - Inspection fees. 
    The fees for each inspection required by this division shall be as established by the city. In addition, there shall be paid any additional costs for fees of the building inspector, engineers, attorney or other professional consultants used to inspect and evaluate the premises as deemed necessary by the zoning administrator, city administrator, health, welfare and sustainability committee members, or any other city official. The units enumerated in section 24-139 shall not include the dwelling units used or occupied by the owner, but shall apply to the owner's local property manager. Where a property does not have a current certificate of inspection, then, for purposes of calculating the fee therefore, the first required inspection date for the property shall be deemed the first inspection. 
(Code 1991, § 13.417) 
Sec. 24-144. - Certificate expiration date. 
(a)  Certificate of inspection issued pursuant to this division shall expire three years from the date of its issuance. 
(b)  The certificate of inspection shall have the expiration date prominently displayed on its face. 
(Code 1991, § 13.413) 
Sec. 24-145. - Certificate transferability. 
    A certificate of inspection issued pursuant to this division shall be transferable to succeeding owners; provided, however, that the transferor shall provide written notice of said transfer to the 
building inspector or zoning administrator or the building inspector's or zoning administrator's designee no later than five days prior to the transfer closing. Such notice shall contain the name and address of all succeeding owners as provided in division 2 of this article. The failure to provide such notice may result in the suspension or revocation of the certificate of inspection. 
(Code 1991, § 13.414) 
Sec. 24-146. - Certificate availability. 
    Upon the request of an existing or prospective tenant, the owner or the duly designated agent or local manager shall produce the certificate of inspection for review. 
(Code 1991, § 13.415) 
Sec. 24-147. - Suspension or revocation of certificate. 
    If the building inspector or zoning administrator determines that any owner has failed to comply with this division or any applicable provision of this Code, after having given that person written notice of said violation and a reasonable opportunity to correct said violation, the building inspector or zoning administrator may suspend or revoke the certificate of inspection held by such owner for the property in violation. 
(Code 1991, § 13.416) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Bond schedules. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0111, a bond not to exceed $200.00 may be accepted from any person arrested for a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 11.903) 
Sec. 26-2. - State statutes adopted. 
    All state statutes defining offenses, except those that are felonies and those that state law prohibits from making a municipal offense, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full into this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference, is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any penalty imposed by any statute incorporated herein by reference, is not imposed or adopted by this chapter; provided, however, the penalties prescribed herein shall be limited to and shall not exceed the penalties prescribed by statute for the same act. 
(Code 1991, § 11.201) 
Sec. 26-3. - Littering. 
(a)  Littering prohibited . No person shall throw or deposit any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the city, or upon property within the city owned by the school district or any private person, or upon the surface of any body of water within the city. 
(b)  Litter from conduct of commercial enterprise. 
(1)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all sales, promotions and other commercial ventures that result in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way. 
(2)  Litter to be cleaned up . Any person, firm, corporation or association carrying on an enterprise that results in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way shall clean up the same within 12 hours of the time the same is deposited. If any such litter is subject to being blown about, it shall be picked up immediately. If any such litter is likely to attract animals or vermin, such litter shall be picked up immediately. 
(3)  Litter picked up at litterer's expense . If any person, firm, corporation or association fails to pick up any litter as required by subsection (b)(2) of this section within the time specified, the city shall arrange to have the same picked up by city crews or by private enterprise. The entire expense of picking up such litter, together with an additional charge of 20 percent for administrative expenses, shall be charged to the person, firm, corporation or association that did the littering. If such sum is not promptly paid, steps shall be taken to collect the same. This charge shall be in addition to any forfeiture or other penalty for violation of this section. 
(Code 1991, § 11.203) 
State Law reference- Littering, Wis. Stats. § 287.81. 
Sec. 26-4. - Curfew. 
(a)  Prohibited hours . No person under the age of 18 years shall be or remain in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road, alley, park, school grounds, swimming beach, cemetery, playground, public building or any other public place in the city during the following hours: 
(1)  After 10:30 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday evenings, and before 5:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday mornings; and 
(2)  After 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday evenings, and before 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings. 
(b)  Defenses . It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence, except that this defense does not apply to a violation of the curfew hours described in subsection (a)(1) of this section; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
(c)  Parental liability . No parent, guardian or legal custodian of any person under the age of 18 years shall allow or permit such underage person to violate the provisions of this section. Any parent, guardian or legal custodian who shall have made a missing person notification to the police department shall not be considered to have allowed or permitted any underage person to violate this section. 
(d)  Loitering. Nothing herein shall limit or abrogate the requirements of section 26-33 regarding loitering. 
(e)  Special penalty section. Any underage person who violates this section shall be subject to referral to the juvenile court intake under Wis. Stats. ch. 48 and/or shall forfeit an amount established by the city for each offense. Any parent, guardian or legal custodian who violates this section shall forfeit an amount established by the city for each offense and may be confined to the county jail until such forfeiture is paid, but not to exceed five days. 
(Code 1991, § 11.204) 
Sec. 26-5. - Roller blades, skate boards and bicycles. 
    No person shall be allowed to use roller blades, skate boards, and/or bicycles on any publicly owned surfaced tennis courts. Surfaced courts are those that have been treated with a colored paint like substance and are striped with a paint-like substance to mark playing area and boundary lines. 
(Code 1991, § 11.213) 
Sec. 26-6. - Outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices. 
(a)  Definition. The term "outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device" means any equipment, device or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed, or situated outdoors, or which is designed to be installed, affixed, or situated outdoors, for the primary purpose of the combustion of solid fuel (e.g., wood, corn, coal, etc.) to produce heat or energy which is used as a component of a heating system providing heat for any interior space or water source. Any outdoor heating system that is manufactured for outdoor use, but is installed within a building or structure (e.g., an outdoor furnace installed in a garage, breezeway or shed), shall be bound by this section. 
(b)  New devices prohibited . No outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices shall be installed, erected, replaced, or used in the city. 
(c)  Existing devices limited. The city is not aware of any existing outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices currently located within the city limits. If there are any such devices, the owners of such devices shall register their devices with the city within 60 days of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived, or be forever barred from the use of said devices in the city. All outdoor solid fuel-fired heating devices which: 
(1)  Currently exist within the city limits and which become registered as required herein; or 
(2)  Are annexed into the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived; 
shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All devices shall be located at least 100 feet from the lot line. 
(2)  All devices shall be installed at least 100 feet from any building, except the building to which the device provides heat. 
(3)  Each device shall have a chimney that is at least 20 feet above the ground surface, or three feet above the height of the tallest building within 300 feet of the device, whichever is higher. 
(4)  All devices shall meet the emissions standards currently required by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Such emissions standards currently required by the EPA are adopted herein by reference, together with any future amendments or modifications. 
(5)  The devices shall not be used to burn any of the following materials: 
a.  Rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food waste, food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, shingles, construction or demolition debris, or other household or business waste. 
b.  Waste oil or other oily wastes, except used oil burned in a heating device for energy recovery subject to and in compliance withal applicable state restrictions. 
c.  Asphalt and products containing asphalt. 
d.  Treated or painted wood, including, but not limited to, plywood, composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished, or treated. 
e.  All plastic material, including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, synthetic fabrics, plastic films, plastic containers, and rubber, including tires and synthetic rubber-like products. 
f.  Newspapers, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper, and other materials that must be recycled in accordance with the city recycling ordinance, except as follows: 
1.  Paper and cardboard products may be used as a starter fuel for a fire that is allowed under the chapter. 
2.  Small quantities of confidential papers from a residence may be burned, for the purpose of maintaining confidentiality. 
(6)  No existing device may be replaced with a new device. 
(7)  The device shall be placed on a poured concrete slab. 
(8)  The device shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's directions and specifications. 
(9)  Any device in a state of disrepair, or that is damaged to such an extent that it does not operate in full conformance with the manufacturer's specifications, is hereby declared a public nuisance, and shall be taken out of service and removed from the property. 
(d)  Nuisance prohibited . Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device which becomes hazardous, harmful, obnoxious, offensive, or a nuisance, is prohibited. Nothing in this section shall limit or restrict the rights or remedies of the city or private persons who are harmed or affected by any device. 
(Code 1991, § 11.214) 
Sec. 26-7. - Smoking prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  Purpose. The common council of the city recognizes that smoking of cigarettes and tobacco products is hazardous to an individual's health and may affect the health of nonsmokers/smokers when they are involuntarily in the presence of smoking. Reliable scientific studies assessed by credible health officials have found that secondhand tobacco smoke is a significant health hazard for children, elderly people, and individuals with cardiovascular disease or impaired respiratory function. Air pollution caused by smoking is an offensive annoyance and irritant. Smoking results in serious and significant physical discomfort to nonsmokers. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority provided in Wis. Stats. § 101.123(4m) for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the people of the city, especially recognizing the health interests of nonsmokers, who constitute a majority of the population. 
(b)  Wis. Stats. § 101.123, to the extent that it requires any act to be performed or prohibited, is hereby adopted, and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein, as a part of this section. 
(c)  Definitions. The definitions set forth in Wis. Stats. § 101.123(1) are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein, provided that the term "enclosed place," defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.123(1)(ak), shall be deemed to include any enclosed indoor area as defined in this subsection. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Day care center means a facility operated by a child care provider that provides care and supervision for four or more children under seven years of age for less than 24 hours a day. 
    Employment means any trade, occupation, or process of manufacture or any method of carrying on such trade, occupation or process of manufacture in which any person may be engaged. 
    Enclosed indoor area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by walls, doors, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50 percent of the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. A 0.011 gauge screen with an 18 by 16 mesh count is not a wall. 
    Person in charge means the person who ultimately controls, governs or directs the activities aboard a public conveyance or within or at a place where smoking is regulated under this section, regardless of the person's status as owner or lessee. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed indoor area that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including an office, work area, elevator, employee lounge, restroom, conference room, meeting room, classroom, hallway, stairway, lobby, common area, vehicle or employee cafeteria. 
    Private club means a facility used by an organization that limits its membership and is organized for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose. 
    Public place means any enclosed indoor area that is open to the public, regardless of whether a fee is charged, or a place to which the public has lawful access or may be invited. 
    Restaurant means an establishment defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.61(5). 
    Retail establishment means any store or shop in which retail sales is the principal business conducted. 
    Smoking means burning or holding or inhaling or exhaling smoke from any of the following items containing tobacco: 
(1)  A lighted cigar. 
(2)  A lighted cigarette. 
(3)  A lighted pipe. 
(4)  Any other lighted smoking equipment. 
(d)  Prohibition against smoking. Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in smoking in a sports arena, bus shelter, public conveyance or any of the following enclosed places: 
(1)  Residence halls or dormitories owned or operated by a college or university. 
(2)  Child care centers, including outdoor areas on the premises when children are present. 
(3)  Educational facilities, outdoor spaces, or grounds. 
(4)  Inpatient health care facilities. 
(5)  Theaters. 
(6)  Restaurants. 
(7)  Taverns. 
(8)  Private clubs. 
(9)  Retail establishments. 
(10)  Common areas of multiple-unit residential properties. 
(11)  Lodging establishments. 
(12)  Municipally-owned buildings. 
(13)  Areas in city parks as posted and so designated by the board of park commissioners, including, but not limited to, the athletic field/bleachers and dugouts, playground and swing set areas, and park restrooms. 
(14)  City-owned or leased motor vehicles and equipment. 
(15)  Public forms of transportation, including, but not limited to, motor buses, taxis, or other public passenger vehicles. 
(16)  All enclosed places, in addition to those listed above, that are places of employment, or that are public places. 
(e)  Exceptions. The prohibition against smoking does not apply in the following places: 
(1)  All outdoor places not identified in Wis. Stats. § 101.123(2)(d). 
(2)  A private residence. 
(3)  A room used by only one person in an assisted living facility as his residence. 
(4)  A room in an assisted living facility in which two or more persons reside if every person who lives in the room smokes and has made a written request to the person in charge of the facility to be placed in a room in which smoking is allowed. 
(5)  Designated outside areas located on the premises of a restaurant, tavern, private club, or retail establishment. 
(f)  Responsibility of persons in charge. 
(1)  No person in charge may allow any person to smoke in violation of this section at a location that is under the control or direction of the person in charge. 
(2)  No person in charge may provide matches, ashtrays, or other equipment for smoking at any location where smoking is prohibited. 
(3)  A person in charge shall make reasonable efforts to prohibit persons from smoking at a location where smoking is prohibited by doing all of the following: 
a.  Posting signs setting forth the prohibition and providing other appropriate notification and information concerning the prohibition. 
b.  Refusing to serve a person, if the person is smoking in a restaurant or tavern. 
c.  Asking a person who is smoking to refrain from smoking and, if the person refuses to do so, asking the person to leave the location. 
d.  If a person refuses to leave the location after being requested to do so, the person in charge shall immediately notify an appropriate law enforcement agency of the violation. 
(4)  A person in charge of a restaurant, tavern, private club, or retail establishment may designate an outside area located a reasonable distance from any entrance where smoking is permitted. 
(g)  Uniform signs. All properties and establishments regulated by this section are required to post no smoking signs in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state department of commerce to notify all persons of this section. 
(h)  Inspection and enforcement. The county health department, the county sheriff's department, the city police department, the city zoning administrator or designee agency shall have the power to enter any premises within its jurisdiction that are subject to the smoking ban to ascertain whether the premises are in compliance with this section and to take appropriate enforcement action pursuant to this section or Wis. Stats. § 101.123, including, in the case of the sheriff or any law enforcement agency, issuing citations for any violation. 
(i)  Penalties. 
(1)  Forfeiture. Any person, agent, firm or corporation violating subsection (d) of this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit an amount established by the city. 
(2)  Forfeiture. An person, agent, firm or corporation violating subsection (f) of this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit an amount established by the city. 
(3)  Maximum forfeiture. For violations of subsection (f) of this section, no person in charge may be required to forfeit more than the total amount established by the city for all violations occurring on a single day. 
(j)  Clean indoor air; intent and construction. The city finds that it is in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community to adopt by reference Wis. Stats. § 101.123. It is the intent of the common council of the city that where there may be a conflict between Wis. Stats. § 101.123 and this section, that the most restrictive section shall apply. 
(k)  Nuisance, injunction. The repeated violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided under this section, the city may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this section. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction, or permanent injunction. 
(Code 1991, § 11.215) 
Secs. 26-8-26-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 26-33. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  No person may loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(b)  No person shall loiter in a group or crowd upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges, or in any other public place within the city, in such manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct the ordinary free use of such public place by persons passing along or over the same. 
(c)  No person shall obstruct any street, bridge, sidewalk or crossing by loitering in or upon the same after being requested to move on by any police officer. 
(Code 1991, § 11.206) 
Sec. 26-34. - Loud and unnecessary noises. 
(a)  General prohibition . No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud and unnecessary sound or noise tending to annoy or disturb a person of ordinary sensibilities in or about any public street, alley, park or private residence. 
(b)  Specific acts prohibited . The following acts are declared to constitute loud and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but the following list should not be deemed to be exhaustive or exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices . The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle in the city for longer than three seconds in any period of one minute, except as a danger warning. 
(2)  Radios, stereos . The use, operation or playing of any radio, stereo, phonograph, musical instrument, or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound or music, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. or 7:00 a.m., in such a manner so as to permit the sound emanating therefrom to be plainly audible at the property line of the building, structure, apartment or vehicle in which such machine or device is located. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising . The use or operation of any radio, stereo, phonograph, musical instrument or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound which is cast upon any public street, alley or highway for the purpose of advertising or attracting the attention of the public to the building, business or enterprise from which the sound is cast. 
(4)  Animals, birds. The keeping of one or more animal or bird which individually, or in combination, bark or chirp frequently or for long periods of time, and which thereby create a noise plainly audible at the property line of the building, structure or apartment in which they are located. 
(5)  Exhaust . The ownership or operation of any motorcycle, motor vehicle, motor boat or other combustion engine which does not have an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent excessive or unusual noise. The equipping of any muffler or exhaust system with a cutout, bypass or similar device, or the modifying of any muffler or exhaust system in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by the engine above that emitted by the muffler or exhaust system originally installed on the engine, shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(6)  Construction work . The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, including, but not limited to, the operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, backhoe, caterpillar, or other similar equipment, attended by loud or unusual noise, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(7)  Yard work. The operation of any machine or piece of equipment, including, but not limited to, chainsaws, lawnmowers, snow blowers or other similar equipment, during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1991, § 11.207) 
Sec. 26-35. - Drinking in public places. 
    No person shall consume any alcohol beverage or carry any open can, bottle or other container of alcohol beverage on the premises of any public place unless: 
(1)  Such beverage has been obtained from a person who has an appropriate license or permit to sell, dispense or give away such beverage in the public place; and 
(2)  The beverage is being consumed in the location authorized by said license or permit. As used in this section, the term "public place" includes, but is not limited to, public buildings, streets, sidewalks or parks. 
(Code 1991, § 11.208) 
Sec. 26-36. - Defecating or urinating in public place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate outside of designated sanitary facilities, upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground, cemetery or other public area within the city, or upon any private property in open view of the public, or in the halls, stairways or elevators of public or commercial buildings. 
(Code 1991, § 11.209) 
Secs. 26-37-26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 26-61. - Regulation of firearms and explosives. 
(a)  Definitions . For purposes of this section, a firearm is defined as any instrumentality from or with which a shot, arrow, bullet or pellet may be discharged or expelled, regardless of whether the propelling force is provided by air, spring or other similar mechanical device, or gun powder. 
(b)  Discharge and possession of firearms regulated . No person, except a police officer or other law enforcement officer in the performance of an official duty, shall fire or discharge any firearms, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun of any description, or bow and arrow within the city or have any firearms, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun or bow and arrow in his possession or under his control unless it is unloaded and enclosed or encased within a carrying case or other suitable container pursuant to state law. 
(c)  Shooting into city limits . No person shall in the territory adjacent to the city discharge any firearm in such manner that the discharge shall enter or fall within the city. 
(d)  Shooting ranges. This section shall not prevent the maintenance and use of duly supervised rifle, shotgun, archery or pistol ranges or shooting galleries approved by the city council after an advisory recommendation from the chief of police, where proper safety precautions are taken. 
(e)  Explosive devices. No person shall discharge or detonate any dynamite, nitroglycerin or other explosive within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city council. 
(Code 1991, § 11.211) 
State Law reference- Weapons, Wis. Stats. § 941.20 et seq.; local regulation of firearms, Wis. Stats. § 66.0409. 
Sec. 26-62. - Hunting and trapping. 
(a)  Hunting prohibited . Hunting is prohibited within the city limits. 
(b)  Trapping . No person shall, within the corporate limits of the city, set or operate any trap, device, or mechanism that is designed, built, or made to close fast upon, hold fast, or otherwise capture an animal, exempting the Lemonweir River System as long as the following criteria is met: 
(1)  Trap, device, or mechanism is not within 300 feet of any residence; and 
(2)  The city has been notified and granted permission. 
This section does not apply to the use of "live" traps as prescribed and authorized under Wis. Stats. § 29.337. 
(c)  Bow fishing. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit bow fishing within the city, provided all such bow fishing is conducted pursuant to the rules and regulations established by the state. 
(Code 1991, § 11.212) 
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste generally, Wis. Stats. chs. 287-289. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND MANDATORY RECYCLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste reduction, recovery and recycling, Wis. Stats. § 287.07 et seq.; municipal solid waste duties and powers, Wis. Stats. §§ 287.09, 287.10. 

Sec. 28-19. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this article is to conserve natural resources; to reduce the volume of refuse placed in the county landfill; to comply with county ordinance 90-01 regarding mandatory recycling; to comply with Wis. Stats. ch. 287, regarding recycling; to establish user fees for those persons who do not pay real estate taxes to the city or who generate substantial amounts of refuse in the city; and to enhance and improve the environment and promote the health, safety and welfare of the city by establishing minimum standards for the storage, collection, transport, processing, separation, recovery and disposal of refuse. 
(b)  Title. This article shall hereinafter be referred to as the "Mauston Solid Waste Collection and Recycling Ordinance." 
(c)  Compliance. No person shall dispose of solid waste or place any solid waste for disposal, removal or collection by the city, except in strict conformity with the rules and regulations of this article. This article shall apply to all persons, corporations, businesses, governmental entities, and tax-exempt entities. 
(d)  Definitions. The definitions set forth in Wis. Stats. chs. 281, 287, 289 and 299 are hereby adopted by reference. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bi-metal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
    Brush means hedge clippings, tree trimmings, branches, twigs, sticks, and other woody material not exceeding six inches in diameter. 
    Clear bags means clear, transparent, plastic bags not exceeding 30 gallons. All such bags shall be waterproof, shall be capable of normal handling in hot and cold weather, and shall be of sufficient strength to allow lifting and loading without tearing. 
    Compost means organic materials, consisting of grass clippings, leaves and/or debris from stem parts of house/garden plants and flowers, but excluding pine cones, twigs, sticks, branches, or refuse of any kind. 
    Compost receptacle means biodegradable paper bags not exceeding 30 gallon capacity, as approved by the director of public works or his designee. These bags shall be available from local merchants. 
    Container board means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products. 
    DPW means the city director of public works. 
    Glass containers means all clear glass, brown glass, green glass and other colored glass used for bottles, jars and similar containers, but excluding window glass, ceramics, china, blue glass, Pyrex and mirrors. 
    HDPE means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code #2. 
    LDPE means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code #4. 
    Magazines means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper. 
    Newspaper means newspaper (excluding inserts on glossy paper) and other materials printed on newsprint, such as telephone books. 
    Office paper means high grade printing and writing papers, including, but not limited to, printed white ledger, computer printout paper, notebook paper, typing paper and similar paper. The term "office paper" does not include newspaper, cardboard, magazines, soiled or wet paper. 
    Other resins or multiple resins means plastic resins labeled by the SPI Code #7. 
    PETE means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI Code #1. 
    PP means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI Code #5. 
    PS means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI Code #6. 
    PVC means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI Code #3. 
    Recyclable materials means lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; containerboard; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office paper; plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; bi-metal containers and waste tires. 
    Residential property means all property which has located thereon one of the following: 
(1)  A single-family residence; or 
(2)  A multiple-family dwelling having four or less dwelling units. 
    Steel containers means all steel containers, tin containers and other ferrous metal containers. 
    Waste tires means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, and/or debris from house/garden plants and flowers. 
(e)  Variances . 
(1)  Where strict enforcement of this article may result in undue hardship upon any party, such party may petition the DPW for a variance from any portion of this article over which the city has control (See Wis. Stats. §§ 287.10, 287.13). Said petition shall be in writing and shall state all grounds upon which the variance is requested. Upon a finding of undue hardship, the DPW may, in his discretion, grant a variance; provided, however, any variance: 
a.  Must satisfy the general recycling purposes of this article; 
b.  May not impose a greater economic burden upon the city without additional compensation from the applicant; and 
c.  May not violate state law. 
(2)  A variance shall be made in writing and shall remain in effect until rescinded by the DPW. In granting the variance, the DPW may establish such terms and conditions as he deems advisable. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the DPW may appeal that decision to the common council. 
(Code 1991, § 15.40) 
Sec. 28-20. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Chapter 1. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the penalties for a violation of this article shall be as provided in chapter 1, article II. 
(b)  Collection refusal. In addition to any other penalty provided herein, the city may refuse to collect and dispose of any and all solid waste which violates this article, and may refuse to collect solid waste from any premises which is in violation of this article. 
(c)  Landowner liable. When any solid waste is found to violate this article, and when the identity of the person responsible for generating or placing such refuse or waste cannot be readily determined, the owner of the land upon which such garbage is found shall be presumed to have committed the violation for purposes of the enforcement of this article and shall be subject to the applicable penalty. 
(d)  Consent to search. Every person who places for collection or dumps solid waste in the city, is deemed to have given consent to the city to: 
(1)  Inspect and search such solid waste, without a warrant, for the sole purpose of enforcing the provisions of the article; 
(2)  Remove and keep any and all items found by the city in its search, which items constitute a violation of this article or which may be used to prove a violation of this article; and 
(3)  Introduce such removed items into evidence in any prosecution for the violation of this article. 
(e)  Special forfeitures. A minimum forfeiture in the amount established by the city shall be imposed for violations of sections 28-26(d) and 28-27(a) through (c). 
(f)  Multiple violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. The prosecution of two or more offenses committed by the same violator may be joined into one action, and the prosecution of two or more violators for the same offense may be joined into one action. 
(Code 1991, § 15.49) 
Sec. 28-21. - Mandatory separation of recyclable materials. 
(a)  General rule. All persons in the city, including, but not limited to, the occupants of single-family residences, multiple-family residences, and commercial, retail, industrial, educational, religious and governmental facilities, shall do one of the following: 
(1)  Separate recyclable materials from all other postconsumer waste; or 
(2)  Treat all postconsumer waste at a facility that will recover recyclable materials from other solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible. 
(b)  Exemptions. The mandatory source separation requirements of subsection (a) of this section do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Postconsumer waste burned at a facility that uses solid waste as a supplemental fuel if less than 30 percent of heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as supplemental fuel. 
(2)  Recyclable material for which a variance has been granted by the DNR under Wis. Stats. § 287.11(2m) or Wis. Admin. Code. NR 544.14. 
(Code 1991, § 15.41) 
Sec. 28-22. - Disposal of recyclable materials. 
    No person may dispose of recyclable materials by either dumping recyclable materials in a solid waste disposal facility or burning recyclable materials in a solid waste treatment facility, except waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility. 
(Code 1991, § 15.42) 
Sec. 28-23. - Commercial, retail, industrial, educational, religious and governmental facilities. 
    The owners of commercial, retail, industrial, educational, religious and governmental facilities shall provide for one of the following: 
(1)  Provide for the collection of solid waste from the facility and the delivery of such solid waste to a solid waste facility, where recyclable materials are recovered from the solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible; or 
(2)  Fulfill the following requirements: 
a.  Provide adequate, separate containers for recyclable materials and postconsumer waste; 
b.  Regularly notify all users and occupants of the facilities of the requirements of this article regarding mandatory source separation and recycling; and 
c.  Provide for the collection of recyclable materials separated from solid waste by the users and occupants, and the delivery of such recyclable materials to a recycling facility. 
(Code 1991, § 15.43) 
Sec. 28-24. - Buildings containing five or more dwelling units. 
    The owners of buildings containing five or more dwelling units shall provide for one of the following: 
(1)  Provide for the collection of solid waste generated in the building and the delivery of such solid waste to a solid waste facility, where recyclable materials are recovered from the solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible; or 
(2)  Fulfill the following requirements: 
a.  Provide adequate, separate containers for recyclable materials and postconsumer waste; 
b.  Notify tenants at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling, and semi-annually thereafter, of the requirements of this article regarding mandatory source separation and recycling; and 
c.  Provide for the collection of recyclable materials separated from solid waste by the tenants, and the delivery of such recyclable materials to a recycling facility. 
(Code 1991, § 15.44) 
Sec. 28-25. - Single-family and two-, three- and four-dwelling units. 
(a)  City collection . The city shall collect postconsumer waste, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, from residential property located in the city pursuant to this article, on such dates and at such times as the city may establish. The city shall collect postconsumer waste from mobile home parks located in the city if the mobile home park owner elects to have the city collect such postconsumer waste. 
(b)  Exceptions to collection . The following recyclable materials will not be collected by the city, but instead shall be managed as set forth below: 
(1)  Lead acid batteries . Lead acid batteries shall be disposed of at a private waste battery disposal site or at a retail business engaged in the sale of similar batteries. 
(2)  Major appliances shall be disposed of at any major appliance disposal facility or given to the city's garbage collector for disposal, provided all Freon is removed by a person certified to do so. 
(3)  Waste oil. Waste oil shall be disposed of at any private waste oil disposal site, or at any automotive repair business which accepts waste oil. 
(4)  Yard waste . All yard waste for pickup shall be placed in biodegradable bags approved by the director of public works or his designee. These bags shall be available from local merchants. Yard waste may be composted by each resident or taken directly to an approved compost collection center. 
(5)  Waste tires . Waste tires shall be disposed of at any waste tire disposal site, or at any retail business engaged in the purchase of waste tires. 
(c)  Placement for collection . All postconsumer waste which is collectible by the city shall be neatly placed in proper collection containers immediately behind the curb of public streets, on the boulevard, or in such other location as may be directed by the city or the waste hauler. 
(d)  Time. All waste collectible by the city shall be placed at the location designated above not more than 24 hours before the scheduled collection time, and all containers and items not collected shall be removed therefrom not later than 24 hours following the scheduled collection time. 
(e)  Storage containers. Between the times of collection, all postconsumer waste shall be placed in storage containers or storage areas which shall be nuisance-free and odor-free, and which shall be strong enough and secure enough to prevent the scattering of waste by weather conditions or animals. 
(f)  Mandatory source separation . All recyclable materials shall be separated from postconsumer waste, and shall be divided into the following categories, with each category placed separately in the following-described containers: 
Category Type of Waste Type of Container A Aluminum containers, glass containers, plastic containers (including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins), steel containers, bi-metal containers and foam polystyrene packaging Clear bag, except plastic with handles may be placed on a string, instead of in a bag B Container board Clear bag, or securely tied into bundles, or securely stacked into a cardboard box, or securely stacked in a grocery bag, none of which shall weigh more than 40 pounds C Newspaper and office paper Clear bag, or securely tied into bundles, or securely stacked into a cardboard box, or securely stacked in a grocery bag, none of which shall weigh more than 40 pounds D Magazines Clear bag, or securely tied into bundles, or securely stacked into a cardboard box, or securely stacked in a grocery bag, none of which shall weigh more than 40 pounds E All other postconsumer waste Clear bags  
(g)  Care of recyclable materials . To the greatest extent practicable, separated recyclable material shall be kept clean and free of contaminates such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other non-recyclable materials. Containers shall be rinsed out, and lids and labels removed. 
(Code 1991, § 15.45) 
Sec. 28-26. - Collection fees. 
(a)  Residential property . Fees for waste collection service shall be charged to each residential property and shall be included on the monthly utility bill. The amount of the fee shall be calculated based upon the number of dwelling units located on each residential property, and shall be established by the city. 
(b)  Mobile home parks . Fees for waste collection services shall be charged to the owner of those mobile home parks who elect to utilize the city's collection services. The fees shall be included on the monthly utility bill to each park. The amount of the fee shall be calculated based upon the number of dwelling units located in each mobile home park, and shall be established by the city. Mobile home park owners may elect to contract with an independent hauler for the collection of waste. If the mobile home park owner contracts with an independent hauler, the city will not charge the mobile home park owner for the collection of waste. 
(c)  Payment terms . Fees for waste collection shall be payable upon the same terms and conditions as the payment of the sewer and/or water utility bills. Failure to pay such fees shall entitle the city to impose an interest charge of 1.5 percent per month, and shall entitle the city to collect such fees in any manner authorized by law, including the placement of such fees on the property tax roll as a special assessment lien against the property. 
(d)  Notice to city . Each owner of residential property and each owner of a mobile home park whose waste is collected by the city shall notify the city of the number of apartments or separate dwelling units serviced by each water meter, so that the city can calculate the appropriate charge for waste collection and place such charge on the utility bill to each property owner. Such notice shall be provided to the city within 15 days of each change of circumstances. 
(Code 1991, § 15.46) 
Sec. 28-27. - Prohibited activities and non-collectibles. 
(a)  Dumping on public property prohibited . No person shall dispose of or dump solid waste upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other public property of the city. 
(b)  Dumping on private property prohibited. No person shall dispose of or dump solid waste upon the property or in the receptacle of another person without the express permission of the owner of the property or receptacle. 
(c)  Garbage not generated in the city . No person shall dump, deposit, or place for collection in the city any solid waste not generated within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Scavenging . No person shall scavenge or remove any recyclable material placed for collection by another person without the express, written permission of such other person. 
(e)  Burning. No person shall burn solid waste in the city, except for yard wastes and clean woody vegetative material. This burning ban shall not apply to entities subject to Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 314. 
(f)  Burying garbage . No person shall bury any solid wastes on public or private property in the city. This section shall not apply to the burying of recognized building materials (e.g., rock, rubble, sand, etc.) in the course of construction. 
(g)  Non-collectible materials . The city shall not collect and it shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any of the following wastes, except on those limited occasions when the city specifically authorizes the collection of certain specified items as part of a special garbage collection pursuant to section 28-28: 
(1)  Hazardous waste. 
(2)  Toxic waste. 
(3)  Hot or warm ashes. 
(4)  Chemicals and paint. 
(5)  Explosives or ammunition. 
(6)  Drain or waste oil. 
(7)  Flammable liquids. 
(8)  Tires, mufflers, tail pipes, batteries and other car parts exceeding five pounds or six cubic inches. 
(9)  Major appliances commonly known as white goods (e.g., stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, etc.). 
(10)  Televisions, stereos and other electronic equipment. 
(11)  Furniture, mattresses and carpeting. 
(12)  Demolition and building debris generated from the repair, remodeling, reconstruction or demolition of buildings, such as lumber, roof and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken concrete, asphalt, plaster, PVC conduit and pipe, insulation, etc. 
(13)  Animal or human feces (this waste should be disposed of in the sanitary sewer system). 
(14)  Pathogenic hospital or medical waste. 
(15)  Trees, logs, stumps, dirt, etc. 
(16)  Pallets. 
(17)  Bulky items whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal collection crews and equipment. 
(18)  All other non-postconsumer waste. 
(h)  MARS . MARS is hereby closed, and will no longer accept or process any garbage. 
(Code 1991, § 15.47) 
Sec. 28-28. - Special collections. 
    From time to time, the city council may authorize the DPW to conduct special garbage collections for the purpose of collecting items not regularly collected by the city. 
(Code 1991, § 15.48) 
Chapter 30 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Special assessments, Wis. Stats. § 66.0701 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Special assessment procedures. 
    In addition to other methods provided by law, special assessments for any public work or improvement or any current service may be levied in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Whenever the common council shall determine that any public work or improvement or any current service shall be financed in whole or in part by special assessments levied under this chapter, it shall adopt a resolution specifying this intention and the time, either before or after completion of the work or improvement, when the amount of the assessments will be determined and levied, the number of annual installments, if any, in which assessments may be paid, the rate of interest to be charged on the unpaid balance and the terms on which any of the assessments may be deferred while no use of the improvement is made in connection with the property. 
(2)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0703 shall apply to special assessments levied under this chapter except that, when the common council determines by resolution that the hearing on the assessments be held subsequent to the completion of the work or improvement or the rendering of the service, the report required by Wis. Stats. § 66.0703(4) shall contain a statement of the final cost of the work, service or improvement in lieu of an estimate of the cost. 
(3)  Notice of the time and place of the public hearing on any special assessment proposed to be levied and notice of the final assessment and terms of payment thereof shall be given in the manner prescribed Wis. Stats. § 66.0703. 
(4)  Any special assessment levied under this chapter shall be a lien against the property assessed from the date of the final resolution of the common council determining the amount of the levy. 
Note: When dealing with special assessments for water utility construction, attention should be paid to the city's "Water Rate Case," which imposes requirements regarding payment for water utility construction. 
(Code 1991, § 15.53) 
Sec. 30-2. - Reconstruction projects. 
(a)  Purpose . The city is about to embark on a 20-year plan to repair and reconstruct the city streets, including the repair and reconstruction of sewer mains, sewer laterals, water mains, water laterals, sidewalks and curb and gutter, where necessary. Before embarking on this project, the city has determined that it is fair, reasonable and necessary to establish a policy for the payment of these repair and reconstruction costs, which policy will be consistently applied throughout the city during the term of this program. The council has spent many months evaluating the various ways and means by which funds could be raised to pay for these projects. Given all the facts, the council believes that the following is the best policy for payment. 
(b)  Policy . The following policy shall apply to all property in the city which pays real estate taxes: 
(1)  The cost to repair and reconstruct the following items shall be paid by the city through the general tax levy: 
a.  Streets, including base and surface. 
b.  Sewer mains, manholes and lift stations. 
c.  Water mains. 
d.  Water laterals extending from the water main to the curb stop. 
e.  Storm sewers. 
(2)  Property owners, including the owners of corner lots, shall be responsible for payment of the following costs: 
a.  Curb and gutter: 100 percent of costs. 
b.  Sewer laterals: 100 percent of costs. 
c.  Water laterals from the curb stop to the building: 100 percent of costs. 
d.  Sidewalks and driveway aprons: 100 percent of costs, except those property owners who have reconstructed their entire sidewalk within the past ten years shall be given the following-described credit, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The sidewalk must be determined to be in good condition by the director of public works. 
2.  The sidewalk must meet ADA standards. 
3.  The property owner must prove to the city the age of the new sidewalk. 
4.  The entire sidewalk (not just pieces) must have been reconstructed by the landowner. 
If the property owner meets the foregoing conditions, then the following prorated credit will be applied: 
Sidewalk Age City Credit Owner Pays 1 year 90% 10% 2 years 80% 20% 3 years 70% 30% 4 years 60% 40% 5 years 50% 50% 6 years 40% 60% 7 years 30% 70% 8 years 20% 80% 9 years 10% 90% 10 years 0% 100%  
e.  Retaining walls: 100 percent of costs. The purpose of this subsection is to require property owners to bear the cost of retaining walls, especially in cases where a retaining wall would not be needed if the property owner would permit the city to re-grade the property behind the sidewalk. In cases where it is not feasible to re-grade the property to avoid the use of a retaining wall, the city council may elect to pay for part or all of the retaining wall. 
f.  Any and all other public right-of-way improvements which provide a benefit to the adjoining property owner: 100 percent of cost. 
(c)  Policy for tax-exempt property . The policy for property which does not pay real estate taxes, and which in turn does not support these projects through the general tax levy, is as follows: 
(1)  The total cost (100 percent) to repair and re-construct streets, including, but not limited to, curb, gutter, sidewalk, sewer mains, water mains, storm sewer, lights, excavation, base course, surfacing and other appurtenances, shall be paid by the adjacent tax-exempt property owner, unless reduced as provided below. 
(2)  The common council may, but is not required to, deviate from the foregoing policy on a case-by-case basis, and may lower the assessment whenever it deems a reduction is just and reasonable. In making this determination, the common council may consider the following circumstances, among others: 
a.  Whether the street re-construction project is requested and/or necessitated by the tax-exempt entity or by the city or some other entity. 
b.  Whether the tax-exempt entity has the authority to raise funds to pay for the special assessment through the imposition of taxes. 
c.  Whether the tax-exempt entity serves or is supported by persons, the vast majority of which are tax paying citizens of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 15.50) 
Sec. 30-3. - New-construction projects. 
(a)  Purpose. The city has determined that it is fair, reasonable and necessary to establish a policy for the payment of construction costs for new construction in the city, which policy will be consistently applied throughout the city. The council has spent many months evaluating the various ways and means to pay for new construction, and given all the facts, the council believes that the following is the best policy for payment. 
(b)  Policy. 
(1)  The costs to construct the following new items shall be paid in full by the owner/developer: 
a.  The base (e.g., aggregate, crushed rock, breaker run, sand lift, etc.) for the new street, including the associated costs of excavation, earth work, grading, placement, compaction and shaping of the base. 
b.  Curb and gutter. 
c.  Water mains, fire hydrants, valves, curb stops, service lines to the property line, and all other water appurtenances, including the excavation work and earth work associated with the installation of the same. 
d.  Sanitary sewer main, sanitary sewer lateral lines to the property line, and all other sewer appurtenances, including the excavation work and earth work associated with the installation of the same. 
e.  Sidewalks and driveway aprons, including all excavation, earth work, grading, aggregate placement, compaction, aggregate shaping, and boulevard restoration, including all excavation, earthwork, grading, compaction, top soil, seed mulch, fertilizer, sod and other restoration labor and materials. 
f.  Drainage features, including storm sewers and all appurtenances, including the excavation work and earth work associated with the installation of the same. 
g.  The first lift of bituminous surfacing, or in the case of concrete surfacing, 50 percent of the costs of the concrete surfacing. 
h.  Any and all other improvements necessary to construct the street and the public utilities within the public right-of-way, except those items provided by the city pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
i.  All costs for improvements/construction outside of the public right-of-way. 
(2)  The cost to construct the following items shall be paid by the city: 
a.  Bituminous surface course based on tonnage costs not to exceed two inches per square yard, or in the case of concrete surface, 50 percent of the cost of the concrete surfacing. 
b.  Street lights, wiring and controls. 
c.  Public signs. 
d.  All engineering expenses, and construction management and supervision expenses. 
(3)  The terms and conditions of payment of these new construction costs by the owner/developer shall be decided on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Exceptions. The common council may deviate from the foregoing policy on a case-by-case basis, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Vote. An exception shall not be permitted unless it is approved by the two-thirds vote of the whole council. 
(2)  Special circumstances. The common council must determine that one or more of the following special circumstances exist: 
a.  Where unusual physical circumstances exist (e.g., bridges, river frontage, interstate highways, state trunk highways, rock formations, drainage problems, etc.), which increase the cost of the project and which, if overcome, will provide a benefit to other parts of the city and not just to the owner/developer or the assessed property; 
b.  Where special features are designed into the project (e.g., extra wide roads, roads with extra base to accommodate heavier traffic, over-sized sewer mains and/or water mains to accommodate further expansion, etc.), which increase the cost of the project and which are designed to provide a benefit to other parts of the city and not just to the owner/developer or the assessed property; or 
c.  Where the financial benefit to the city of the proposed project, in terms of estimated tax revenue to be generated from the project, is sufficient to justify a modification of the assessment against such property. 
(Code 1991, § 15.51) 
Sec. 30-4. - Assessments against township property. 
(a)  Purpose. The city has determined that it is fair, reasonable and necessary to establish a policy for the handling of assessments for improvements which benefit, or may benefit, property located in townships adjacent to the city. The council believes it is unfair for city residents to pay for the construction of public improvements only to have adjacent township property owners annex to the city and receive the full benefit of such improvements after the cost of such improvements have been fully paid. Therefore, after thorough evaluation of this problem, the council believes that the following is the best policy for handling such matters. 
(b)  Policy. 
(1)  Property not located within the city shall not receive the benefit of public improvements made by the city. For example, property not located within the city may not hook onto city sewer and/or water. 
(2)  Whenever the city constructs improvements along township property, the city shall assess the township property in the same manner as if such property were located within the city. However, payment of such assessments against township property shall be deferred, upon such terms and conditions as the council deems appropriate, until such property annexes into the city and receives the benefit of the improvement. For example, if the city extends sewer and water down a street where one side is located in the city and that other side is located in a township, the side located in the township shall be assessed its fair share of the sewer and water improvement, but such assessment shall be deferred until the township property annexes into the city and hooks onto the sewer and water. 
(Code 1991, § 15.52) 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to grant street privileges, Wis. Stats. § 66.0425; public works generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.15; acquisition of property, Wis. Stats. § 62.22; authority relative to street grades, Wis. Stats. § 62.16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boulevard means that part of the street right-of-way which is not covered by sidewalk, curb and gutter, or the street itself. 
    Drop crotch cut means a pruning cut that removes the terminal portion of a branch back to a lateral branch that is one-third the diameter of the removed portion, this cut shall leave no stub. 
    Large trees means trees that grow to more than 40 feet in height. 
    Medium trees means trees that grow to 20 to 40 feet in height. 
    Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Public nuisance means any tree/shrub or part thereof which by its condition of being infected/infested by disease/insects will kill the plant, or being an invasive plant as described in Wis. Admin Code ch. NR 40 or is already a dead plant or structurally unsound and is the size where in the DPW or tree board's opinion may endanger the safety or welfare of persons or property. 
    Sidewalk means those sidewalks on either or both sides of a public street, which run approximately parallel to the street and which are located on the street or within the street right-of-way. Sidewalk shall include curb ramps for wheelchairs and intersecting sidewalks at all corners. 
    Small trees means trees that grow to less than 20 feet in height. 
    Street means all public ways and thoroughfares, including state, federal and county highways and bridges, located in the city. 
    Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(Code 1991, § 15.10) 
Sec. 32-2. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    In addition to any other penalty provided herein, the city may abate any violation of this chapter through the following procedure: 
(1)  Non-hazardous conditions. The city may cause the issuance of a written notice to the responsible person directing him to correct and abate the violation on or before a specified date, but not sooner than 72 hours following service of said notice. The written notice may be served by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the responsible person to the last-known address of the responsible person. If the responsible person to whom notice has been given fails to remove or abate the violation within the time established, the city may remove or abate said violation at the expense of the responsible person. 
(2)  Hazardous conditions . If the city determines that the violation creates a substantial and immediate danger to public safety, the city shall attempt to contact the responsible person in any way or form which the city deems most expedient, and give such responsible person notice of the problem and the opportunity to immediately correct the problem. If such responsible person cannot be promptly notified by the city, or if the responsible person cannot or will not immediately abate the violation, the city may immediately take steps to abate the violation without providing any further notice to the responsible person. 
(3)  Charges . An account of the expenses incurred by the city to remove or abate the violation shall be kept and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the responsible person. Notice of the expenses shall be mailed to the last-known address of the responsible person and shall be payable within ten calendar days from the mailing thereof, and if not paid, the city administrator shall enter those charges onto the tax roll as a special tax pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0907(4) against the real estate of any or all responsible person, or the city may collect such charges through any other lawful procedure. 
(4)  Authorized personnel . The director of public works, the police, the city administrator and/or the mayor are authorized to make the determinations permitted by this section. The administrator and director of public works are authorized to issue the notices permitted by this section. 
(Code 1991, § 15.25) 
Sec. 32-3. - Discontinuance of streets, alleys and other public ways. 
    The owner of adjoining lands, to which title to the vacated property reverts, shall pay the cost incurred by the city in discontinuing the street, alley or other public way, and the cost incurred in transferring title of the vacated property to the adjoining landowner. These costs include, but are not limited to, survey costs, title costs, document preparation costs, publication costs, recording fees, and transfer fees. Exceptions to these costs may be made, in the sole discretion of the common council: 
(1)  When the cost of transfer would exceed both the value of the property transferred and the value of the adjoining property to which the property is transferred; or 
(2)  When the public benefit of the discontinuance outweighs the benefit to the adjoining landowner. These costs shall be billed directly to the adjoining landowner, on a pro-rated basis based upon the square footage of land received by each adjoining landowner, and if not paid, shall be assessed against the adjoining land as permitted by law. 
(Code 1991, § 15.23) 
Sec. 32-4. - Sidewalk construction or repair. 
(a)  All city sidewalks shall be laid, removed, replaced or repaired pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0907. No established sidewalk may be removed or altered without notifying the director of public works and without approval of the council, but any established sidewalk can be repaired without approval of the council provided such repairs comply with the city's construction specifications. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications adopted by the city and on file with the director of public works, unless the ordinance or resolution ordering the particular sidewalk construction establishes a different standard therefor. 
(c)  In all cases where new streets are constructed, or old streets are re-constructed in the city, public sidewalk shall be installed on both sides of the street, unless the common council determines that there is good cause for not installing all or any part of a sidewalk on one or both sides of the street. 
(Code 1991, § 15.11) 
Sec. 32-5. - Sidewalk cleaning and maintenance. 
(a)  Rubbish removal. No owner or occupant shall cause or allow the sidewalk on or abutting his premises to be littered with rubbish, dirt, stone, wire, trash, glass, waste, paper, garbage or other materials. In the event the sidewalk becomes littered with such materials, the owner and occupant shall clear such materials from the sidewalk within 24 hours of this discovery of such materials. 
(b)  Snow and ice removal. The owner and occupants of any parcel or lot which fronts upon or abuts any sidewalk shall keep said sidewalk clear of all snow and ice. In the event of snow and/or ice accumulating on said sidewalk due to natural means and/or by any other means, said sidewalk shall be cleared of all accumulated snow and/or ice within 24 hours from the time the snow and/or ice cease to accumulate on said sidewalk. Sidewalks are to be kept clear of snow and ice to a minimum of three feet in width, except that sidewalks located in any district zoned commercial shall be kept clear to their full, maximum width. In the event that ice is formed on any sidewalk in such a manner that it cannot be removed, said sidewalk shall be kept sprinkled with sand and/or salt to permit safe travel by pedestrians. 
(c)  Downspouts and eaves not to drain on sidewalks . No downspout from any building shall terminate on or upon, or in such position that the contents of such downspout be cast upon or flow over any public sidewalk in the city. No eave of any building shall be so constructed or maintained as to permit water therefrom to fall upon any public sidewalk, and eaves shall be so protected by proper troughs, spouts or otherwise as to collect and drain water away from the public sidewalk. The owner of any building having downspouts or eaves which violate this section shall be responsible for such violation. 
(d)  Violations, penalties, and abatement costs Persons violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in chapter 1, article II, in addition to the following costs: 
(1)  If any person fails to comply with subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section, the DPW, as soon as practicable after such failure, may cause such work to be done, either by city employees or by private contractors selected by the city. 
(2)  If the DPW elects to perform such work, the DPW shall keep records of the costs of all work performed in accordance with this section. 
(3)  Each person, whose conduct makes it necessary for the DPW to cause such work to be done in accordance with this section, shall be liable to the city for the cost of such work, plus an administrative fee in an amount to be established by the city. A bill for the work, plus the administrative fee, shall be submitted to the person responsible. If the bill is not paid within 60 days of mailing, this amount may be collected in any manner permitted by law, and, in addition thereto, the city may collect this bill as a special charge against the real property by placing the bill upon the current or next tax role as a special tax against the property. 
(Code 1991, § 15.13) 
State Law reference- Sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 66.0907. 
Sec. 32-6. - Street cleaning and maintenance. 
(a)  Raking into streets. It shall be unlawful to rake or place leaves or grass clippings onto the pavement or into the gutter of any public street, except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Such leaves or clippings are promptly removed, or 
(2)  The placement of fallen leaves coincides with the fall leaf pickup season, September 1 through November 30. Only leaves may be raked to the street, and must be left in an orderly pile on the street gutter to assist with the convenient pickup of leaves by the public works department. This section does not apply to grass clippings or other yard debris. 
(b)  Pushing snow into street. It shall be unlawful to push, plow, shovel, deposit or cause to be deposited on any public street, alley or sidewalk, snow or ice taken or removed from property privately owned or occupied, excluding snow or ice taken or removed from public sidewalks or boulevards, except as permitted by this chapter. 
(c)  Dumping garbage on streets. It shall be unlawful to deposit, dump, sort, scatter or leave any rubbish, stone, wire, earth, ashes, cinders, sawdust, hay, glass, manure, filth, paper, construction waste, garbage or other offensive or noxious material on any public street, alley or other public property. 
(d)  Burning in streets. It shall be unlawful to burn leaves, wood, rubbish or any other material on the street. 
(Code 1991, § 15.14; Ord. No. 2018-2002 , 2-13-2018) 
Sec. 32-7. - Public ditch cleaning and maintenance. 
    No person shall in any manner obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free passage of water in any public ditch, gutter, culvert, swale or drain, nor shall any person place or cause to be placed any rubbish, dirt, sand, gravel, brush, leaves, grass clippings, or any other matter or thing so that the same is likely to be carried by the elements into any public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale or drain. 
(Code 1991, § 15.15) 
Sec. 32-8. - Boulevard cleaning and maintenance. 
(a)  Grass cut. The owner and occupant of each parcel or lot which fronts upon or abuts any boulevard shall keep the grass cut on such boulevard in conformity with surrounding property, but not to exceed eight inches in height. Grass cut on the boulevard shall not be discharged into the street or gutter. 
(b)  Rubbish removal. No owner or occupant shall cause or allow the boulevard on or abutting his premises to be littered with rubbish, dirt, stone, wire, trash, glass, waste, paper, garbage or other similar materials. In the event such boulevard becomes littered with such materials, said owner and occupant shall clear such materials from the boulevard within seven days of the discovery of such materials. 
(c)  Plantings. No trees or shrubs shall be planted in the boulevard without written permission from the director of public works. 
(Code 1991, § 15.16) 
Sec. 32-9. - Alley cleaning and maintenance. 
(a)  Grass cut . The owner and occupant of each parcel or lot which abuts any alley shall keep the grass cut on his side of the centerline of the alley. Grass in the alley shall be cut in conformity with surrounding property, but not to exceed eight inches in height. 
(b)  Rubbish removal . No owner or occupant shall cause or allow an alley abutting his premises to be littered with rubbish, dirt, stones, wire, trash, glass, waste, paper, garbage or other similar materials. In the event such an alley becomes littered with such materials, said owner and occupant shall clear such materials from the alley within seven days of the discovery of such materials. 
(Code 1991, § 15.17) 
Sec. 32-10. - Snow removal by city contract. 
    Any person, firm or corporation owning or occupying private property within the city may not remove any snow from such private property and deposit the same in a public street, alley or roadway abutting or adjacent to such private property. 
(Code 1991, § 15.18) 
Sec. 32-11. - Tree standards. 
(a)  Spacing . The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes defined in section 32-1, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 15 to 20 feet; medium trees, 25 to 30 feet; and large trees, 40 feet; except in special plantings designed by a landscape architect and approved by the city board. 
(b)  Distance from curb and sidewalk . The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes defined in section 32-1. No trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet. The board shall develop and implement a system for permitting such plantings, and shall from time to time review the effectiveness of the permitting process. Plans that include planting trees in the boulevard shall be reviewed and approved as per section 2-177(f)(3). 
(1)  Planting permit process completion and submission of planting permit shall be at no cost to applicant. Failure to submit a completed permit application prior to planting is a violation of this section. The DPW or designee will review and either approve or deny submitted permit applications. Plans that include planting trees in the boulevard shall be reviewed and approved as per section 2-177(f)(3). 
(2)  Planting permit application information. At a minimum, the permit application form shall include reference to this section, including minimum distances, prohibited species, a diagram of suggested placement relative to the buildings on the lot, property owner contact information, applicant contact information if different, and instructions to applicant regarding marking proposed planting locations. 
(c)  Distance from street corners and fire hydrants . No street tree shall be planted closer than 25 feet to any street intersecting corner. The DPW may require more than 25 feet at his discretion to ensure public safety. This shall be measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fire hydrant, driveway entrance or street sign. 
(d)  Utilities. No street trees may be planted in conflict with any utility unless authorized by the city tree board or designee. 
(e)  Public tree care. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(2)  The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(3)  This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with chapters 24 and 114. 
(f)  Tree topping . It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or in conflict with utility lines shall be drop crotched, removing conflicting limbs to a branch union of a larger limb so as to reduce the chance of decay and or excessive sprouting of new limbs. 
(g)  Pruning, corner clearance . Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and all limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than ten feet above the surface thereof and all limbs which project over a public street less than 14 feet above the surface thereof. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. Property owners shall be notified of the city's intent and billed for costs and fees as outlined in chapter 1, article II. 
(h)  Pruning oak trees . No pruning of oak trees is permitted between April 1 and August 1. Any violation of this subsection shall be treated as a separate violation for each tree pruned during the prohibited period, unless an emergency situation requires it as determined by the DPW/tree board or their designee. 
(i)  Dead, public nuisance, diseased, infested, tree treatment or tree removal on private property . The city shall have the right to cause the remedial actions for any public nuisance as defined in section 24-25 or tree defined in section 24-25(7)(h) on private property within the city. After review with the city tree board, public works staff will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal and/or treatment shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 30 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove and/or treat such trees and charge the cost of removal, treatment, associated legal costs and administrative fees, on the owner's property taxes. 
(j)  Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(k)  Interference with city tree board . It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, treatment, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this section. 
(l)  Prohibited trees . The following list of trees has proven to have undesirable characteristics and shall not be planted on public property or right-of-way within the limits of the city: 
(1)  Ash species, any. 
(2)  Butternut. 
(3)  Hawthorn species, any. 
(4)  Multi-stemmed trees, i.e., birch, poplar. 
(5)  Bigtooth aspen. 
(6)  Chinese elm. 
(7)  Honeysuckle. 
(8)  Silver maple. 
(9)  Box elder. 
(10)  Coniferous trees in the pine family. 
(11)  Hybrid poplar. 
(12)  Walnut trees. 
(13)  Buckthorn species, any. 
(14)  Cottonwood. 
(15)  Locust (black/honey/yellow with thorns). 
(16)  Willow. 
(m)  Penalty. Except as otherwise specifically limited herein, the penalties set for in chapter 1, article II shall apply to violations of this section. 
(Code 1991, § 15.19) 
Sec. 32-12. - Excavations of streets and public grounds. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall make or cause to be made any opening or excavation in any public street, public alley, public way, public sidewalk or other public ground in the city without a permit therefor. Furthermore, any excavation which may last for longer than three months shall also comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.0425. 
(b)  Exceptions . A permit shall not be required under the following circumstances: 
(1)  No permit is required for excavations performed by the city, or persons hired by the city. 
(2)  No permit shall be required before the commencement of work if an emergency situation exists which requires immediate action to remedy a dangerous condition or to protect property, life, health or safety; provided, however, that the person performing the work shall notify the director of public works or his designee before commencing work and obtain oral approval for said work. If the director of public works cannot be reached, his designee can be reached through the police department. Thereafter, the person performing the work shall apply for a permit as soon as possible, but in no event later than the close of the next business day. 
(c)  Application. An application for a permit shall be filed with the department of public works at city hall, upon forms furnished by the city, which shall include, for the purpose of enforcement of this section, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant who intends to perform the work, and the person for whom the work is to be performed. 
(2)  The location of the work. 
(3)  A general description of the work to be performed and the method the applicant proposes to use in doing the work. 
(4)  Any other information which the director of public works deems necessary to the proper review of the application. 
(d)  Time limits. Permits shall be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of approval, and may be renewed upon application. 
(e)  Fees. The fees to be charged for each application and for the nature of the work to be performed, as well as the time and method of payment and collection thereof, shall be as established by the city. 
(f)  Insurance required. A permit shall be issued only upon the condition that the applicant provides satisfactory evidence that the applicant has in force, and will maintain during the time the permit is in effect, public liability insurance of not less than $500,000.00 per one person and per one accident, and property damage insurance of not less than $500,000.00 per accident. 
(g)  Assumption of liability . A permit shall be issued only upon the condition that the applicant sign a statement that he will indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers from all liability for accidents and damages caused by any of the work covered by the permit, and that he will comply with the requirements of this section. 
(h)  Frozen ground. No openings or excavations shall be permitted between November 15 and April 15, except where it is determined by the director of public works to be an emergency. 
(i)  Protection of public. 
(1)  Every opening and excavation shall be enclosed and marked with barriers, signs and traffic control devices as may be required by law and the director of public works, and in accordance with section VI of the manual of uniform traffic control devices. 
(2)  All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard persons and property from accidents or damage. 
(3)  Unless otherwise approved, a minimum of one lane of traffic in each direction shall be provided. Every effort shall be made to provide reasonable access to all properties adjacent to the work. The permittee shall perform the work in such a manner so as not to disrupt the flow of traffic in the area. 
(4)  It shall be the permittee's responsibility to have the various utilities locate and mark their facilities prior to excavation. When the work will result in the loss of any utility service to a private property, a reasonable attempt shall be made to notify the occupant of the private property of the loss of service at least 12 hours prior to the loss of service, unless the operation is part of an emergency excavation. 
(j)  Pavement removal. 
(1)  Removal of existing pavement shall be to neat, straight, saw-cut lines. Excavation shall be kept to the minimum possible and acceptable for the convenience and safe performance of work, and in accordance with all applicable codes and regulations. Special care shall be taken with concrete pavement to produce a vertical face on the existing concrete at the point of the saw cut to ensure a full depth of concrete at the joint. 
(2)  If the pavement is damaged during excavation beyond the original saw cut lines, it shall be saw cut again along neat, straight lines. The finished saw cut shall leave a regular, rectangular section for pavement replacement. Should the street opening occur within, adjacent or close to an existing patch or require more than one opening within a short distance, the director of public works may order the permittee to remove and replace additional pavement up to an existing patch or between openings. 
(3)  Pavement replacement areas shall be parallel with or at right angles to the direction of traffic. 
(4)  The director of public works may order the permittee to remove and replace additional adjacent pavement, up to one full lane width of pavement, along the patched or excavated area. 
(k)  Excavation. 
(1)  All excavated material shall be piled in a manner such that pedestrian and motor traffic is not unnecessarily disrupted. Gutters shall be kept clear and other satisfactory provisions shall be made for street drainage so that natural water courses are not obstructed. 
(2)  Excavated material to be used for backfilling of a trench must be so handled and placed to minimize inconvenience to public travel and adjoining owners and occupants. 
(l)  Backfilling. 
(1)  All backfilling materials shall be dry, clean, granular material, and shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse, vegetable or organic matter, timbers and lumber, boulders, rocks or stones greater than eight inches in diameter at their greatest dimension, frozen lumps or other material which, in the opinion of the director of public works, is unsuitable. All wet spoils shall be removed. 
(2)  In refilling the excavation, if there is not sufficient material excavated suitable for refilling, the deficiency shall be made up with sand. 
(3)  Excavations shall be carefully compacted in six to eight inch lifts from the bottom of the excavation, with special care being made for existing utilities, pipes and other structures. 
(4)  Mechanical compaction shall be used on all materials used for trench backfill. Each layer (eight-inch maximum) shall be uniformly compacted. Compaction or consolidation by flooding shall not be permitted. 
(m)  Notices and inspections. The permittee shall notify the department of public works at least three business days before such work is to commence, unless an emergency exists as determined by the director of public works. The permittee shall also notify the department of public works at least four hours prior to backfilling, and four hours prior to final restoration of the surface. 
(n)  Surface restoration . Surfaces shall be restored as follows within 20 days after the closing of the opening or excavation, unless otherwise permitted by the director of public works: 
(1)  Backfill for pavement . Backfill material on streets shall be left below the original surface to allow for a layer of 1.5-inch crushed stone and a layer of 0.75-inch crushed stone, plus the thickness of the required pavement structure. The thickness of each layer of crushed stone shall be in accordance with the specifications on file with the director of public works. If paving will not occur as part of the initial street restoration operation, the balance of the opening to the original surface elevation shall be backfilled with compacted three-fourths-inch crushed stone. 
(2)  Bituminous pavement . Streets consisting of bituminous pavement shall be resurfaced with bituminous pavement to the full depth of the existing pavement or three inches, whichever is greater. Bituminous pavement shall be placed in a maximum of 11/2 inch layers, with each layer compacted to maximum density. State department of transportation gradation No. 1 bituminous pavement shall be used for the binder course and gradation No. 3 for the surface course. The finished surface shall be smooth and free of surface irregularities and shall match the existing pavement and any castings or street appurtenances. Allowable deviations shall be no more than one-quarter-inch as measured with a ten-foot straight edge. 
(3)  Concrete pavement . Streets consisting of concrete pavement shall be resurfaced with concrete placed to the full depth of the existing pavement 
(4)  Sidewalks . Sidewalks shall be repaired in accordance with the specifications adopted by the council and on file with the director of public works. 
(5)  Winter conditions . During winter months, when it is not possible to replace the removed pavement with a like material, the excavation shall be temporarily resurfaced with a minimum of 3.5 inches of cold mix bituminous material. This temporary wearing surface shall be compacted and rolled smooth. These temporary wearing surfaces shall be removed and replaced with material as specified above by not later than the following June 1. 
(6)  Other surfaces. All other surfaces shall be restored as much as possible to the condition existing prior to the excavation. Contours of the land shall be restored to the extent possible. Grassy areas shall have three inches of black dirt placed on the surface and shall be reseeded. 
(7)  Variances . Upon written application, the director of public works may grant a written variance from the foregoing surface restoration requirements if he determines that the pre-existing condition of the surface was substantially different from or substantially below the quality of the foregoing restoration requirements. In such case, the director may prescribe, in writing, different restoration requirements, provided such requirements create a surface at least as good as the surface existing prior to the opening or excavation. 
(o)  New streets . Whenever the city decides to provide for the resurfacing or repaving of any street, the city shall notify in writing, each person, utility or other agency owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in or under such street or any real property abutting said street at 
least 30 days before commencement of work by the city. All excavation work by such notified persons shall be completed in such street prior to commencement of work by the city. After such resurfacing or repaving, no permit shall be issued to open or excavate said street for a period of five years after the date of improvement or repaving unless, in the opinion of the director of public works, conditions exist which make it absolutely essential that the permit be issued. 
(Code 1991, § 15.20) 
Sec. 32-13. - Obstructions and encroachments. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, park, public ground or land dedicated to public use, and no person shall permit any encroachment, obstruction or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any such public property adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except as provided below. 
(b)  Exceptions. The prohibition of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0425. 
(2)  Building materials and equipment, which are temporary, and which do not obstruct more than one-third of the traveled portion of the street. 
(3)  Excavations and openings permitted under section 32-12. 
(c)  Sidewalk permits. 
(1)  The city council is authorized to issue a permit which allows property owners to place certain fixtures on city sidewalks which immediately adjoin their property. In determining if a permit shall be authorized, all of the following requirements must be met: 
a.  The property must be located in an area zoned for commercial uses. 
b.  The fixture shall not be physically attached to the sidewalk, any street fixture or any adjacent building, and shall be of a temporary design. 
c.  The placement of the fixture shall not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk. In no event shall the fixture reduce the unobstructed sidewalk width to less than five feet at any point. 
d.  The property owner shall provide the city with proof of liability insurance coverage. The insurance coverage shall be an amount of not less than $100,000.00 per occurrence and the policy shall specifically state that it includes coverage for accidents caused by the fixtures located on the city sidewalks and that it includes the city as a third-party insured. 
e.  The fixture shall not be for sale, nor shall the fixture be used for the sale of merchandise, such as vending machines, vendor's carts or tables, etc. 
f.  The property owner whose property adjoins the city sidewalk shall file the permit application or authorize the occupant of the subject property to file the permit application. 
g.  The property owner or the occupant of the subject property shall display the approved permit in the window of the building so that it can be seen from the sidewalk. 
(2)  Said permit may be revoked by the city at any time when one or more of the requirements specified in subsection (c)(1) of this section are not complied with, or if the city determines that the placement of the fixture endangers the safety of pedestrians who utilize the sidewalks. 
(d)  Street permit. 
(1)  When issued. Permits to occupy, obstruct or encroach upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ground or public ways of the city may be granted by the council for the purpose of moving, erecting, altering, repairing or demolishing any building or structure, or for the purpose of occupying, obstructing or encumbering any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground with the materials or equipment necessary in and about the moving, erection, alteration, repair or demolition of any building or structure. 
(2)  Permit conditions. Such permits shall be subject to the following terms and conditions: 
a.  Such temporary obstruction shall not cover more than one-third of any street or alley. 
b.  Obstructions shall be marked and/or lighted at night so as to be identifiable to the public from all directions. 
c.  Sidewalk traffic may be interrupted if there is a sidewalk across the street. If there is no sidewalk across the street, a temporary sidewalk of not less than four feet in width guarded by a closed fence at least four feet high on both sides shall be constructed and maintained during the period of occupancy. 
d.  The process of moving any building or structure shall be as continuous as practicable until completed and, if ordered by the chief of police and the director of public works, shall continue during all hours of the day and night. 
e.  No building or structure shall be allowed to remain overnight on any street crossing or intersection or in such other place as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant. 
f.  Buildings shall be moved only in accordance with the route prescribed by the director of public works and the chief of police. 
g.  Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all parts of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds occupied or used shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and obstructions, and placed in at least the same condition they were in before commencement of the work. All damages to the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds shall be promptly repaired by the permittee. 
(3)  Insurance and bond. A permit shall be issued only upon condition that the applicant submit satisfactory written evidence that the applicant has in force and will maintain during the time the permit is in effect, public liability insurance of not less than $500,000.00 per one person, $500,000.00 per one accident, and property damage coverage of not less than $500,000.00, providing coverage for accidents or damage caused by reason of work performed under said permit. The city may also require the applicant to execute and file a bond in an amount determined by the director of public works, not exceeding $20,000.00, conditioned upon the applicant indemnifying and holding harmless the city from liability for damages to the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public property of the city resulting from the work under said permit. 
(4)  Fee. The fee for a street permit shall be established by the city. 
(5)  Termination. Such permits shall automatically terminate on the date stated in the permit. If any of the conditions of the permit are violated, the permit may be revoked or suspended by the city, without notice. 
(6)  Statutory requirements. If any permit is issued for a period of three months or longer, the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.0425 shall also be satisfied, and are incorporated herein by reference to the extent applicable. 
(Code 1991, § 15.21) 
Secs. 32-14-32-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 32-45. - Driveway permits. 
(a)  Purpose . For the safety of the general public, the city shall determine the location, size, construction and number of access points to public roadways within the city limits, through the administration of this section and section 114-162 by the director of public works (DPW). It is the city's intent to provide safe access to properties abutting public roadways suitable for the property to be developed to its highest and best use, provided that access is not deficient or dangerous to the general public. 
(b)  Permit required to construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge . No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge any private driveway within the limits of the dedicated portion of any public street under the control and jurisdiction of the city without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided by this article. 
(c)  Application . Application for such permit shall be made to the clerk or DPW on a form provided by the city and shall be accompanied by a drawing accurately depicting the portion of the proposed private driveway to be constructed, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, lying within the dedicated portion of the public right-of-way, the dimensions thereof and a statement of the materials proposed to be used. The applicant shall pay such fee as may be established from time to time by the council, unless the proposed private driveway is a part of construction for a building or other structure for which a building permit has been applied for, in which case no additional fee is required. Upon receipt of the application and fee, if required, the DPW shall approve such application if the proposed driveway complies with the terms and conditions of this article and any other applicable city ordinance. 
(d)  Application provisions . All driveway permit applications shall contain the applicant's statement that: 
(1)  The applicant owns the lot to be served by the proposed driveway, and that such proposed driveway is for the bona fide purpose of securing access to applicant's property and not for the purpose of parking or servicing vehicles, advertising, storage or merchandising of goods within the dedicated portion of the city street, or for any other purpose. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to make any changes, additions, repairs or relocations of that portion of the driveway located within the dedicated portion of the city's right-of-way at any time and for any purpose, including relocation, reconstruction, widening and maintenance of the street, without compensating the applicant or any subsequent owner of the property served by said driveway, for the damage to, destruction, closure or relocation of that portion of the driveway located within the city's right-of-way. 
(3)  The applicant, his successors and assigns, agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials, officers, agents or employees, against any claim or any cause of action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of the granting or the exercise of such permit. 
(4)  The city does not assume any responsibility for the removal or clearance of snow, ice or sleet from said driveway, nor any responsibility for the opening of any windrows of snow, ice or sleet placed upon the driveway by the city. 
(5)  Such additional statements as the city administrator shall deem necessary to ensure that the city's ownership and control over all rights-of-way are completely vested in the city and are not directly or indirectly transferred to a property owner by virtue of the granting of a driveway permit. 
(Code 1991, § 15.30) 
Sec. 32-46. - Driveway location, design and construction requirements. 
    General requirements. The location, design and construction of driveways shall be in accordance with the requirements of section 114-162 and the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Utilities. Driveways shall in all cases be placed wherever possible as not to interfere with utilities in place. Any costs of relocating utilities shall be the responsibility of the property owner with approval of the city necessary before any utility may be relocated and the driveway installed. 
(2)  Culverts . Driveways shall not obstruct or impair drainage in street ditches or roadside areas. Driveway culverts, where required, shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the street and shall not be less than the equivalent of a 12-inch diameter pipe. The distance between culverts under successive driveways shall not be less than ten feet. 
(3)  Reconstruction of sidewalks and curb and gutter . When the construction of a driveway requires the removal of a curb or gutter, the new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable material and curb returns shall be provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner, in accordance with city standards. The driveway surface shall be separated from each curb cut and from the sidewalk, if any, by an expansion or cold joint, in a neat, workmanlike manner. Driveway construction shall include the installation of new or the replacement of existing sidewalk areas, over which vehicles may travel, and all such sidewalk shall be constructed to the standards required by the city to support the weight of vehicles crossing the new sidewalk. 
(4)  Boulevards. The area located between the traveled street surface and the edge of the street right-of-way is managed and controlled by the city, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  No filling or draining of the boulevard shall occur, except with approval by the DPW. No planting shall occur within the boulevard except with approval by the DPW. 
b.  Culvert extensions within the boulevard shall be of the same size and of equivalent acceptable material as the culvert under the driveway. Intermediate manholes adequate for cleanout purposes may be required where the total culvert length is excessive. 
c.  The city may require the landowner to construct a permanent barrier (e.g., curb, ditch, rails, posts, etc.) to separate the boulevard from the landowner's lot to prevent use of the boulevard for driveway or parking purposes as may be required by the DPW. 
(Code 1991, § 15.31) 
Chapter 34 - TAXATION 

Sec. 34-1. - Room tax. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section, the definitions contained in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1) shall apply. To the extent that Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1) does not provide a definition for the following terms, then the following terms shall have the definitions ascribed to them below: 
    Committee means the select committee on room taxes created pursuant to section 2-205. 
    Gross receipts means the funds derived from the furnishing of rooms for lodging to transients. 
    Payor means the person or entity who owes the tax imposed herein. 
(b)  Imposition of tax. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, a tax is hereby imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail (except sales for resale), rooms or lodging to transients by hotelkeepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for use of the accommodations. The room tax shall be at the rate of five percent of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging. 
(c)  Treasurer to administer. The provisions of this section shall be administered by the city treasurer (or his designee), subject to the supervision of the common council and the committee. 
(d)  Payment of tax. The tax imposed herein shall be paid to the city on a quarterly basis for each calendar quarter, and shall be due and payable on the last day of the month immediately following the calendar quarter for which the tax was imposed, e.g., for the first quarter, January through March, the payment is due on or before April 30. 
(e)  Tax returns. 
(1)  Quarterly returns. A quarterly tax return, on forms prescribed by the treasurer, shall be filed with the treasurer on or before the same date on which the quarterly tax is due and payable. Such return shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the treasurer deems necessary. 
(2)  Annual return. An annual tax return, on forms prescribed by the treasurer, shall be filed on or before March 15 of each year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns of the previous year, shall reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain such additional information as the treasurer requires. Errors voluntarily disclosed and corrected in the annual return shall not be subject to penalty. 
(3)  Time extensions. Upon receipt of a written request from a payor, the treasurer, for good cause, may extend the time for filing any return up to, but not exceeding, one month from the filing due date. All such extensions shall be issued in writing. During such extension, no penalties shall accrue against the payor. 
(4)  Signing of returns. All such returns shall be signed by the payor or his duly authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath. 
(5)  Confidentiality. 
a.  All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports related to such returns, filed with the treasurer, are deemed to be confidential, except the treasurer may divulge their contents to the following and no others: 
1.  The payor or his duly authorized agent. 
2.  Officers, agents or employees of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service or the state department of revenue. 
3.  Officers, agents or employees of the city as may be necessary to evaluate the return and enforce collection. 
b.  No person having any administrative duty under this section shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained in any investigation of records of any payor, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any unauthorized person. 
(6)  Overpayment. If a payor accidentally pays more tax than is due, the payor may file an amended return at any time, and upon verification that an overpayment has occurred, the city shall promptly refund the overpayment. 
(f)  Records required. Every payor shall keep or cause to be kept, for at least three years, such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers needed to support the payor's calculation of the room tax imposed herein. Furthermore, the treasurer is authorized to develop such forms as the treasurer deems necessary and reasonable to administer this section, and every payor shall use the forms developed by the treasurer. 
(g)  Audits. 
(1)  Audits authorized. The treasurer may, by office audit and/or by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid from any payor or the refund due to any payor. This determination may be based on the facts contained in the return being audited, on any other information within the treasurer's possession, on the financial records of payor, on the payor's state sales tax records, and/or on any other documents or information deemed relevant by the city. 
(2)  Compliance with audit. Each payor shall cooperate with the treasurer, or his designated agent, in the conducting of an audit. Such cooperation shall include, but not be limited to, the payor promptly responding, within 30 days, to the treasurer's requests for information and/or documents which the treasurer deems necessary to conduct the audit. 
(h)  Distribution of taxes collected. All room taxes and other expenses collected by the city under this section shall be distributed by the city as follows: 
(1)  Seventy percent of the amount collected shall be spent on tourism promotion and development, as defined by Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1). 
(2)  Thirty percent of the amount collected shall be used for the following items in the following order: 
a.  To reimburse the city for the cost of administering the room tax, including accounting, collection, consulting and legal costs incurred by the city; and 
b.  To pay for projects and/or events which promote tourism, which support or develop commerce, which enhance the quality of life in the city and/or which improve the city's image to visitors. 
(i)  Sale of business. If any payor sells the business and/or real estate which is subject to this room tax, then the seller and the purchaser thereof shall withhold a portion of the sale price sufficient to pay any current and/or delinquent room taxes, plus all penalties and costs, until the treasurer produces a receipt confirming that the city has received payment of all taxes, penalties and/or other costs which may be due hereunder. Failure of the seller and the purchaser to withhold sufficient sums shall make both the seller and the purchaser jointly and severally liable for the payment thereof. 
(j)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Failure to pay tax or file return on time. 
a.  Failure to file a room tax return when due and/or the failure to pay the room tax when due, shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall result in the following penalties, which shall be based upon the length of the delinquency as follows: 
1.  One-30 days delinquent. If the tax is paid or if the tax return is filed between one and 30 days late, the delinquent payor shall pay a penalty of five percent of the tax due, but in no event less than the amount established by the city; 
2.  31-60 days delinquent. If the tax is paid or if the tax return is filed between 31 and 60 days late, the delinquent payor shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax due, but in no event less than the amount established by the city; 
b.  It shall be a violation of this section for a payor to file a return late and/or pay a tax late, without voluntarily paying the forgoing penalty. A payor who commits such a violation shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit the amount established by the city, plus the unpaid penalty. 
(2)  Failure to file return or pay tax after 60 days. If a payor fails or refuses to file a room tax return or pay the room tax, plus all delinquent charges pursuant to subsection (j)(1) of this section within 60 days of the due date, then the treasurer shall send a written notice to the delinquent payor by certified mail, informing the delinquent payor of the delinquency and requesting voluntary action on or before a date no more than 30 days from the date of said notice. If the delinquent payor files a return and makes payment of the tax, plus the penalty calculated pursuant to subsection (j)(1) of this section, within the time stated in the notice, then no further action shall be taken. If the delinquent payor fails or refuses to comply with said notice, then the treasurer shall compute a penalty equal to 25 percent of the room tax due for the previous year or $5,000.00, whichever is less. 
a.  Any payor who fails to file a return, pay the tax and penalty within the time stated in the aforesaid notice, shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit the amount established by the city, plus the foregoing penalty. 
(3)  Incorrect returns. It shall be a violation of this section for a payor to file an incorrect return or pay an incorrect tax. Any person who violates this provision shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit one of the following amounts depending upon the nature of the violation: 
a.  Negligence. If the violation was due to negligence, then, in addition to payment of the unpaid tax, a forfeiture equal to 50 percent of the unpaid tax, or the amount established by the city, whichever is less, shall be paid. 
b.  Intentional. If the party committed the violation intentionally, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 939.23, or if the party filed an incorrect return "with intent" to defeat or evade the tax imposed by this section (as defined by Wis. Stats. § 939.23), then the party shall pay, in addition to the tax already paid, a forfeiture equal to the penalty computed under subsection (j)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Other violations. Any person who violates any other portion of this section not specifically addressed in this subsection (j) shall be subject to a forfeiture in the amount established by the city. 
(5)  Removal from committee . Any payor, who commits any violation of this section, shall have his representative automatically removed from the committee for a period of at least one year. 
(Code 1991, § 3.211; Ord. No. 2015-1079, 3-10-2015; Ord. No. 2017-1096 , 11-28-2017) 
State Law reference- Room tax, Wis. Stats. § 66.0615. 
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic and vehicles, Wis. Stats. chs. 340-350; powers of local authorities, Wis. Stats. ch. 349. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - State statutes adopted. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 340 through 350 and Wis. Stats. § 23.33; and Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans 305, including any future revisions or amendments thereto, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, utility terrain vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including the penalties to be imposed and the procedure for prosecution, are hereby adopted and, by reference, made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 14.10) 
Sec. 36-2. - Disorderly conduct with a vehicle. 
    No person shall make any unnecessary and annoying noise with a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or ATV/UTV vehicle, by squealing tires, by excessive acceleration of the engine, or by emitting unnecessary and loud exhaust system noises, nor shall any person operate a vehicle in such a manner to cause the tires to squeal, or spin and displace sand or gravel, nor shall any person otherwise engage in other disorderly conduct while operating a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or ATV/UTV vehicle. 
(Code 1991, § 14.80; Ord. No. 2018-1099 , 7-24-2018) 
Sec. 36-3. - School premises. 
    By request of the school board of the School District of Mauston (school board motion dated December 19, 1988) and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 118.105, the city does hereby agree to regulate the operation and parking of motor vehicles on school premises, drives and parking lots as follows: 
(1)  Speed limits . The speed limit on all school premises shall be 15 miles per hour regardless of whether children are present. 
(2)  Parking . All parking regulations of this chapter shall apply to school premises, drives and parking lots. 
(Code 1991, § 14.86) 
Sec. 36-4. - Accident reports. 
    In addition to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 346.70, the operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall file with the city police department a copy of the report required by Wis. Stats. § 346.70, if any, within ten days after the accident giving rise to the report. 
(Code 1991, § 14.83) 
State Law reference- Authority to require accident reports, Wis. Stats. § 349.19. 
Sec. 36-5. - Keys in vehicles. 
    Every passenger motor vehicle shall be equipped with a lock suitable to lock either the starting lever, throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift lever or ignition system. No person shall permit a motor vehicle in the person's custody from standing or remaining unattended on any street, road, or alley or in any other public place, except an attended parking area, unless either the starting lever, throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift or ignition of the vehicle is locked and the key for that lock is removed from the vehicle. This section does not apply to motor vehicles operated by common carriers of passengers under Wis. Stats. ch. 194. 
(Code 1991, § 14.85) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Wis. Stats. § 66.0431. 
Sec. 36-6. - Neighborhood electric vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV) means a self-propelled motor vehicle that has successfully completed the Neighborhood Electric Vehicle America test program conducted by the Federal Department of Energy and that conforms to the definition and requirements for low speed vehicles as adopted in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for low-speed vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and 571.500. NEVs shall be four-wheeled and have a speed range of at least 20 miles per hour and not more than 25 miles per hour on a paved surface and have a gross vehicle weight at rest of less than 2,500 pounds. The term "NEV" does not include an electric golf cart and shall have: 
(1)  Headlamps; 
(2)  Front and rear turn signals; 
(3)  Stop lamps; 
(4)  Reflex reflectors; one red on each side as far to the rear as practical, and one red on the rear; 
(5)  An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side and either an exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rearview mirror; 
(6)  Parking brake; 
(7)  A windshield that conforms to the requirements of the federal motor vehicle safety standard on glazing materials (49 CFR 571.205); 
(8)  A vehicle identification number (VIN) that complies with federal law (49 CFR 565); 
(9)  A Type 1 or Type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming to 49 CFR 571.209, and Federal Motor Safety Standard No. 209, for each designated seating position; and 
(10)  Meets the general test conditions under 49 CFR 571.50056. 
(b)  Permitted users of neighborhood electric vehicles . To use an NEV on city streets as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the individual must have a valid state driver's license. 
(c)  Permitted use of neighborhood electric vehicles on city streets . A licensed individual may operate an NEV on the streets of the city having a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less and headlamps must be on during operation. 
(d)  Operating of neighborhood electric vehicles. The operation of NEVs as permitted herein shall in all respects be in compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  License . NEVs shall be licensed by the state, and the license shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle. The license shall be displayed on the rear of the NEV. 
(Code 1991, § 14.88) 
Secs. 36-7-36-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-31. - Official traffic signs and signals. 
(a)  Erection and maintenance . The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of the state highway division, giving such notice of the provisions of this chapter as required by state law. The signs shall be erected in such locations and manner as the director of public works and the chief of police shall determine will best effect the purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning to the users of the city streets and highways. 
(b)  Removal. The director of public works and the police department shall have the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 349.09 to remove or cause to be removed any sign, signal, marking or device which is placed, maintained or displayed in violation of Wis. Stats. § 346.41 or this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 14.84) 
State Law reference- Traffic control devices, Wis. Stats. § 349.065 et seq. 
Sec. 36-32. - Enforcement procedure. 
    This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 345.20 through 345.53 and 66.0114 and the other statutory sections incorporated therein by reference. 
(Code 1991, § 14.90) 
Sec. 36-33. - Enforcement by police. 
    The chief of police and city police officers are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter and the state statutes incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1991, § 14.91) 
Secs. 36-34-36-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 36-55. - Citations. 
    The uniform traffic citation, promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11 shall be used for all violations of this chapter, except for nonmoving violations. Citations for all nonmoving traffic violations under this chapter shall conform to Wis. Stats. § 345.28 and shall permit direct mail payment of the applicable forfeiture to the police department within ten days of the issuance of the citation in lieu of a court appearance. The citation shall specify thereon the amount of the applicable forfeiture as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 14.92) 
Sec. 36-56. - Registration suspension program. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 345.28, the city hereby elects to participate in the nonmoving traffic violation and registration suspension program of the state department of transportation and to pay the costs established by the department under Wis. Stats. § 85.13. All costs assessed by the department against the city shall, in turn, be assessed against the person charged with the nonmoving traffic violation. 
(Code 1991, § 14.93) 
Sec. 36-57. - Deposit schedule. 
    The deposit schedule, and all future revisions thereto, established by the judicial conference pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 345.26(2) is hereby adopted as the deposit schedule for every violation of this chapter having a statutory counterpart covered by the deposit schedule. The amount of the deposit for violations of this chapter which do not have a statutory counterpart shall be $100.00. 
(Code 1991, § 14.94) 
Sec. 36-58. - Penalties. 
    The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture as hereafter provided, together with statutory court costs, penalty assessment and license suspension or revocation, where applicable. 
(1)  State forfeiture statutes. The forfeitures for violation of any statute adopted herein by reference, for which the penalty is a forfeiture, shall conform to the forfeiture permitted by said statute, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses, and including any future amendments thereto. 
(2)  State fine statutes. The forfeiture for violation of any statute adopted herein by reference, for which the penalty is a fine, shall not exceed the maximum fine permitted under such statute. 
(3)  Local regulations. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalty for a violation of this chapter which does not have a statutory counterpart shall be as provided in chapter 1, article II. 
(Code 1991, § 14.95) 
Secs. 36-59-36-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE OPERATION 

Sec. 36-90. - Speed limits. 
    The common council hereby determines that the statutory speed limits on the following streets or portions thereof are unreasonable, unsafe or imprudent, and pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 349.11 does hereby set the following speed limits for the streets designated thereunder: 
(1)  15 miles per hour on Mansion Street, between Hickory and Beach. 
(2)  15 miles per hour when children are present on: 
a.  Mansion Street, between Union and Hickory. 
b.  Grayside Avenue, between Elm and West line of school property. 
c.  Loomis, between Arlington and Elm. 
d.  Grove, between Tremont and West. 
e.  Arlington, between Crescent and Pearl. 
f.  West Avenue, between 150 feet on each side of intersection with Loomis. 
(3)  35 miles per hour on: 
a.  Gateway Avenue between Union and Kennedy. 
b.  Attewell, between Grayside and Martin. 
c.  Hwy. 12 and Hwy. 16 West, between state and Western corporate boundary line. 
(4)  45 miles per hour on Gateway Avenue between Kennedy and eastern corporate boundary line. 
(Code 1991, § 14.20) 
State Law reference- Speed limits, Wis. Stats. § 346.57 et seq.; local modification of speed limits, Wis. Stats. § 349.11. 
Sec. 36-91. - Heavy traffic routes. 
    All heavy traffic as defined in Wis. Stats. § 349.17(2) is hereby prohibited from operating on the streets of the city, except as follows: 
(1)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.17, the following streets and parts of streets within the city are hereby designated as heavy traffic routes, upon which heavy traffic may operate: 
a.  All streets in the business area as defined in section 32-122(b)(1); 
b.  All state, county and federal highways; 
c.  Attewell Street; and 
d.  Vine Street east of South Union (STH 58/82) to LL Townline Road. 
(2)  Heavy traffic which is being operated on a street for the sole purpose of delivering, loading or unloading freight or garbage to or from a premises which is not adjacent to a heavy traffic route, provided that all such heavy traffic shall take the shortest route possible between the existing heavy traffic routes and a premises not adjacent to a heavy traffic route. 
(3)  The common council may, by resolution, temporarily designate other streets as heavy traffic routes whenever special circumstances (e.g., construction, repairs, disasters, etc.) require it. 
(Code 1991, § 14.82) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate heavy traffic, Wis. Stats. § 349.17. 
Sec. 36-92. - Compression (Jake) brakes. 
    No person shall use, within the city limits, motor vehicle brakes which are in any way activated or operated by the compression of the engine of the motor vehicle, commonly known as "Jake brakes". It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that compression brakes were applied in an emergency and were necessary for the protection of persons or property. Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from this section. 
(Code 1991, § 14.87) 
Secs. 36-93-36-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, Wis. Stats. § 346.50 et seq.; authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, Wis. Stats. § 349.13. 

Sec. 36-113. - Penalties for parking violations. 
(a)  First offense. Except as otherwise provided in this article or by state statute, the forfeiture for any violation of this article shall be as established by the city fee schedule, in addition to any costs associated with the prosecution thereof which are recovered or authorized by state statute or administrative regulation. 
(b)  Second and subsequent offenses. Except as otherwise provided in this article or by state statute, the forfeiture for a second or subsequent parking violation occurring within 12 months of the first offense shall be as established by the city in addition to any costs associated with the prosecution thereof which are recovered or authorized by state statute or administrative regulation: 
(1)  For the second or subsequent violation of section 36-122(e) regulating truck parking, an additional $20.00 shall be added to the forfeitures identified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  For the second or subsequent violation of all other provisions of this article requiring truck parking, except as in section 36-121(e), no additional forfeiture shall be added to the forfeiture identified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Multiple violations. Each violation and each 24-hour time period that a violation continues or occurs, shall constitute a separate offense. Prosecution of two or more offenses committed by the same violator may be joined into one action, and the prosecution of two or more violators for the same offense may be joined into one action. 
(Code 1991, § 14.39) 
Sec. 36-114. - Owner of vehicle liable. 
    When any vehicle is found upon a street, alley or parking lot in violation of any provision of this article regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, and when the identity of the operator of such vehicle cannot be readily determined, the owner, as shown by the ownership registration of the vehicle supplied by the state department of transportation or a comparable authority of any other state, shall be deemed to have committed the violation for purposes of the enforcement of this article and shall be subject to the applicable forfeiture. 
(Code 1991, § 14.36) 
Sec. 36-115. - Chief of police. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.13, the authority to regulate the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles within the city is delegated to the chief of police, subject to the control of the council and subject to the express regulations contained herein. The chief, with the cooperation of the director of public works, is hereby authorized to designate and sign streets, or portions thereof, where, in the opinion of the chief, the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles should be regulated to promote and protect the safe, convenient and efficient use of city streets. Any prohibition, limitation or restriction on stopping, standing or parking, imposed by the chief, is effective if an official traffic sign or marker has been placed or erected at or reasonably near the regulated area, indicating the particular prohibition, limitation or restriction. 
(Code 1991, § 14.30) 
Sec. 36-116. - Street maintenance. 
    Whenever the director of public works deems it necessary to clear, repair or perform maintenance upon any city street, alley, parking lot or any portion thereof, the director of public works may temporarily close such area by the installation of signs and/or barricades. No person shall stop, leave standing or park any vehicle in violation of such signs or barricades provided such signs or barricades were erected prior to the stopping, leaving or parking of the violator's vehicle. 
(Code 1991, § 14.35) 
Sec. 36-117. - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  Towing permitted. Any vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of this article or state statutes may be towed and/or stored, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.13, by the city police or by a private party at the direction of the city police. 
(b)  Notice required. Upon the towing and/or storing of any vehicle pursuant to this section, the city shall mail or serve to the owner or operator of the vehicle, a citation for the ordinance violation committed by the vehicle. Such mailing or service shall be accomplished within 24 hours of the towing. With the citation, there shall be included a statement of the towing and storage charges, an explanation of how the vehicle can be obtained by payment of a deposit, and an explanation of the defendant's right to a prompt hearing to determine probable cause for the citation. 
(c)  Deposit and release of vehicle. A towed or stored vehicle shall not be released to the operator or owner until a deposit has been paid to the city, equal to the cost of the towing and storage, or until the citation has been dismissed, or until the city elects to pursue another lawful remedy for the collection of the charges. Such deposit shall be held by the city pending disposition of the violation which caused the vehicle to be towed and/or stored. 
(d)  Prompt hearing . Upon failure of the defendant to pay the deposit for the release of the vehicle, the defendant may request a prompt hearing for the purpose of determining whether the citation should be dismissed due to the lack of probable cause for the offense charged. Such request can be made by the defendant, or his representative, by contacting the police department. Upon receipt of such a request, a probable cause hearing shall be held during the next business day before one of the following: 
(1)  The county circuit court; 
(2)  Any county court commissioner; or 
(3)  The mayor. 
If a finding of probable cause is made by someone other than the circuit court, than the defendant may request, and upon request shall be entitled to, a de novo probable cause hearing before the circuit court within ten days of the request. If it is found that probable cause does not exist, then the citation shall be dismissed and the vehicle released without charge. 
(Code 1991, § 14.37) 
Sec. 36-118. - Abandoned vehicles. 
    In addition to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 342.40, the following requirements apply: 
(1)  Presumption of abandonment . Whenever one of the following conditions exist, a vehicle shall be deemed to have been abandoned within the meaning of this section: 
a.  Whenever any vehicle, whether operative or inoperative, has been parked in the same place on any public street, alley, parking lot or property for more than 72 hours; 
b.  Whenever any vehicle, whether operative or inoperative, has been parked in the same place and remains on any city parking lot, or signed area, in violation of the parking prohibition, limitation or restriction regarding such area, for more than a period of 24 hours; 
c.  Whenever any vehicle, whether operative or inoperative, has been parked on any private property, without the permission of the owner or lessee, for more than a period of 48 hours; or 
d.  Whenever any vehicle has been moved and stored pursuant to section 36-117 and the vehicle is not claimed and removed by the owner prior to the entry of judgment on the article violation which caused the towing and storage. 
(2)  Forfeiture and costs. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the forfeiture set forth in chapter 1, article II, and shall also be responsible for all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle. The city may impound the vehicle on city property, and if so, the charge for such impoundment shall be as established by the city. 
(3)  Disposal procedure. In addition to the procedure set forth in Wis. Stats. § 342.40, the city may dispose of the vehicle by auction sale, conducted at the front entrance to the city hall by the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  Notice. No vehicle shall be seized or towed by the city on the sole grounds that the vehicle is abandoned, prior to adjudication of abandonment. Nothing herein shall limit or prevent the towing of a vehicle pursuant to section 36-117 without prior notice or adjudication. 
(Code 1991, § 14.38) 
Sec. 36-119. - Obedience to signs. 
    No person shall stop, leave standing or park a vehicle on any city street, alley, parking lot or portion thereof, contrary to any prohibition, limitation or restriction imposed by a traffic sign, or marker which has been placed or erected by the city at or reasonably near the regulated area. 
(Code 1991, § 14.31) 
Sec. 36-120. - School bus warning lights. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 346.48(2)(b)2, school bus operators shall use flashing red lights in residential and business districts when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at locations at which there are no traffic signals. Such flashing red warning lights shall be activated at least 100 feet prior to stopping for purposes of loading and unloading and shall continue until such persons have crossed the street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. The provisions of this section shall not apply to special needs buses that pull over to the curb in front of the residences of the student to be picked up or dropped off. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1081, 8-11-2015) 
Sec. 36-121. - Designated parking spaces. 
    The chief of police, in cooperation with the director of public works, is hereby authorized to paint lines or markings on the curbs, streets or parking lot surfaces for the purpose of designating parking spaces. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking or to park a vehicle in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. It shall also be unlawful to park in a designated parking space any vehicle which cannot fit within one designated space, except when such vehicle is temporarily parked solely for the purpose of loading or unloading freight to or from an adjoining premise. 
(Code 1991, § 14.32) 
Sec. 36-122. - No parking areas. 
(a)  Schools. There shall be no parking on the following-described streets between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when school is in session: 
(1)  Grayside Avenue, north side, between the west side of Madden Street and 880 feet west of the west side of Buttner Street. 
(2)  Grayside Avenue, south side, between the west side of Madden Street, extended and 1,200 feet west thereof. 
(3)  Loomis Drive, south side, between Arlington Avenue and Grove Street. 
(4)  Mansion Street, both sides, between Hickory Street and Union Street. 
(b)  Snow season. 
(1)  For purposes of this subsection, the term "residential street" shall be all streets except the following, which shall be deemed to be the business area: 
a.  Division Street, between State Street and the railroad tracks; 
b.  Elm Street from State Street to railroad tracks; 
c.  Hanover Street, between State Street and Maine Street; 
d.  Hickory Street, between Mansion Street and the railroad tracks; 
e.  LaCrosse Street, between Division Street and Union Street; 
f.  Maine Street, between Hanover Street and Division Street; 
g.  Mansion Street, between Union Street and Hickory Street; 
h.  Oak Street, between State Street and Division Street; 
i.  Pine Street, between Mansion Street and the railroad tracks; 
j.  Prairie Street, between Hickory Street and Union Street; 
k.  State Street, between Hanover Street and Union Street; 
l.  Gateway Avenue between North Union Street and the East city limits; 
m.  Union Street, between Mansion Street and the railroad tracks. 
(2)  During the period of December 1 of each calendar year to April 1 of the following calendar year, all vehicles parked, between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., on those city streets where parking is allowed shall park on the odd-numbered side of the street on the odd-numbered days and on the even-numbered side of the street on the even-numbered days. 
(3)  No person shall be in violation of this subsection (b) if, prior to the receipt of a citation, he telephones the police department and states that he cannot comply with this subsection (b) because his vehicle is disabled and provides the location of the vehicle; provided the disabled vehicle is moved within 18 hours after the receipt of such notification by the police department. 
(4)  The forfeiture for violation of this subsection (b) shall be as established by the city fee schedule in addition to any costs associated with the prosecution thereof which are required or authorized by state statute or administrative regulation. 
(5)  Each night that a vehicle is parked contrary to this subsection (b) shall constitute a separate violation of this subsection (b). 
(c)  Snow emergencies. 
(1)  Whenever the mayor determines, in his sole discretion, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a weather forecast of snow, sleet or freezing rain, that vehicle traffic in the city is or will be unusually hazardous or dangerous or that parking on certain city streets is or will be unusually hazardous, dangerous or congestive, and therefore such traffic or parking should be stopped, limited, rerouted or otherwise controlled, the mayor may declare a snow emergency and may order that traffic or parking be stopped, limited, rerouted or otherwise controlled. 
(2)  When the mayor declares a snow emergency, the mayor shall cause such declaration to be publicly announced by means of radio broadcast from a station with a normal operating range covering the city, and the mayor may cause such declaration to be further announced in the newspaper published in the city. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the mayor, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. A parking prohibition declared by the mayor under this section shall not go into effect until at least two hours after it has been announced at least two times between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on any day; provided, however, that one announcement in a newspaper of general circulation shall be sufficient. The mayor shall make or cause to be made a record of each time and date when any declaration is announced to the public under this section. 
(3)  No person shall operate, park, stop or leave standing a vehicle on any street contrary to the terms and conditions of a snow emergency declaration and order of the mayor. 
(4)  In addition to, or in lieu of the foregoing, the director of public works may temporarily close any city street, alley or parking lot, by the installation of signs or barricades, for the purpose of removing snow, sleet or ice. 
(d)  Late night business district. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in any alley, city-owned parking lot, or street located in the business area, as defined in subsection (b)(1) of this section, between 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and between 2:45 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Saturday through Sunday, except the foregoing shall not apply on January 1. No person shall be in violation of this subsection if he telephones the police department and states that he cannot comply with this subsection because his vehicle is disabled and provides the location of the vehicle; provided the disabled vehicle is moved within 18 hours after the receipt of notification by the police department. 
(e)  Truck parking regulations. No person shall park any of the following vehicles, trailers or other items, as defined by Wis. Stats. § 340.01: 
(1)  Commercial motor vehicle; 
(2)  Double bottom; 
(3)  Motorbus; 
(4)  Road machinery; 
(5)  Road tractor; 
(6)  School bus; 
(7)  Semitrailer; 
(8)  Tow truck; 
(9)  Tractor-semitrailer combination; 
(10)  Truck tractor; 
on any street in any residential zoning district as defined by chapter 114, except that the prohibition stated herein shall not apply to any vehicle, trailer or other prohibited item which is temporarily parked solely for the purpose of loading or unloading freight to and from an adjoining premises, or solely for the purpose of performing work on, or rendering a service to, an adjoining premises. 
(f)  Sidewalks. There shall be no parking on any sidewalk, nor in any driveway or alley so as to block any sidewalk. 
(g)  Other designated areas. In addition to the foregoing prohibitions, there shall be no parking at any time wherever indicated by one of the following: 
(1)  Traffic signs placed or erected at or reasonably near the area in which there is to be no parking; or 
(2)  Yellow paint on the curb or road edge at or next to the area in which there is to be no parking. 
(Code 1991, § 14.33) 
Sec. 36-123. - Limited time parking. 
(a)  Signs. No person shall stop, park or leave a vehicle standing for longer than the period specified by any traffic sign, or marker indicating the particular time limitation thereon. 
(b)  Exceptions. The prohibitions contained in subsection (a) of this section shall not be effective on Sundays and the following holidays: January 1; Good Friday; the last Monday in May, commonly known as Memorial Day; July 4; the first Monday in September, commonly known as Labor Day; the fourth Thursday in November, commonly known as Thanksgiving; and December 25; or any other day or time period designated by resolution of the common council. 
(c)  Chalk marking. In order to monitor the continuous length of time that a vehicle is parked in a parking space, lot or zone subject to time limit restrictions, the police department is authorized to place a chalk mark or other similar mark on one or more tires of the parked vehicle. It shall be unlawful to remove, erase or alter, or attempt to remove, erase or alter, any chalk mark or other similar mark of any kind placed by the police department upon any tire for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(Code 1991, § 14.34) 
Secs. 36-124-36-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 36-143. - Applicable law. 
    Every person owning or operating a bicycle shall be subject to all of the provisions of the state statutes and this chapter applicable to vehicles and the owners and operators thereof. 
(Code 1991, § 14.40) 
Sec. 36-144. - Special regulations. 
(a)  Riding on sidewalks. Persons under the age of ten may operate their bicycles upon the public sidewalks, except sidewalks located in the business area as defined by section 36-122(b)(1). 
(b)  Attachments. No operator of a bicycle may attach any coaster, roller skates, sled, wagon, toboggan or other apparatus not specifically designed for attachment to a bicycle, while operating on a public street or sidewalk. 
(c)  Improper riding. No person operating a bicycle upon a public street or sidewalk shall participate in any race, speed or endurance contest, unless such race or contest has the permission of the police department. No person operating a bicycle on a public street or sidewalk shall perform or attempt to perform any acrobatic, trick, fancy or stunt riding. 
(Code 1991, § 14.41) 
Secs. 36-145-36-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ALL-TERRAIN/UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATV/UTV)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-1099 , adopted July 24, 2018, changed the title of art. VI from all-terrain vehicles to all-terrain/utility-terrain vehicles (ATV/UTV). 

Sec. 36-173. - Requirements for operating an ATV/UTV vehicle within the city. 
(a)  Hours of ATV/UTV use on city streets is limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(b)  All ATV/UTV operators must be 16 years of age or older and have a valid driver's license. 
(c)  All ATV/UTV operators shall comply with Wis. Stats. § 23.33, including ATV training certification requirements. 
(d)  All ATV/UTV operators shall follow posted speed limits, yield the right-of-way according to the state's rules of the road, travel in single file fashion, and obey all other traffic laws. 
(e)  No person shall possess open intoxicants while operating an ATV/UTV. 
(f)  No person shall operator on private property not controlled or owned by the operator without express permission of the property owner. 
(g)  No person shall operate an ATV/UTV on any public sidewalks, parks, other public property, city streets, state and/or U.S. highways except as designated on the official city ATV/UTV route map. 
(Ord. No. 2018-1099 , 7-24-2018) 
Sec. 36-174. - ATV/UTV routes. 
(a)  Except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 23.33, no person shall operate an ATV/UTV upon any public street, alley, right-of-way, park or any other public property in the city except as hereinafter designated: 
(1)  Designated route. Operation of ATV/UTV vehicles is authorized on those streets and highways designated by the chief of police with approval by the common council provided, however, no operation may occur until after: 
a.  The ATV/UTV route authorized by the chief is properly marked; 
b.  A copy of the route is sent to the county sheriff's department and department of natural resources in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 23.33(11); and 
c.  The route is placed upon a city map, designated as the official city ATV/UTV route map, which shall be made available for public inspection at city hall. 
(2)  Lake Decorah. Operation of ATV/UTV vehicles is authorized on Lake Decorah during the winter, provided such operation not occur within 100 feet of any private property. 
(3)  Union Street Bridge. Operation of ATV/UTV vehicles is authorized on the Union Street/Highway 58 North bridge. The person crossing the bridge shall adhere to all regulations of Wis. Stats. § 23.33(11)(am)3. 
(b)  Designation of an ATV/UTV vehicle route by the chief is subject to control of the council. Any ATV/UTV vehicle route designated by the chief may be terminated at any time by the chief or council upon notice to the foregoing authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-1099 , 7-24-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-1099 , adopted July 24, 2018, amended § 36-174 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 36-174 pertained to ATV routes and derived from Code 1991, § 14.50. 
Secs. 36-175-36-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SNOWMOBILES 

Sec. 36-202. - Snowmobile routes designated. 
(a)  Except as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 350.02 and 350.03, no person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public street, alley, right-of-way, park or any other public property in the city except as hereinafter designated: 
(1)  Lake Decorah. Operation of snowmobiles is authorized on Lake Decorah during the Winter, provided such operation not occur within 100 feet of any private property. 
(2)  Riverside Park. Operation of snowmobiles is authorized in Riverside Park during the winter, but only for the purpose of access to Lake Decorah or the purpose of temporarily parking the snowmobile while the operator visits the downtown area of the city. 
(3)  Designated route. Operation of snowmobiles is authorized on those streets and highways designated by the chief of police; provided, however, no operation may occur until after: 
a.  The snowmobile route authorized by the chief is properly marked in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 350.04 and 350.13; 
b.  A copy of the route is sent to the county sheriff's department and department of natural resources in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 350.047; and 
c.  The route is placed upon a city map, designated as the official city snowmobile route map, which shall be made available for public inspection at city hall. 
(b)  Designation of a snowmobile route by the chief is subject to control of the council. Any snowmobile route designated by the chief may be terminated at any time by the chief or council upon notice to the foregoing authorities. 
(Code 1991, § 14.60) 
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal utilities, Wis. Stats. § 66.0801 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Cross connection control. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to comply with Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 810 and SPS 382, which require protection of the public water system from contamination due to back flow of contaminants through the water service connection; and 
(b)  Cross connection defined. The term "cross connection" means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the city's public water system, and the other which contains water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, with the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
(c)  Unprotected cross connections prohibited. No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or maintain, or permit to be established or maintained, any unprotected cross connection. Cross connections shall be protected as required in Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 382. 
(d)  Inspections. The city, through its authorized agent, is hereby authorized to enter and inspect all property served by the city water utility where cross connections with the public water system are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections shall be established by the director of public works based upon his determination of the potential health hazards involved and in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code. Any unprotected cross connections identified by the inspection shall be promptly corrected. Failure to promptly correct an unprotected cross connection shall be sufficient cause for the water utility to discontinue water service to the property, as provided under paragraph (e) of this section. From time to time the common council will establish a fee schedule determining applicable rates and circumstances whereby property owners may be charged fees for failure to comply in a reasonable and timely fashion. 
(1)  Right-of-entry. Upon presentation of credentials, one or more representatives of the city shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a connection to the public water system for the purpose of inspecting the property for cross connections. Refusing entry to such city representative/s shall be sufficient cause for the water utility to discontinue water service to the property, as provided under paragraph (e) of this section. If entry is refused, a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119 may be obtained. 
(2)  Release of information. Upon request by the city, the owner, lessee and/or occupant of any property served by a connection to the public water system shall furnish to the city any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. Refusing to provide requested information shall be sufficient cause for the water utility to discontinue water service to the property, as provided under paragraph (e) of this section. 
(e)  Discontinuation of service. The city water utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this chapter exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. 
(1)  By notice. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. ch. 68, except as provided below. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Emergency discontinuance. If it is determined by the city that a cross connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare, and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the city clerk and delivered to the customer's premises, water service may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Wis. Stats. ch. 68 within ten days of such emergency discontinuance. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the unprotected cross connection has been eliminated. 
(f)  State plumbing code. For purposes of this chapter, the city hereby adopts by reference the state plumbing code, currently Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 382. 
(Code 1991, § 8.109; Ord. No. 2016-1088 , 8-23-2016) 
Secs. 38-2-38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 38-21. - Purpose. 
    It is determined and declared necessary to adopt rules governing the construction, use, maintenance and operation of the city water system, and to levy and collect revenue against property to which connection has been made to the water system, in order to provide for the cost of construction, operation, maintenance and replacement of the system. This article regulates the installation, use and abandonment of public and private wells, the use of the water system, and the creation and maintenance of connections to the city system. It provides for and explains the method used for levying and collecting service charges and fees, and it enables the city to comply with administrative provisions that are required or authorized by the state and/or federal law. By regulating, through this article, the use of the water system, the city intends to achieve the maximum public benefit from the water system by operating a safe, efficient, and cost-effective system. 
(Code 1991, § 8.101) 
Sec. 38-22. - Establishment. 
    The city water utility is hereby created and all wells, reservoirs, hydrants, water pipes and other apparatus used in the delivery of water service throughout the city are hereby recognized as being managed and controlled by the water utility, under the control and direction of the common council, pursuant to this article and state law. 
(Code 1991, § 8.102) 
Sec. 38-23. - Public service commission rules. 
    The terms, conditions, rules, regulations and rates established by the state public service commission for the city water utility, as contained in the rate file for the city water utility, including any and all future revisions or amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and, by reference, made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by said rate file is required or prohibited by this article, in addition to the acts required or prohibited by Wis. Admin. Code ch. PSC 185. 
(Code 1991, § 8.103) 
Sec. 38-24. - Compliance with rules. 
    All persons now receiving a water supply from the city water utility, or who may hereafter make application therefore and/or receive such water supply, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by the aforesaid rules and regulations contained in the city water utility rate file as filed with the state public service commission, including any and all future amendments, revisions or modifications thereof. 
(Code 1991, § 8.104) 
Sec. 38-25. - Mandatory hookup. 
    The owner of each parcel of land, which is located within the city, which is adjacent to a city water main, and which has pipes, wells or plumbing for the delivery of water, shall connect the plumbing in such building to the city water system and shall comply with all other terms and conditions of this article within 90 days of receiving notice in writing from the city. Upon failure to hook onto the city water system, the city may cause such connection to be made and bill the property owner for the cost thereof. If such costs are not paid within 60 days, such costs shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.45. 
(Code 1991, § 8.106) 
Sec. 38-26. - Service within city limits. 
    The design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement costs of the water system are paid: 
(1)  By the fees and charges paid by its customers; and 
(2)  By the general real estate taxes paid by the property owners of the city. 
Therefore, it is the policy of the city not to provide connections to or service for property and structures which are located outside of the city and which do not pay city real estate taxes. Therefore, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0813(3), no building or property located outside of the city corporate limits shall be connected to the water system, without the express permission of the common council. Any existing connection to property outside the corporate limits shall not create any obligation or precedent binding upon the city to permit similar connections for other property located outside of the city limits. 
(Code 1991, § 8.107) 
Secs. 38-27-38-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Sewers, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.15, 62.175, 62.18. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ammonia nitrogen (NH 3 -N) means one of the oxidation states of nitrogen, in which nitrogen is combined with hydrogen in molecular form as NH 3 or in ionized form as NH 4 . Quantitative determination of ammonia nitrogen shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods. 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building's drainage system that receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning approximately five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer . See Sewer lateral. 
    Chemical elements and compounds. Chemical elements and compounds that are typically found in sewage and may be regulated by this article include: 
Ammonia nitrogen NH 3 Arsenic As Cadmium Cd Copper Cu Chromium Cr Cyanide Cn Lead Pb Mercury Hg Nickel Ni Nitrogen N Phosphorus P Radium Ra Zinc Zn  
    Commercial customer means any person or entity whose water and/or sewer meter services any of the following: 
(1)  Any retail business, including, but not limited to, the businesses listed as permitted uses in the C-1 or C-2 zoning districts, excluding industrial customers, governmental entities, and religious or nonprofit customers; 
(2)  Any multiple-family dwelling which is not owner-occupied; or 
(3)  Any multiple-family dwelling having five or more dwelling units, regardless of whether any unit is owner-occupied. 
    Compatible pollutants means sewage with pollutants which contain an amount of biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, phosphorus, nitrogen, or pH, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES permit, which the sewage treatment plant was designed to safely and efficiently treat without adversely affecting or disrupting the treatment process, the effluent quality or sludge quality of the system. 
    Customer or user means a person who leases and/or owns property which is connected to the sewage system. 
    Customer charges means charges levied to customers of the sewerage system as part of the sewer service charge for financing of operation and maintenance costs of such facilities. 
    Debt service charge means all costs associated with repayment of debts incurred for the construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater collection system and treatment facilities. 
    DPW means the director of public works or his designee. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables and condemned food and other vegetable and animal matter. 
    Ground garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such degree that all particulates are no greater than one-half inch in any dimension and will be carried freely in suspension under normal flow conditions in sewers. 
    Governmental entity means any person or entity whose water and/or sewer meter services a governmental entity, including, but not limited to, The United States of America, the state, county, WWTC, public schools, U.S. Post Office, or other governmental agencies and subdivisions. 
    Incompatible pollutants means sewage containing pollutants that the sewage treatment plant was not designed to safely and efficiently treat or that will adversely affect or disrupt the wastewater treatment processes, effluent quality or sludge quality if discharged to the wastewater facilities. 
    Industrial customers means any person or entity whose water and/or sewer meter services any building or parcel used for industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, the manufacturing, growing, storage or assembly of products, or for any of the conditional uses identified in the industrial or manufacturing zoning districts. 
    Industrial waste means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial or manufacturing establishment or process, or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, but not including normal domestic sewage, cooling water, or discharge from pretreatment facilities. 
    Licensed disposer means any person or entity holding a valid license to do septage servicing under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 141. 
    Lift station means the structures located throughout the city which are connected to the sewerage system and which are designed to collect sewage by gravity flow at a low level, and then to lift or pump the sewage to a higher level to then be carried by the public sewers to the sewer plant. 
    May means permissible, not mandatory. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means a weight-to-weight ratio; the milligrams per liter value (mg/l) multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Normal concentration means sewage which does not exceed the following concentrations: 
(1)  A five-day, 20 degrees Celsius BOD of not more than 250 mg/l; 
(2)  A suspended solids content of not more than 250 mg/l; 
(3)  A total Kjeldahl nitrogen content of not more than 25 mg/l; or 
(4)  A total phosphorus content of not more than mg/l. 
    Normal domestic sewage or normal sewage means sanitary sewage produced from the range of normal domestic activities, typically conducted in a single-family residence, in which BOD or suspended solids concentrations do not exceed normal concentrations. 
    Operation and maintenance costs means all costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the public sewage system, as well as the costs associated with temporary or periodic treatment facilities. These costs, including costs associated with clear water flows, shall be divided proportionately among the various classes of sewer customers. 
    Person means any and all persons or entities, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, partnership, limited liability company, church or other religious institution, school, government agency or other entity. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 -7. . 
    Pretreatment means an arrangement of devices and structures designed for the preliminary treatment and processing of wastewater to render such wastewater acceptable for admission to the public sewers. 
    Private on-site systems means all privately owned facilities for storage, pumping, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage, including, but not limited to, septic systems, holding tanks, mound systems, privies, privy vaults, cesspools, or other private facilities designed and/or used for the storage or treatment of sewage. 
    Private sewer means the sanitary sewers owned, operated, maintained and controlled by persons or entities other than the city, usually located outside of a public right-of-way or public easement. Except as provided in this article, the city shall not be responsible for the design, construction, operation and/or maintenance of such sewer. Private sewers typically include sewer laterals and building drains which are properly connected, with permission of the city, to the public sewer. 
    Public customer means any customer discharging normal sewage whose premises are owned by a governmental entity, private or public school, church, hospital, health care facility, philanthropic, patriotic, benevolent or fraternal organization. 
    Public sewer means the sanitary sewers owned, operated, maintained and controlled by the city, primarily consisting of the common sanitary sewers within the sewage system that are installed to receive sewage directly from facilities through private sewers which convey sewage from individual structures. Public sewers include service connection wye fittings designed for connection with those facilities. The facilities which convey sewage from individual structures to the public sewer are specifically excluded from this definition; except that pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of structures may be included as part of the Public sewers when such units are cost-effective and are owned and maintained by the city pursuant to written agreement. 
    Replacement costs means those expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the sewage system to maintain the capacity and performance for which such system was designed and constructed. 
    Residential customer means any person or entity whose water and/or sewer meter services any of the following: 
(1)  Any single-family residence; 
(2)  Any multiple-family dwelling having five or less dwelling units, at least one of which is owner-occupied; 
(3)  Mobile homes metered as individual customers; or 
(4)  Dwelling units in apartments or condominiums metered as individual customers. 
    Sand Ridge treatment facility means the secure treatment facility in the city, owned and operated by the state, for placement of Wis. Stats. ch. 980 commitments. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and into which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septage means the contents of septic or holding tanks, dosing chambers, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches, mound systems, privies or portable restrooms. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, including normal sewage and industrial waste, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. Sewage includes normal sewage and industrial waste. 
    Sewage treatment plant or sewer plant means the structures containing fixtures and equipment used to collect, store, treat and dispose of sewage, including the facilities commonly known as the main lift station, treatment lagoons, chemical feed building, and blower buildings. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer department means the sewer division of the department of public works. 
    Sewer lateral or building sewer means sewer pipe from a building drain to the public sewer. Except as specifically provided in this article, the city shall not be responsible for the design, construction, operation and/or maintenance of laterals. 
    Sewerage system or sanitary sewerage system means all publicly owned facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage, including, but not limited to, sewer mains, manholes, lift stations, sewer plants and treatment lagoons, but not including privately owned facilities such as building drains, sewer laterals, and private on-site systems. 
    Slug means any substance released at a discharge rate and/or concentration that causes interference to wastewater treatment processes or plugging or surcharging of the sewerage system, including, but not limited to, any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in any given concentration or quantity of flow exceeds, for any period longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes", published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water, groundwater, drainage, unpolluted cooling water and other unpolluted water, excluding sewage and industrial waste. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids that either float on the surface of or are suspended in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering, as prescribed in Standard Methods, and which are referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Toxic discharges means a discharge into the sewers containing a substance or mixture of substances which, through sufficient exposure, or ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation by an organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through the food chain, will, on the basis of information available to the city, cause death, disease, behavioral or immunological abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, or developmental or physiological malfunctions, including malfunctions in reproduction or physical deformations, in such organisms or their offspring. 
    WPDES permit means a Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Eliminator System permit, issued per Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 210. 
(Code 1991, § 8.202) 
Sec. 38-57. - Penalties. 
(a)  Consent by use. The rules, regulations, and sewer rates of the city, shall be considered a part of the contract with every person or entity connected to or using the sanitary sewerage system, and every such person or entity by connecting to or using the sanitary sewerage system shall be deemed to have thereby expressed their assent to be bound by said rules, regulations and rates. 
(b)  Inspections. The director of public works or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter all properties, public or private, served by the city sanitary sewerage system, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or enforcement of the rules and regulations of this article. The director of public works or his authorized agent shall also be permitted to enter all private property upon which the city holds an easement for the construction, maintenance or operation of a sewer, provided all such entry and subsequent work shall be performed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the easement. 
(c)  Damage to property. No person shall cause damage to any structure, appurtenance, facility or equipment which is a part of the public sewerage system, nor shall any person, through their use of the sewage system, cause damage to any water body receiving effluent from the sewage system. Any person who willfully, wantonly or intentionally causes such damage shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in chapter 1, article II. Nothing herein shall limit the city's right to seek compensation for the damages otherwise caused through any means authorized by law, in addition to any penalty imposed for the same damage. 
(d)  Mandatory hook-up. The city shall give the owner of any structure required to hook-up to the public sanitary sewer under section 38-60, written notice requiring such hook-up within 90 days from the date of said notice. Upon failure of the property to hook-up, the city may choose one of the following remedies: 
(1)  City performs work. The city may cause such connection to be made and bill the property owner for such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days, such costs shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property; however, the property owner may, within 30 days after the completion of the work, file a written option with the city council stating that he cannot pay such amount in one sum and requesting that the city levy said sum in equal installments, not to exceed ten, and that the amount be so collected with interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the completion of the work, with the unpaid balance being a special tax lien, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 218.45. 
(2)  Fine. The city may impose a penalty in the amount established by the city for the period that the violation continues. Upon failure to make such payment, said charge shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 218.45. 
(e)  Shut off. Whenever any of these rules and regulations, or such others as the city council may hereinafter adopt, are violated, the use of the sewerage system by the offending customer may, in the city's sole discretion and in addition to all of the other remedies authorized herein, be shut off from the building or place of such violation, even though two or more parties are receiving service through the same connection, and shall not be re-established except upon payment of all arrears, the expenses and charges of shutting off and putting on, the payment of all damages to the public sewerage system and on such other terms as the city may determine, and upon a satisfactory understanding with the party that no further cause for complaint shall arise. 
(f)  Continuing violations. Each day a violation occurs or continues to occur shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(g)  Other penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, except subsection (b) of this section, shall be subject to the penalties provided in chapter 1, article II. The city may, but need not, serve an offender with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and stating a time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease and correct such violation. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in the written notice shall be subject to the penalties provided in chapter 1, article II. 
(h)  Appeals. Any customer, affected by any decision, action, or determination (except decisions of the circuit court), including cease and desist orders, made by the city in interpreting or implementing the provisions of this article, may file with the city public works committee a written request for reconsideration within ten days of the date of such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the customer's request for reconsideration. The committee shall render a decision on the request for reconsideration to the customer in writing within 15 days of receipt of the request. If the ruling on the request for reconsideration made by the committee is unsatisfactory, the person requesting reconsideration may, within ten days after notification of the action, file a written appeal with the city council. A fee as established by the city shall accompany any appeal to the council. This fee shall be refunded if the appeal is sustained in favor of the appellant. 
(Code 1991, § 8.223) 
Sec. 38-58. - Purpose. 
    It is determined and declared necessary to adopt rules governing the construction, use, maintenance and operation of the city sanitary sewage system, and to levy and collect revenue against property to which connection has been made to the sewage system, in order to provide for the cost of construction, operation, maintenance and replacement of the sewage system. This article regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains, the discharge of septage into the sewage system, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the sewage systems within the city. It provides for and explains the method used for levying and collecting service charges and fees; it provides a means for determining sewage and septage volumes, strengths, constituents and characteristics; it sets uniform requirements for discharges into the sewage system; and it enables the city to comply with administrative provisions and other discharge criteria that are required or authorized by the state and/or federal law. By regulating, through this article, the characteristics of sewage discharged into the system, the city intends to achieve the maximum public benefit from the sewage system by operating a safe, efficient, and cost-effective system. 
(Code 1991, § 8.201) 
Sec. 38-59. - Establishment of sewer utility. 
    The city sewer utility is hereby created and all sanitary sewers, lift stations, sewage treatment plants, and other equipment, apparatus and appurtenances relating thereto which are used for the disposal and/or treatment of sanitary sewage throughout the city, are hereby recognized as being managed and controlled by the city department of public works, under the control and supervision of the common council, pursuant to this article and state law. 
(Code 1991, § 8.204) 
Sec. 38-60. - Regulations for the use of the public sewer. 
(a)  Required use . All residences, buildings, institutions, churches, schools, industrial establishments, and other structures located within the city corporate limits which generate sewage shall be connected to the city sewage system, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Private on-site systems . No person shall construct or maintain a private on-site system after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except as follows: 
(1)  The owner of property located beyond the reach of the existing public sewage system may petition the city council for approval of a private on-site system, and such approval may be granted, in the sole discretion of the city council, where the extension of the public sewer will place an unusual burden upon the city, the sewer department or the property owner. Such private on-site system, if approved, shall meet all other state codes and local ordinances. 
(2)  The owner of property located within the reach of the public sewer may petition the city council for continued use of a private on-site system, where the private on-site system was constructed prior to the annexation of the property to the city or was constructed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section. The city council may approve such petition if the private on-site system has been tested by an independent, qualified tester and has been determined to be in good working order. 
(3)  All private on-site systems not complying with subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section shall be abandoned and thereafter the property shall be connected to and serviced by the public sewer. 
(c)  Service outside city limits. The design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement costs of the sewage system are paid: 
(1)  By the fees and charges paid by its customers; and 
(2)  By the general real estate taxes paid by the property owners of the city. 
Therefore, it is the policy of the city not to provide connections to or service for property and structures which are located outside of the city and which do not pay city real estate taxes. Therefore, no building or property located outside of the city corporate limits shall be connected to the public sewer, without the express permission of the common council. Any existing connection to property outside the corporate limits shall not create any obligation or precedent binding upon the city to permit similar connections for other property located outside of the city limits. Furthermore, if the city reconstructs an existing sewer main, property and structures located outside of the city limits may not reconnect to the new sewer main. Moreover, no sewage or waste generated in whole or in part at any site located outside of the city corporate limits shall be deposited into the city sewage system, except as authorized by written contract approved by the common council. 
(d)  Prohibited connections. The following connections and uses are prohibited, except by the express written approval of the common council: 
(1)  Stormwater. No person shall construct or maintain a sewer lateral or other device which discharges or causes to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof run off, subsurface drainage or other drainage water into the sewage system. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, roof-leaders, surface drains, groundwater drains, foundation footing drains, sump pumps, and any other clear water drains which discharge into the sewage system. 
(2)  Septage. No person shall construct or maintain any connection to the public sewer which connection discharges or causes to be discharged septage from any source. No person or entity shall permit any other person or entity to discharge septage into the public sewer through a building drain, sewer lateral, private sewer or other connection to the public sewer which is not approved in writing by the city. 
(3)  Discharge locations. No person shall construct or maintain a private sewer or other device which permits or causes the discharge of any sewage into the city's storm sewer system or into the Lemonweir River or into any other repository not authorized by this article or state law. 
(4)  Non-point generated sewage. No person or entity shall permit any other person or entity to discharge sewage into the public sewer through a building drain, lateral or other connection to the public sewer, which sewage was not generated on the site where the discharge is occurring. 
(5)  Private on-site systems. No private on-site systems shall be connected to the public sewer. 
(e)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any waste or other substance that is dangerous to the public health or safety, or that can harm the public sewer, sewer plant, lift stations, sewage treatment process, or any other part of the city's sewage system or that can have an adverse effect on the receiving streams. Sewage discharged into the sewage system shall not: 
(1)  Contain any gasoline, antifreeze, motor oil, brake fluid, transmission fluid, hydraulic fluid, oil-based paint, paint thinners, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, or other pollutant that creates a fire or explosion hazard in the system, including, but not limited to, pollutants that result in wastewater with a closed cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Contain pollutants that will cause corrosive structural damage to the sewerage system, including, but not limited to, discharges with a pH lower than 5.0 s.u. or greater than 9.0 s.u. 
(3)  Contain any solid or viscous substances which could cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewer or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage system, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, grease, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, sanitary napkins or disposable diapers, either whole or ground. 
(4)  Contain any liquid or vapor having a temperature that will inhibit biological activity in the sewage system, but in no case having a temperature higher than 120 degrees Fahrenheit unless the system is designed to accommodate higher temperatures. 
(5)  Contain any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances in excess of 0.005 parts per million. 
(6)  Contain arsenic, cadmium, copper, chromium, cyanide, lead, mercury, nickel, zinc or other toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed the limitation set forth in special agreements, or in state or federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
(7)  Contain hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide gases in excess of ten parts per million. 
(8)  Contain substances which solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 through 65 degrees Celsius). 
(9)  Have chlorine demand greater than 15 parts per million. 
(10)  Contain any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
(11)  Contain any other solid, liquid or gaseous substance identified by the Environmental Protection Agency or any other state or federal agency as being a hazardous waste, such as those wastes included in the most current federal register listing of hazardous wastes. 
(12)  Contain waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed by the city, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewer plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(13)  Contain PCB waste or radioactive waste. 
(14)  Contain any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair. 
(15)  Contain any substance that may cause the sewage system's effluent, treatment residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
(16)  Contain any substance that will cause violations of the WPDES and/or other disposal system permits. 
(17)  Contain any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(18)  Contain any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, non-contact cooling water. 
(19)  Contain any sewage or wastewaters that may be acutely or chronically toxic to aquatic life or wild and domestic animals. 
(20)  Contain a toxic discharge. 
(21)  Contain garbage which has not been reduced to ground garbage. 
(f)  Limitations on sewage strength. 
(1)  National standards. National categorical pretreatment standards, as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial categories. 
(2)  State standards. State requirements and limitations on all facilities shall be met by all dischargers, which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than other applicable requirements. 
(3)  Dilution. No customer shall increase the use of water, nor mix separate waste streams, for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment or pretreatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this article, unless approved in writing by the city. 
(4)  Supplementary limitations. No customer shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations of the following enumerated materials exceeding the following values unless prior approval is granted by the city: 
Material Concentration 
(mg/l) Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 250 mg/l Suspended Solids (SS) 250 mg/l Fats, oil and grease (FOG) 100 mg/l Phosphorus (P) 7 mg/l  
(5)  Mass limitations. The city may impose mass limitations on all or any class of customers where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate by the city council. The city may also impose mass limitations on customers that are using dilution, with city approval, to meet the requirements of this article. 
(g)  Control of harmful discharges. If any sewage, waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the sanitary sewerage system, which sewage, waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsections (e) or (f) of this section, or which, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage system, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which in the judgment of the city may create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes, by blockage if necessary, after reasonable notification is given to the customer. 
(2)  Require pretreatment, at the customer's expense, to transform such sewage into an acceptable condition before discharge into the public sewer. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
(5)  Require installation of a sampling manhole. 
(6)  Require the construction of additional facilities to prevent the accidental discharge of prohibited materials into the sewage system. 
(7)  Require the execution of an agreement, which may include any of the foregoing requirements, plus whatever additional requirements, payments, limitations, guarantees, representations, or protections the city deems appropriate. 
(8)  Require the customer to install, operate, maintain, monitor, and clean grease, oil, and/or sand interceptors, commonly called grease traps, at the customer's cost, at a location approved by the city which is readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining these interceptors, the customer shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain records, for the city's review, of the dates and means of cleaning and disposal. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the customer must be performed by properly licensed disposal firms. 
(h)  Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Liability. Each customer shall be responsible for and shall provide protection from accidental discharges of prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this article. Where necessary in the city's discretion, facilities to prevent additional discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the customer's cost and expense. Upon request, detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and the city may require modifications to such facilities and procedures to protect against accidental discharges. Review and approval of such plans and procedures by the city shall not relieve the customer from total responsibility for accidental discharges, nor shall it make the city liable therefore. 
(2)  Notification. Customers shall notify the city immediately upon the occurrence of a slug load or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this article. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Any person who discharges a slug load or prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the city's sewerage system, in addition to the amount of any forfeitures imposed on the city on account thereof under state or federal law. 
(3)  Signs. Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on industrial customer's premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures. 
(Code 1991, § 8.205) 
Sec. 38-61. - Sewer connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall uncover, use, alter, disturb, make connection with or opening into, any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit therefor. 
(b)  State code. All work performed on the sewerage system shall comply with the state plumbing code and all other applicable codes. 
(c)  Application. An application for a permit shall be filed with the department of public works at city hall, upon forms furnished by the city. The director of public works shall determine which permit is applicable, and is authorized to make such investigation and obtain such information as is determined necessary to evaluate and issue a permit. 
(d)  Reports. Each person desiring to make a new connection to a public sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall prepare and file with the city a report that shall include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity, strength and characteristics of the sewage to be discharged. 
(e)  Fees. 
(1)  Connection charge. The applicant shall pay a sewer connection charge to the city to defray the costs of processing the permit and conducting the necessary inspections. The sewer connection charge shall as established by the city. This fee shall be paid when the application for a permit is filed with the city. 
(2)  Diagram deposit. At the time the permit for sewer connection is filed with the city, a deposit in an amount established by the city shall also be paid. The deposit shall be refunded after final inspection and approval of the sewer connection, and submission by the applicant of an engineer's diagram of the location and depth of the completed connection, sewer lateral and other required appurtenances. If the applicant fails to comply with the requirements of this article, or if the applicant fails to submit the required engineer's diagram within 30 days following the final inspection of the sewer connection, said deposit shall be forfeited. The forfeiture of this deposit shall not limit or prevent the city from pursuing any other penalties authorized herein or recovering any expenses incurred by the city due to the applicant's failure to comply herewith. 
(3)  Other fees. A fee in the amount established by the city shall be paid for all other permits. 
(f)  Design. The design and construction of sewer laterals and their connection to the public sewer shall be performed by and under the direction of a licensed plumber authorized by the owner of the property. Such plumber shall keep accurate records of the location, depth and length of sewer lateral as built in the location of the wye-branch, slants and all appurtenances thereto. All costs of such plumbing and recordkeeping shall be the responsibility of the applicant. After final inspection and approval of the sewer connection, said plumber shall submit a detailed diagram of the location, depth and length of the sewer lateral, wye-branch or slants and all other appurtenances as built. 
(g)  Construction specifications. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a sewer lateral and all connections and appurtenances thereto, and the methods to be used in excavating and backfilling the trench, and placing, joining, and testing the pipe and all other appurtenances, shall all conform to the requirements of applicable city and state building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. sewer mains should always be tapped on top, and not within six inches (15 cm) of the joint, or within 24 inches (60 cm) of another lateral connection. Lateral connections to existing sewers shall be made into saddles and by coring the existing sewer or by inserting (cutting-in) a wye or tee into the existing sewer. Unless authorized by the director of public works, the wye or tee shall be of the same pipe material as the existing sewer. The lateral/tee connection shall be made with approved adaptors or couplings. 
(h)  Licensed plumbers. No plumber, pipefitter, or other person will be permitted to perform any plumbing or pipe fitting work in connection with the sanitary sewerage system without first receiving a license from the state. 
(i)  Elevations . Whenever possible, the sewer lateral shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such sewer lateral shall be lifted by a means approved by the director of public works, and discharged to the sewer lateral. 
(j)  Old laterals. Old sewer laterals may be used to service new buildings only when such laterals are found to meet all requirements of this article. 
(k)  Independent laterals. A separate and independent sewer lateral shall be provided for every building, unless otherwise permitted in writing by the common council. 
(l)  Inspections. The applicant shall notify the DPW when the sewer lateral and/or all appurtenances thereto are ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the DPW or his designee. 
(m)  Construction costs. All costs and expenses incident to the construction, installation, connection and inspection of a sewer lateral to the public sewer shall be borne by the applicant. The applicant shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the work on the sewer lateral. 
(n)  City property only . Only property and structures located within the city limits may be connected or reconnected to the sewerage system. 
(Code 1991, § 8.209) 
Sec. 38-62. - Metering and monitoring of use. 
(a)  Metering required . The owner of every connection to the public sewer is hereby required to install a metering manhole, a water meter on a private well, and/or a water meter on a connection to the city water system in order to provide the city with an accurate measurement by which to determine the sewer service charge. The director of public works shall determine what measuring device is necessary. 
(b)  Exemption water meters. Exemption water meters shall be handled pursuant to the regulations of the city PSC rate file and all amendments thereto. 
(c)  Waste meters. Devices for metering the volume of waste discharged may be required by the city if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined by the use of water meters or exemption water meters. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be purchased, installed, owned and maintained by the person required to install the waste meter. The type of meter and metering arrangement shall be approved by the city. Such meters may not be removed without the consent of the city. 
(d)  Monitoring of industrial wastes. 
(1)  Existing customers. Existing customers discharging industrial wastes to the sewage system shall install a sampling manhole and shall install recording, sampling and flow measuring equipment, when it is determined by the director of public works that monitoring of the industrial waste is necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  New customers. All new industrial services connected to the sewage system and all new occupants of industrial property already connected to the sewage system, that may discharge a sewage above normal concentration, shall install a sampling manhole, when it is determined by the director of public works that monitoring of the industrial waste is necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Costs. The cost of installing and maintaining the sampling manhole and equipment shall be borne by the customer. The sampling equipment shall be operated by and the cost of collecting samples shall be paid by the city. The cost of analysis of the samples shall be assessed to and paid by the customer. 
(e)  Reporting requirements. Upon request by the city, each person who discharges sewage to a public sewer shall prepare and file with the city, a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the quantity, strength and characteristics of the sewage discharged to the sewage system. The city shall be notified 60 days in advance of any plans that change the discharge by more than 15 percent of flow or strength. 
(f)  Analyses. 
(1)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of sewage, water, waste, and/or septage to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the city. 
(2)  Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial wastewater shall be made by the person discharging them or their agent, as designated and required by the city. The city may also make its own analyses of the wastes and these determinations shall be used as a basis for charges. If the person discharging the waste contests the determination, the city may elect to have an independent laboratory determine the character and concentration of the waste. Said independent laboratory shall be certified under Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 149 and be acceptable to both the city and the customer discharging the waste. All costs incurred by the independent laboratory in making the determination shall be assumed by the customer. 
(Code 1991, § 8.206) 
Sec. 38-63. - Unique customers. 
(a)  Special agreements. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any commercial, public, private or industrial entity whereby sewage or other waste of unusual volume, strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the unique customer. The city at any time hereafter, may establish additional rates for any large or otherwise unique customer that does not readily fit into other customer categories. The city may also require the unique customer to supply a performance bond and insurance in a manner acceptable to the city. Moreover, the city may choose to terminate or restrict any such agreement whenever the sewage system has operational problems, maintenance problems or discharge problems. 
(b)  Septage disposal. 
(1)  Applications. Between August 1 and September 1 of each year, each licensed disposer wishing to discharge septage to the city sewage system shall file a nonrefundable filing fee and an application in writing to the city clerk on such form as may be prescribed for that purpose. The application must state fully and truly the type, frequency, quantity, quality and location of generated septage to be disposed. 
(2)  Council action. During the month of September, the city council will evaluate the applications and make a determination as to the amount and conditions of septage disposal. The city council shall approve or reject all applications by October 1 of each year. If the city cannot accept all the proposed septage disposal, then consideration shall be given first to those generators of septage that are within the sewer service or holding tank service areas. 
(3)  Bond. The person or party disposing waste shall furnish bond to the city in the amount of $1,000.00 to guarantee performance. Said performance bond shall be delivered to the city clerk prior to the issuance of the permit hereunder. 
(4)  Insurance. The applicant shall carry public liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00 to protect any and all persons or property from injury and/or damage caused in any way or manner by any act, or failure to act, by any of his employees. The applicant shall furnish a certificate certifying such insurance to be in full force and effect. 
(5)  Service interruption. All approvals for septage disposal shall be granted on the condition that, if at any time the sewage system has operational problems, maintenance problems or threat of WPDES permit violations which are indirectly or directly related to septage disposal, the city may immediately restrict, suspend or terminate septage disposal until such time as corrective action or mitigative measures have been taken. 
(6)  Disposal location. Septage shall only be discharged to the city's sewage system by city-approved and state-licensed disposers and at locations, times and conditions as specified by the city council. All septage discharges shall be at the receiving facility at the main lift station, except septage discharges to specified manholes may, under special circumstances, be allowed by written permission, provided discharge rates are restricted as necessary to facilitate mixing, to prevent backup in the receiving sewer and to prevent a slug load to the system. Discharges shall be limited to the posted, normal working hours of the facility and be approved in advance of each such discharge. 
(7)  Reports. Documentation of all discharges shall be submitted to the city clerk within one working day of the discharge. The forms prescribed for the purpose of documentation of the discharge will be furnished at the city clerk's office and will include the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the hauler; 
b.  License number; 
c.  Type of septage; 
d.  Quantity of septage; 
e.  Estimated quality of septage; 
f.  Location, date, time and feed rate of discharge; 
g.  Source of septage; 
h.  Name and address of septage generator; and 
i.  Other information as required by the city. 
(8)  Septage discharges. Septage discharged to the sewage system shall be of domestic origin only and septic tank wastes shall be segregated from holding tank wastes. 
(9)  Charges. Charges for septage disposal shall be calculated as set forth in section 38-61. The city may require partial or full payment in advance of dumping. 
(10)  Monitoring/testing. The city may require the disposer to sample and test loads before dumping into the sewage system. The disposer will be liable for damages caused by the dumping of any substance prohibited or restricted by this article. 
(11)  Applicable rules. To the extent applicable, the disposer shall comply with all the terms and conditions of this article applicable to other customers. 
(Code 1991, § 8.208) 
Sec. 38-64. - Sewer extensions. 
(a)  Requests. Any person wishing to extend any public sewer or appurtenance thereof may apply to the city for such extension. The regulations applicable to sewer connections shall be followed to the extent applicable. 
(b)  Decision . The common council shall decide, on a case-by-case basis, whether to grant the request for an extension, giving appropriate consideration to location, costs, budgets, work schedules, etc. Prior practices shall not establish any precedent. 
(c)  Assessments. In addition to any other procedures permitted by law, the city may also use one of the following procedures to pay for the extensions of sewers: 
(1)  Statutory assessment. The city may collect the cost of the extension by imposing an assessment against the abutting property and/or against the area benefitted, pursuant to the procedures of Wis. Stats. ch. 66, subch. VII (Wis. Stats. § 66.0701 et seq.). 
(2)  Customer-financed. Where the city is unwilling or unable to impose an assessment under subsection (c)(1) of this section, the extension may be made on a customer-financed basis as follows: 
a.  The customer desiring sewer service shall advance, as a contribution in and of construction, the total amount equal to that which would have been assessed for all property under subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
b.  Part of the contribution required under subsection (c)(1) of this section will be refundable. When additional customers are connected to the new extension within five years of the date of completion, such additional customers shall pay to the city a connection charge equal to the amount which would have been assessed under subsection (c)(1) of this section for the property of the additional customer. This amount will be refunded without interest by the city to the original customer. In no event will the contributions from additional customers exceed the proportionate amount which would have been required under subsection (c)(1) of this section or the total assessable costs of the original extension. 
(3)  Deferred assessment. When the city elects to impose an assessment under subsection (c)(1) of this section, it may postpone the imposition or collection of the assessment until a customer connects to the service, upon such terms and conditions as the common council may determine on a case-by-case basis. 
(Code 1991, § 8.211) 
Sec. 38-65. - Disconnection and refusal of service. 
(a)  When permitted. Sewer utility service may be disconnected or refused for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to pay a delinquent account or failure to comply with the terms of a deferred payment agreement. 
(2)  Failure to comply with deposit requirements. 
(3)  Diversion of service around a meter. 
(4)  Refusal or failure to permit authorized city personnel to read a meter or conduct an inspection. 
(5)  Violation of any provision of this article. 
(6)  Where a dangerous condition exists. 
(b)  Notice. The city shall give a written disconnect notice at least eight calendar days prior to disconnection, except the city may disconnect service without notice where a dangerous condition exists for as long as the condition exists. Notice shall be personally served upon the customer or mailed to the customer's last known address by first class mail. If the billing address is different from the service address, notice shall be posted at each individual dwelling unit of the service address not less than five days before disconnection, and if access is not possible to each dwelling unit, such notice shall be posted at the main entrance to the building. In each case, the city shall make a reasonable effort to have a personal or telephone contact with the customer prior to disconnection. 
(c)  Costs. All costs and expenses incurred by the city in disconnecting sewer service shall be assessed against the real estate affected and collected as a special charge or special assessment. 
(Code 1991, § 8.216) 
Sec. 38-66. - Limitation of liability. 
    No claim shall be made against the city, or its acting representatives, for damages, loss of use, discomfort, diminution of value or other compensation, caused by reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage, or freezing of any public or private sewer or any other part of the sewerage system; nor from any damage arising from any act or omission of the city arising out from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or extension of any part of the sewerage system. The city hereby reserves the right to cut off the service of a customer at any time for the purpose of repairing the system or for any other purpose necessary, in the sole discretion of the city, for the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or extension of any part of the sewerage system, any permit granted or regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the sewer within any district of the city, the city clerk shall, to the extent practicable, give notice thereof to the consumers within the affected area. 
(Code 1991, § 8.222) 
Secs. 38-67-38-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES, CHARGES, SERVICE DEPOSITS, ETC. 

Sec. 38-91. - Sewer service charges. 
(a)  Basis for sewer service charges. The sewer service charge for any lot, parcel of land, building or premises inside or outside the corporate limits shall be based on the quantity and quality of sewage generated, as measured by the water meter and/or sewage meter in use; and on debt service related to the construction and purchase of land, buildings, equipment, pipe and other associated appurtenances for the sanitary sewage system; and on costs related to operation, maintenance and replacement of the sanitary sewerage system. To fairly accommodate these considerations, the sewer service charges are comprised of two parts; a fixed meter charge and a sewer use charge, determined as follows: The fixed meter charge and the sewer use charge shall be sufficient to pay the costs of debt service, operation and maintenance, including any replacement fund, of the wastewater facilities. The city council has provided the initial estimates of number of users, costs, etc., to calculate the first year's user charges. The rates in this division shall be reviewed not less than biennially. Such review will be performed by the city council. Rates shall be adjusted, as required, to reflect the actual number and size of users and actual costs. Users shall be notified annually of the portion of service charges attributable to operation, maintenance, and replacement. 
(b)  Fixed meter charge. A fixed meter charge (FMC) is hereby imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises served by the sewerage system or otherwise discharging sewage, including non-domestic and industrial wastes, into the sewage system. Such charge shall be as established by the city. 
(c)  Sewer use charge. A sewer use charge is hereby imposed on all customers of the sewage system based upon the metered water used thereon or therein, as calculated by the water utility, unless the city authorizes the installation and use of a wastewater flow meter. 
(1)  Calculation. On or before October 15 of each year, the city clerk shall recompute the sewer use charge per 1,000 gallons of water used. This charge shall be computed by dividing the proposed net (total cost less FMC revenue) yearly debt service, operation, maintenance and replacement budget as provided in this division, by the previous year's average billable water usage. 
(2)  Deductions. Any refrigeration, air conditioning/humidification system, industrial cooling water, or similar water not entering the sewerage system shall not be used in computing the sewer use charge if a separate meter is installed. The customer of such system shall be responsible for furnishing, installing and maintaining the necessary meter. 
(3)  Charge categories. Sewer use charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and in an amount established by the city. 
(Code 1991, § 8.212) 
Sec. 38-92. - Payment of sewer service charge. 
(a)  Method of payment. The sewer service charge shall be payable monthly to the city treasurer in such manner as may be directed from time to time by the city council. Such charges may be incorporated onto the bill submitted by other city utilities. Reasonable care will be exercised by the city in the proper delivery of sewer bills. Failure to receive a sewer bill shall not relieve any customer of the responsibility for payment of sewer service charges within the prescribed period, nor exempt the customer from any penalty imposed for delinquency in this payment. 
(b)  Landowner liable. The bills for sewer service charges shall be mailed to the designated utility bill recipient, but this mailing shall not relieve the owner of the property from liability for payment of a bill for rental property in the event payment is not made as required herein. The owner of any property served, which is occupied by tenants, shall have the right to examine collection records of the city for the purpose of determining whether such rates and charges have been paid by such tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office at which the records are kept and during normal business hours. 
(c)  Penalties. A penalty of 1.5 percent per month calculated on the unpaid balance shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed for final payment in accordance with any administrative procedures of payment determined by the city council. 
(d)  Lien for charges. Sewage service charges shall be a lien upon the property served pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0821 and shall be collected in the manner therein provided. Whenever a delinquent charge is placed upon the tax roll, the delinquent charge shall be subject to a ten percent penalty charge in addition to all other charges and interest. 
(Code 1991, § 8.213) 
Sec. 38-93. - Customer deposits. 
(a)  Required. The city may require a cash deposit or other guarantee as a condition of new service or as a condition of continued service if any of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  The credit of the applicant for sewer service has not been established to the satisfaction of the city. 
(2)  The city has shut off or disconnected the service of the customer at any address within the last 24-month period for a violation of the city's rules or for non-payment of any charge. 
(b)  Deposit amount. The amount of the deposit shall be established by the city, but shall not exceed the estimated gross bills for all sewer service, both billed and unbilled, which can be supplied during a three-month period to the customer. 
(c)  Interest. Deposits shall not bear interest. 
(d)  Disposition. A deposit may be used by the city to satisfy any arrearage occurring after the deposit was made. If the city deducts an arrearage from a customer deposit, it may require the customer to bring the deposit up to its original amount. Failure by the customer to do so within 20 days of mailing a written request for payment is grounds for disconnection. The deposit shall be refunded after 24 consecutive months of prompt payment, provided the customer's credit standing is otherwise satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1991, § 8.215) 
Sec. 38-94. - Deferred payment agreement. 
    The sewer utility is authorized to enter into deferred payment agreements, only with residential accounts, upon such terms and conditions as the city may decide. All such deferred payment agreements shall be in writing. 
(Code 1991, § 8.218) 
Sec. 38-95. - Disposition of revenue. 
(a)  Annually before December 15, the clerk shall prepare a budget for the following fiscal year which shall be separated into two sections, the first for operation and maintenance and the second for debt service. This budget shall be submitted to the city council for annual approval. 
(b)  Revenues for the operation and maintenance budget shall be limited to receipts from sewer use charges; municipal sewer use charges; shut off and re-connection charges; connection permit fees; late payment penalties; projected interest earned from investing balances in the operation and maintenance fund; septic tank charges and fees for the transfer of sewage sludge into the system; damage recovery charges paid by a customer for any increased operation, maintenance and replacement costs caused by the customer's discharge; and penalties paid by any person as a part of enforcement of this article or related rules and regulations. 
(c)  Expenditures for the operation and maintenance budget shall include any projected year-end deficit and all costs defined as the actual sums spent by the city in the operation and maintenance of its sewerage system consisting of, but not limited to, each and all of the following purposes: 
(1)  Wages, salaries and employees' related expenses of operation, maintenance, clerical, laboratory, administrative, legal and supervisory personnel, together with fringe benefits and premiums paid on such wages and salaries for the state worker's compensation coverage. 
(2)  Utility expenses (e.g., electrical power, gas, etc.). 
(3)  Supplies, chemicals, materials, machinery and equipment. 
(4)  Insurance costs for providing coverage against hazards and liability for the injury of persons and property. 
(5)  Maintenance and repair costs. 
(6)  Replacement and reconstruction costs. 
(7)  Certain debt service costs assigned by the city to be recovered from flow charges. 
(d)  The amounts received from the collection of charges authorized by this article shall be credited to a sanitary sewer system account that shall show all receipts and expenditures of the system. Charges collected for replacement expenses shall be credited to a segregated, non-lapsing replacement account. These funds are to be used exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by the city council, the credits to the account shall be available for the payment of costs of the system consistent with Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 162. All present outstanding sewerage system general obligation bonds, including refunding bonds, shall be paid from this fund as to both principal and interest. 
(e)  The operation and maintenance budget shall be balanced with the sewer use charge so that projected revenues equal projected expenditures. Revenues for the debt service budget shall include any projected year-end balances in the debt service sinking funds, transfers from the tax incremental financing fund, reserve capacity assessments, sinking fund interest income, and property taxes. Expenditures for the debt service budget shall include principal, interest, premiums, agency fees and other expenses related to debt. Projected revenues for the mortgage revenue bonds portion of the debt service budget shall exceed projected expenditures by at least 25 percent. The city may assign debt costs, as it deems appropriate, to the flow charge component of the rates. 
(f)  The funds received from collection of the sewer service charge shall be credited to a sanitary sewer account. The sanitary sewer account shall be divided into separate funds so that revenues for equipment replacement are segregated from other revenues for operation, maintenance and debt service. The equipment replacement fund shall be used exclusively for the replacement of equipment associated with the sanitary sewerage system. 
(g)  Any surplus remaining after payment of debt service charges, operation and maintenance and replacement costs shall be credited to the following year's operation and maintenance account. Excess revenues collected from a user class will be applied to operation and maintenance costs attributable to that class for the next year. Revenues collected for mortgage revenue bonds shall be credited to appropriate bond accounts. 
(Code 1991, § 8.219) 
Sec. 38-96. - Audit. 
(a)  The city shall conduct an annual audit, the purpose of which shall be to maintain the proportionality between customers and customer classes of the customer charge system and to ensure that adequate revenues are available relative to changing operation, maintenance and replacement costs. 
(b)  The city shall, at least annually, notify the current customers of any change in the portion of customer charges and ad valorem taxes attributable to sewage system services. 
(Code 1991, § 8.221) 
Chapter 40 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Navigable waters, harbors and navigation, Wis. Stats. ch. 30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - State laws adopted. 
    For the protection of life and property through regulation of boat operation and water recreation activities on waters within the corporate boundaries of the city, and in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 30.77(2), the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 30.50-30.71 are adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1991, § 12.60) 
Sec. 40-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be as established by the city. 
(b)  Within ten calendar days of the issued citation, penalties shall be paid in person or mailed to city hall. The cancelled check will serve as the receipt. 
(c)  Unpaid citations shall be forwarded to the municipal court. Violators shall be responsible for all costs incurred to collect this debt, including, but not limited to, legal fees and court costs. 
(d)  The registered owner of any vehicle used to commit a violation of this chapter shall be responsible for citation fees and all associated costs. 
(Code 1991, § 12.66) 
Secs. 40-3-40-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOAT LANDINGS 

Sec. 40-23. - Boat launch fee established. 
(a)  Boat launch fees shall be as established by the city. 
(b)  The daily launch fee shall be paid at the launch site or at city hall during business hours. 
(c)  Annual launch permits are available at city hall during business hours or can be purchased at the launch site by completing the launch permit envelope form; placing the annual permit fee into a site envelope, and depositing said envelope and fee in the launch site drop-box. 
(Code 1991, § 12.61) 
Sec. 40-24. - Information necessary to issue launch permit. 
    The following information shall be included on any launch fee deposit envelope or annual launch permit application: 
(1)  Complete name, address, and phone number of person purchasing launch permit; 
(2)  Date and time of boat launch, or annual launch permit purchase date; 
(3)  Type of permit being purchased; 
(4)  Complete license plate information, including issuing state and plate number, on vehicle towing boat trailer; 
(5)  Instructions for completing and depositing the launch permit fee envelope; 
(6)  Instructions where to place the daily launch permit in the towing vehicle or annual launch permit sticker on the boat trailer; 
(7)  Notice of penalty for non-payment of launch permit fee; 
(8)  Applicable cautionary statements for permit user, permit purchaser, and boat operator; 
(Code 1991, § 12.62) 
Sec. 40-25. - Launch fee regulations. 
(a)  No person shall launch a watercraft from any launch site owned by the city without paying the applicable launch fee established in this article. 
(b)  Any vehicle left at the launch site for more than 24 hours shall pay the daily launch fee for each 24-hour period, or portion thereof. 
(c)  The fee shall be placed in the envelope supplied at the launch sites and placed in the deposit box at each site. 
(d)  The current daily launch permit is to be displayed on the driver's side dashboard so as to be visible through the glass and readable from the outside of the vehicle. 
(e)  The current annual launch permit sticker is to be attached to the tongue of the boat trailer on the driver's side, so as to be visible from a standing position facing the trailer. 
(f)  Permits must be firmly attached using the adhesive provided on the sticker; the use of tape or other temporary adhesives is not permitted. 
(g)  No commercial exclusions; commercial users must obtain an annual launch permit. 
(h)  Government agencies are exempt (DNR, municipal, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, law enforcement, fire services and fish and wildlife). 
(i)  Any attempt to avoid launch fees or display of expired or unauthorized permits, may be grounds for issuance of a municipal citation. 
(j)  The registered owner of any vehicle used to commit a violation of this article shall be responsible for citation fees and associated costs. 
(Code 1991, § 12.63) 
Sec. 40-26. - Signage and payment information. 
    Per Wis. Stats. § 30.77(4), regulations outlined by this article, and instructions for payment of the launch permit fees shall be displayed at each municipal launch site in a legible and weather protected manner. A locked drop box and payment envelopes will be available at each launch site. Additional information pertaining to boating and the boat launch facilities may be posted at the discretion of the director or public works (DPW), or designee. No information shall be posted without the direct consent of the DPW or designee. 
(Code 1991, § 12.64) 
Sec. 40-27. - Revenue collection and disposition. 
(a)  The DPW, or designee, shall be responsible to check the drop box and collect fees deposited at each launch site in a timely manner. 
(b)  A municipal citation may be issued for any vehicles in the parking area that are in violation of this article. 
(c)  All funds deposited in the lock boxes shall be turned over to the city treasurer or designee as quickly as is practical. 
(d)  Launch fees collected shall be maintained in a non-lapsing fund and shall be used to offset expenses incurred for operation and maintenance of the launch sites. 
(Code 1991, § 12.65) 
PART II - LAND DEVELOPMENT 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101-1. - Application of chapter 1. 
    The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this part. 
Sec. 101-2. - Legal status. 
    The provisions of this part are a codification of ordinances pertaining to land development. The provisions of part I of this Code are a codification of other ordinances. The inclusion of an ordinance in part I of this Code that relates to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. The inclusion of an ordinance in this part that does not relate to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. 
Chapter 102 - BUILDING CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Buildings and construction, Wis. Stats. ch. 101. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 320 are incorporated herein by reference. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Addition, in addition to the definition provided by Wis. Admin. Code SPS 320.07(2), the term "addition" includes, but is not limited to, the construction of the following items: 
(1)  Decks made of any material and elevated more than two feet. 
(2)  Balconies. 
(3)  Fireplaces 
    Alteration. See Wis. Admin. Code SPS 320.07(4). 
    Commercial building code (CBC) means those provisions of the state administrative code contained in the following chapters: 
(1)  SPF 360: Erosion control, sediment control and stormwater management. 
(2)  SPF 361: Administration and enforcement. 
(3)  SPF 362: Buildings and structures. 
(4)  SPF 363: Energy conservation. 
(5)  SPF 364: Heating, ventilating and air conditioning. 
(6)  SPF 365: Fuel gas appliances. 
(7)  SPF 366: Existing buildings. 
    Detached building, in addition to the definition provided by Wis. Admin. Code SPS 320.07(24), the term "detached building" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Garages. 
(2)  Storage sheds which are secured to the real estate. 
    Electrical Code means those provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code contained in the following chapters: 
(1)  SPF 316 - Electrical. 
(2)  SPF 324 - Electrical standards. 
    Minor building repair means repairs performed for maintenance or replacement purposes, in any building or structure which do not: 
(1)  Involve the structural portions of the building or structure; 
(2)  Affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, plumbing or electrical systems, access to or efficiency of any existing stairways or exits, or fire protection; or 
(3)  Increase a given occupancy or use, as determined by the building inspector. 
No building permit is required for work deemed to be a minor building repair. 
    Minor electrical work means repair or replacement of broken or defective sockets, convenience outlets, portable electric appliances, hanging light fixtures, and snap, push, or toggle switches, and any other items as determined by the building inspector. No building permit is required for work deemed to be minor electrical work. 
    Multiple-family dwelling means any building which contains three or more dwelling units. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or other legal entity. 
    Plumbing. (See Wis. Stats. § 145.01(10)). 
    Plumbing code means the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 145, and the provisions of the state administrative code, and any future amendments, revisions, or modifications thereto, contained in the following chapters: 
(1)  SPF 325: Plumbing. 
(2)  SPF 381: Definitions and standards. 
(3)  SPF 382: Design, construction, installation, supervision, maintenance and inspection of plumbing. 
(4)  SPF 383: Private on-site wastewater treatment systems. 
(5)  SPF 384: Plumbing products. 
(6)  SPF 385 : Soil and site evaluations. 
(7)  SPF 386: Boat and on-shore sewage facilities. 
(8)  SPF 387: Private on-site wastewater treatment system replacement or rehabilitation financial assistance program. 
    State building code means those sections of the state administrative code which regulate building construction, specifically including, but not limited to, the UDC, the CBC, the plumbing code, and the electrical code. 
    Uniform dwelling code (UDC) means those provisions of the state administrative code contained in the following chapters: 
(1)  SPF 320: Administrative and enforcement. 
(2)  SPF 321: Construction standards. 
(3)  SPF 322: Energy conservation standards. 
(4)  SPF 323: Heating, ventilating and air conditioning. 
(5)  SPF 324: Electrical standards. 
(6)  SPF 325: Plumbing and potable water standards. 
(7)  SPF 328: Smoke detectors. 
(Code 1991, § 17.106) 
Sec. 102-2. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  Exercise jurisdiction over the application of the state building code to the construction and inspection of most new construction; 
(3)  Exercise jurisdiction over the application of the state building code to the construction and inspection of additions and alterations to most existing construction; 
(4)  Establish a permit procedure to monitor, for tax assessment purposes, the construction, extension, removal, alteration and repair of buildings and structures within the city; 
(5)  Establish and collect fees to defray costs; and 
(6)  Provide remedies and penalties for violations. 
(Code 1991, § 17.102) 
Sec. 102-3. - Conflicts. 
    If, in the opinion of the building inspector, the provisions of the codes adopted by this chapter shall conflict with the provisions of the Federal Housing Administration standards in their application to any proposed building or structure, the city shall apply the most stringent provisions in determining whether or not the proposed building meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 17.109) 
Secs. 102-4-102-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-25. - Building inspector. 
    In addition to the duties and powers set forth in section 2-92, the city building inspector shall have the following additional duties and powers under this article: 
(1)  Advise citizens as to the provisions of this article concerning the application of the state uniform building code, and to answer their questions regarding the preparation of permit applications and the interpretation of the building code. 
(2)  Evaluate and administer applications for state uniform building permits to determine compliance with the building code, to issue conditional approvals, to conduct inspections, to issue certificates of occupancy, to administer and issue state uniform building permits, and to prepare and submit the city's recommendation regarding any application for a variance. 
(3)  Keep records as required by the department of commerce of all approvals, permits, and certificates issued, refused, and revoked, inspections made, and other official actions and administrative tasks. 
(4)  Have access to all buildings, structures, or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties. 
(5)  Investigate violations, serve notices of violations, and report violations to the city. 
(Code 1991, § 17.400) 
Sec. 102-26. - Zoning administrator. 
    In addition to the duties and powers set forth in section 2-93, the city zoning administrator shall have the following duties and powers under this article: 
(1)  Advise citizens as to the provisions of this article which do not deal with the state building code, and to answer their questions regarding applications and other documents required herein, specifically including questions about city improvement permits. 
(2)  Evaluate and administer applications for city improvement permits. 
(3)  Keep records regarding city improvement permits, and forward copies thereof to the city assessor. 
(4)  Have access to all buildings, structures, or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties. 
(5)  Investigate violations, serve notices of violations, and report violations to the city. 
(Code 1991, § 17.401) 
Sec. 102-27. - Records. 
    The city clerk shall maintain copies of all applications, permits, and certificates generated through the foregoing procedures. The city building inspector shall also maintain copies of the foregoing documents, plus records of inspections. 
(Code 1991, § 17.411) 
Sec. 102-28. - Variances. 
(a)  New buildings or additions subject to the building code. for all new construction, and for all new additions and alterations which are subject to the building code adopted herein, the procedure for variances shall be the procedure established by the applicable building code. The building inspector shall prepare and submit all paperwork and recommendations required by the code. 
(b)  Additions and alterations not subject to the building code. For all additions and alterations which would not be subject to the state building code but for the provisions of this article (e.g., additions to one- and two-family dwellings constructed prior to June 1, 1980), the procedure for variances shall be as follows. An application form provided by the city shall be prepared by the applicant and filed with the city clerk along with the appropriate fee. The city clerk shall submit the application to the building inspector, who shall review the application and issue a written decision. If the variance is denied by the building inspector, the applicant may appeal the denial to the board of appeals, which shall have the power to overrule the decision of the building inspector if it determines that the granting of such variance does not result in lowering the level of health, safety, and welfare established or intended by the specific rule from which the appeal is taken. 
(c)  Fees. The fees to be paid by an applicant for a state uniform building permit shall be as established by the city. 
(Code 1991, § 17.410) 
Sec. 102-29. - Posting of permits. 
    Any permit issued hereunder shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the building site before and during construction, and until a final occupancy permit is issued. 
(Code 1991, § 17.404) 
Sec. 102-30. - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspection powers. The city is authorized to enter upon public or private property, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of performing the inspections required by the state building code and this article. No person shall interfere with the exercise of the city's authority to inspect, nor shall anyone refuse access to any property, building, or structure which is properly subject to inspection. 
(b)  Inspection requests. It is the obligation of the applicant (or agent) to contact the city when the applicant is ready for each of the inspections required by this article and the building code. Requests for inspections shall be made directly to the building inspector, or city hall. 
(c)  Inspection warrants. If the city is denied access to any property, building, or structure, the city may seek and obtain an inspection warrant, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. All costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the city in seeking, obtaining, and executing an inspection warrant to administer this article shall be imposed as a special charge against the applicant and the owner of the subject property, and any building permit issued hereunder shall be revoked until such charges are paid. 
(Code 1991, § 17.405) 
Sec. 102-31. - Permits to start construction (footings and foundation). 
    Prior to issuance of a building permit, a permit to start construction may, but need not, be requested by filing with the city a request therefore on forms furnished by the city. The issuance of a permit to start construction shall permit the applicant to commence work only on the footings and foundation prior to the issuance of a building permit, and shall not relieve the applicant from full compliance with section 102-59. 
(Code 1991, § 17.406) 
Sec. 102-32. - Certificates of occupancy. 
    No building, alteration, or addition, for which a building permit has been issued, may be used or occupied until it has been inspected by the building inspector, and until the building inspector has issued either: 
(1)  A temporary occupancy permit; or 
(2)  A certificate of completion and occupancy permit. A certificate of completion and occupancy permit shall be issued only if all work has been satisfactorily finished and the building inspector's final inspection has been completed. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued in the sole discretion of the building inspector and upon such terms and conditions as the building inspector may impose. 
(Code 1991, § 17.407) 
Sec. 102-33. - Permit lapses. 
    Any permit issued hereunder shall lapse and be void unless building operations are commenced within six months from the date of issuance, or if construction has not been completed within one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1991, § 17.408) 
Sec. 102-34. - Suspension or revocation of permits. 
(a)  Authority. The city may suspend or revoke any permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval issued under the regulations of this article and may stop construction or use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices, or appliances for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Whenever the building inspector shall find at any time that applicable ordinances, laws, orders, plans, or specifications are not being complied with, and that the holder of the permit has refused to conform after written warning has been issued to him. 
(2)  Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to life or property. 
(3)  Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provision of either the application for a permit or the permit itself. 
(4)  Whenever, in the opinion of the building inspector, there is inadequate supervision provided on the job site. 
(5)  Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data specifications, or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or other approval was based. 
(6)  Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an approval or occupancy given by the building inspector for the use of new materials, equipment, methods, construction devices or appliances. 
(7)  Whenever the work being performed exceeds the scope of the permit and or the scope of the application for the permit. 
(b)  Notice. The notice suspending or revoking a permit, or a certificate of occupancy or approval, shall be in writing and shall be served upon the applicant, the owner of the premises (or its agent), or on the person apparently in charge of construction. A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building, structure, equipment, or premises in question. 
(c)  Effect of notice. After the notice is posted and served upon the persons aforesaid, it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and a permit which has been revoked shall be null and void, and before any construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as required by this article, shall be procured and fees paid therefor, and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation shall be in compliance with the regulations of this article. However, after the issuance of the notice, the city may authorize such work as it deems necessary for the preservation of life, property, and safety. 
(Code 1991, § 17.409) 
Secs. 102-35-102-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPROVEMENT PERMIT 

Sec. 102-57. - City improvement permit established. 
    There is hereby established a city improvement permit subject to the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1991, § 17.300) 
Sec. 102-58. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the city improvement permit is to monitor the construction, alteration, repair, and maintenance of structures to ensure that such work does not violate chapter 114 and/or the building code, and to provide accurate information to the city assessor regarding alterations to property which may affect the assessed value of said property. 
(Code 1991, § 17.301) 
Sec. 102-59. - When permit required. 
    A city improvement permit shall be obtained from the city whenever both of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  The construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, movement, or demolition of a building, structure, or addition does not require the issuance of a building permit; and 
(2)  The total cost to be expended on the work during any calendar year, including carpentry, plumbing, electrical, etc., is either: 
a.  $1,000.00 if a contractor performs substantially all the work; or 
b.  $500.00 if the owner performs part or all of the work. 
These amounts shall be determined based upon the estimated cost, bid cost, or final cost of the work, whichever is highest. 
(Code 1991, § 17.302) 
Sec. 102-60. - Application. 
    An application for a city improvement permit shall be filed with the city clerk pursuant to the provisions of this division, upon forms furnished by the city, prior to the commencement of work on the improvement described therein. However, in the case of an emergency which requires the commencement of work to avoid hardship to the owner/occupant or to avoid damage to property, the application shall be filed within 72 hours after commencement of work. 
(Code 1991, § 17.303) 
Sec. 102-61. - Improvement permit procedure. 
(a)  When required. An improvement permit shall be obtained from the city pursuant to the requirements of section 102-59. 
(b)  Application. An application for an Improvement permit shall be filed with the city clerk upon forms furnished by the city, along with an application fee, if any. 
(c)  Evaluation of application. Upon receipt of an application, the city shall review the application to determine whether it has been properly prepared, and whether the application reveals that other permits are required by the proposed project. 
(d)  Decision on application. The city shall review the application within ten business days, and shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Rejection. The city may reject and return the application if it fails to contain the information required by the application form. If the application is rejected, the city shall inform the applicant of the inadequacies of the application, and thereafter the applicant may correct and resubmit the application, along with a reapplication fee, if any. 
(2)  Denial. The city may deny the application if the city determines that the proposed project must comply with another ordinance (e.g., building code, zoning code, etc.) for which the applicant has not obtained a permit. If an application is denied, the city shall inform the applicant of the reasons for the denial, and thereafter the applicant may correct the infraction and resubmit the application, along with a reapplication fee, if any. 
(3)  Approval. The city shall approve the application if the city determines that the proposed project is allowed by city ordinances without any further applications or permitting. If the city approves the application, the city shall issue an improvement permit to the applicant. Thereafter, the project shall be completed as described in the application, and shall not be altered or changed without approval of the city. 
(e)  Modifications. The recipient of an improvement permit, or their contractors, agents, or assigns, shall not change or alter the plans and specifications upon which the permit was issued by the city, without the express written approval of the city. All requests for modifications shall be submitted in writing to the city, prior to the construction thereof, along with a modification fee. The city shall review, analyze, and decide upon the request for a modification using the same procedure as set forth in subsection (d) of this section for initial applications. 
(f)  Fees. 
(1)  The applicant shall pay such fees as may be set from time to time by the city. No application is considered complete and ready for consideration until all fees have been paid. 
(2)  A double application fee shall be charged by the city if an application is submitted after the applicant has committed an act for which the applicant seeks a permit. 
(3)  The applicant shall pay all delinquent fines, forfeitures, fees, or charges to the city, owed by the applicant or by the property for which a permit is requested. No application is considered complete and ready for consideration until all such amounts have been paid. 
(Code 1991, § 17.403) 
Secs. 102-62-102-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- One- and two-family dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.60 et seq.; multifamily dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.971 et seq.; local building codes, Wis. Stats. § 66.1019. 

Sec. 102-81. - Building permit procedure. 
(a)  When required. A building permit shall be obtained from the city. Furthermore, no building, addition, or alteration, which requires a state uniform building permit, shall be occupied unless a temporary occupancy permit or a certificate of completion and occupancy permit has been issued by the city. 
(b)  Application. Three copies of an application for a building permit shall be filed with the city clerk upon forms furnished by the department, along with an application fee. All information required by the applicable sections of the state building code shall be provided by the applicant. In addition, the following information will be provided by the applicant: 
(1)  Name and address of the landowner. 
(2)  The legal description, address, and tax parcel number of the land upon which the work is to be performed. 
(3)  A description of the current use and the expected use of the structure on which the work is to be performed, along with a copy of the land use permit (if applicable) issued by the city, or a copy of the application for a land use permit. 
(4)  A completed energy worksheet on forms provided by the department. 
(5)  A set of the drawings required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 20. 
(6)  A list of architects, engineers, contractors, and subcontractors, including their addresses and telephone numbers, who have performed work or who are expected to perform work on the project. 
(7)  Any additional information requested by the city to evaluate the proposed project and to determine its compliance with city ordinances and state regulations. 
(c)  Evaluation of application. Upon receipt of an application, the city shall review the application to determine the following: 
(1)  Completeness. Whether the application contains the information required by subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Zoning. Whether the subject property, and the proposed project, comply with chapter 114. This analysis shall include, but not be limited to, a review of the following: 
a.  Whether the current use of subject property is a permitted use, conditional use, or nonconforming use, and whether the proposed work will change or expand this use in conformity with chapter 114. 
b.  Whether the current structures on the subject property are conforming or nonconforming structures, and whether the proposed work will change or expand these structures in conformity with chapter 114. 
c.  Whether the proposed project will violate any of the regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the project is located (e.g., whether the project will violate a setback, height, density, intensity, or other regulation). 
(3)  Utilities. Whether the proposed project will be properly serviced by the city's utilities, whether the project will have any impact on those utilities, and whether the property and the project comply with the city's regulations regarding utilities (chapter 38). 
(4)  Streets. Whether the subject property properly abuts a city street, whether the proposed project will be adequately serviced by the city's streets, and whether any driveway complies with the city's driveway regulations (section 32-45 et seq.). 
(5)  Subdivision. Whether the subject property and the proposed project comply with the chapter 112. 
(6)  Delinquent fees. Whether the subject property, or the owner thereof, owes any fees, charges, or forfeitures to the city which are delinquent. 
(d)  Decision on application. The city shall review the application within ten business days, and shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Rejection. The city may reject and return the application if it fails to contain the information required by section 102-59. If the application is rejected, the city shall inform the applicant of the inadequacies of the application, and thereafter the applicant may correct and resubmit the application, along with a reapplication fee. 
(2)  Denial. The city may deny the application if the city determines that the proposed project will not comply with this building code or any other city ordinance. If an application is denied, the city shall inform the applicant of the reasons for the denial, and thereafter the applicant may correct the infraction and resubmit the application, along with a reapplication fee. If an application is denied, the city may also revoke any permit to start construction which may have been issued pursuant to section 102-60. 
(3)  Approval. The city shall approve the application if the city determines that the proposed project will comply with this building code and all other city ordinances. If the city approves the application, the city shall issue a building permit to the applicant and, when required, send a copy thereof to the department. Thereafter, the approved plans and specifications shall not be altered or changed without approval of the city. 
(e)  Modifications. The recipient of a building permit, or their contractors, agents, or assigns, shall not change or alter the plans and specifications upon which a building permit was issued by the city, without the express written approval of the city. All requests for modifications shall be submitted in writing to the city, prior to the construction thereof, along with a modification fee. The city shall review, analyze, and decide upon the request for a modification using the same procedure as set forth in subsection (d) of this section for initial applications. 
(f)  Fees. 
(1)  The applicant shall pay such fees as may be set from time to time by the city. No application is considered complete and ready for consideration until all fees have been paid. 
(2)  A double application fee shall be charged by the city if an application is submitted after the applicant has committed an act for which the applicant seeks a permit. 
(3)  The applicant shall pay all delinquent fines, forfeitures, fees, or charges to the city, owed by the applicant or by the property for which a permit is requested. No application is considered complete and ready for consideration until all such amounts have been paid. 
(Code 1991, § 17.402) 
Sec. 102-82. - City jurisdiction limited. 
    The city does not assert or exercise jurisdiction over the construction, extension, repair, removal or alteration of any building, structure, or part thereof, which is not regulated by the state codes adopted herein. For example, the city does not assert jurisdiction over quarries (Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 308), elevators (Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 318), boilers (Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 341), schools (Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 378), etc. 
(Code 1991, § 17.206) 
Sec. 102-83. - Uniform dwelling code. 
(a)  State code adopted. The UDC is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by the UDC is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications to the UDC are intended to be made a part of this chapter to secure uniform statewide regulation of one-family and two-family dwellings in the city. 
(b)  Application to existing buildings. The regulations adopted herein shall also apply to the following buildings and conditions: 
(1)  Conversions. An entire existing structure to be converted into and occupied as a one-family or two-family dwelling, which structure was not previously so occupied, shall comply with this chapter. 
(2)  Major rebuilds. An entire existing structure that is altered or repaired to such an extent that the cost of such alteration or repair during the life of the structure exceeds 50 percent of the equalized value of the structure (said value to be determined by the building inspector). 
(3)  Roof coverings. Whenever more than 25 percent of the roof covering of a building is replaced in any 12-month period, all roof covering shall be in conformity with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Additions and alterations. Any addition or alteration, regardless of cost, made to a building shall be made in conformity with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Permit required. No work subject to subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be performed in the city until a permit therefore shall first have been obtained by the owner, or his authorized agent, from the city, pursuant to the provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 17.201) 
State Law reference- One- and two-family dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.60 et seq.; multifamily dwelling code, Wis. Stats. § 101.971 et seq. 
Sec. 102-84. - Commercial building code. 
(a)  State code adopted. The CBC is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by the CBC is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications to the CBC are intended to be made a part of this chapter to secure uniform statewide regulation of commercial buildings in the city. 
(b)  Permit required. No work subject to subsection (a) of this section shall be performed in the city until a permit therefore shall first have been obtained by the owner, or his authorized agent, from the city, pursuant to the provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 17.202) 
Sec. 102-85. - Plumbing code. 
(a)  State code adopted. The state plumbing code is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by the plumbing code is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications to the plumbing code are intended to be made a part of this chapter to secure uniform statewide regulation of plumbing in the city. 
(b)  Permit required. No work subject to subsection (a) of this section shall be performed in the city until a permit therefore shall first have been obtained by the owner, or his authorized agent, from the city, pursuant to the provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 17.203) 
State Law reference- Plumbing, Wis. Stats. ch. 145. 
Sec. 102-86. - Electrical code. 
(a)  State code adopted. The state electrical code is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by the electrical code is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications to the electrical code are intended to be made a part of this chapter to secure uniform statewide regulation of the installation of electrical wiring and equipment in the city. 
(b)  Permit required. No work subject to subsection (a) of this section shall be performed in the city until a permit therefore shall first have been obtained by the owner, or his authorized agent, from the city, pursuant to the provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 17.204) 
State Law reference- Electrical regulations, Wis. Stats. § 101.80 et seq.; municipal authority relative to electricity, Wis. Stats. § 101.86. 
Chapter 104 - FLOODPLAIN ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 104-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. § 62.23 and the requirements in Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Code 1991, § 24.101) 
Sec. 104-2. - Finding of fact. 
    Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of the city would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base. 
(Code 1991, § 24.102) 
Sec. 104-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(1)  Protect life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(4)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain; 
(6)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain; 
(7)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers; 
(8)  Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and 
(9)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Code 1991, § 24.103) 
Sec. 104-4. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the city floodplain zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1991, § 24.104) 
Sec. 104-5. - General provisions. 
(a)  Areas to be regulated. This chapter regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or other maps approved by the DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(b)  Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the flood insurance study (FIS) listed in subsection (b)(1) of this section. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the FIS or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the letter of map change process before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFEs) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file at city hall. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(1)  Official maps based upon the FIS: flood insurance rate map (FIRM), panel numbers 55057C0354D, 55057C0361D, 55057C0362D, 55057C0365D, 55057C0366D, dated October 16, 2012, with corresponding profiles that are based upon the flood insurance study (FIS), dated October 16, 2012, volume number 55057CV000A. 
(2)  Official maps based on other studies. 
(c)  Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows: 
(1)  The floodway district (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE zones as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  The floodfringe district (FF) is that portion between the regional flood limits and the floodway and displayed as AE zones on the FIRM. 
(3)  The general floodplain district (GFP) are those areas that may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined, including A, AH, and AP zones on the FIRM. 
(d)  Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to article VIII of this chapter. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled as provided in subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to article VIII of this chapter. 
(1)  If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(2)  Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale. 
(e)  Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to article VIII of this chapter. 
(f)  Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(g)  Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation is exempted when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(h)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(1)  This chapter supersedes all the provisions of chapter 114 which relate to floodplains and which are less restrictive than this chapter. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(2)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(i)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. If a provision of this chapter, required by Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this chapter. 
(j)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in this chapter are based on engineering experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. Nor does this chapter create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this chapter. 
(k)  Severability. Should any portion of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected. 
(l)  Annexed areas. The county floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116 and 44 CFR 59-72, national flood insurance program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this chapter and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway location. 
(Code 1991, § 24.105) 
Secs. 104-6-104-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 

Sec. 104-29. - General development standards. 
(a)  The city shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a floodprone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding. 
(b)  Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks, shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development which meets the subdivision definition of this article and all other requirements in section 104-180(b). Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(Code 1991, § 24.200) 
Sec. 104-30. - Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(a)  No floodplain development shall: 
(1)  Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the regional flood height; or 
(2)  Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase regional flood height based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of article VIII of this chapter are met. 
(Code 1991, § 24.201) 
Sec. 104-31. - Watercourse alterations. 
(a)  No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the department and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The standards of section 104-30 must be met and the flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(b)  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to article VIII of this chapter, the community shall apply for a letter of map revision (LOMAR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process. 
(Code 1991, § 24.202) 
Sec. 104-32. - Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, development. 
    Development which requires a permit from the department, under Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to this chapter are made according to article VIII of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 24.203) 
Sec. 104-33. - Public or private campgrounds. 
    Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(1)  The campground is approved by the state department of health services; 
(2)  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator; 
(3)  The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground is such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants; 
(4)  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation; 
(5)  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the officials identified in subsection (4) of this section to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state department of health services and all other applicable regulations; 
(6)  Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use are allowed; 
(7)  The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours; 
(8)  All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section; 
(9)  The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to ensure compliance with the terms of this section; 
(10)  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either article III, IV, or V of this chapter for the floodplain district in which the structure is located; 
(11)  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued; and 
(12)  All service facilities, including, but not limited to, refuse collection, electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells, shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Code 1991, § 24.204) 
Secs. 104-34-104-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) 

Sec. 104-55. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 104-116. 
(Code 1991, § 24.301) 
Sec. 104-56. - Permitted uses. 
    The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if they are not prohibited by any other ordinance; they meet the standards in sections 104-57 and 104-58; and all permits or certificates have been issued according to section 104-180: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
(3)  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of section 104-57(d). 
(4)  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with sections 104-57 and 104-58. 
(5)  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with section 104-57(d). 
(6)  Functionally water dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31. 
(7)  Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with section 104-57(c). 
(Code 1991, § 24.302) 
Sec. 104-57. - Standards for developments in floodway areas. 
(a)  In general. 
(1)  Any development in floodway areas shall comply with article II of this chapter and have low flood damage potential. 
(2)  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to section 104-30: 
a.  A cross section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or 
b.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will cause any increase flood elevations upstream or based on the data submitted for subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(b)  Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria. The structures: 
(1)  Are not designed for human habitation, do not have high flood damage potential and are constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
(3)  Must be anchored to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
(4)  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
(5)  It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(c)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
(2)  Construction meets the development standards of section 104-30. 
(d)  Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  The requirements of section 104-30 are met; 
(2)  No material is deposited in the navigable waters unless a permit is issued by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30 and a permit pursuant to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this section are met; 
(3)  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
(4)  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material. 
(Code 1991, § 24.303) 
Sec. 104-58. - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses not listed as permitted uses in section 104-56 are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(1)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open space uses; 
(2)  Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(3)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(4)  Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383; 
(5)  Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812; 
(6)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(7)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Wis. Admin. Code NR 110.15(3)(b); 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Code 1991, § 24.304) 
Secs. 104-59-104-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF) 

Sec. 104-90. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to section 104-116. 
(Code 1991, § 24.401) 
Sec. 104-91. - Permitted uses. 
    Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the standards in section 104-92 are met, the use is not prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in section 104-180 have been issued. 
(Code 1991, § 24.402) 
Sec. 104-92. - Standards for development in floodfringe. 
    All of the provisions of section 104-31 shall apply. In addition, the following requirements shall apply according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of article VI of this chapter: 
(1)  Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly constructed or moved into the floodfringe must meet the requirements of article VI of this chapter. 
a.  The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill unless the requirements of subsection (1)b of this section can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. 
b.  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation. 
c.  Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subsection (1)d of this section. 
d.  In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with subsection (1)c of this section impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where access roads are below the regional flood elevation, if: 
1.  The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
2.  The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan. 
(2)  Accessory structures or uses. An accessory structure or use, as defined in section 114-128, shall be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
(3)  Commercial uses. Any commercial or indoor institutional use or structure, as defined by sections 114-124 and 114-123(c), which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall meet the requirements of subsection (2) of this section. Subject to the requirements of subsection (5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(4)  Industrial and transportation uses. Any industrial or transportation use or structure, as defined by sections 114-126 and 114-127, which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in section 104-184. Subject to the requirements of subsection (5) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(5)  Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with section 104-184. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(6)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets, bridges, and appurtenances thereto, shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and: 
a.  When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction or repair of such facilities may only be permitted if they are designed to comply with section 104-184. 
b.  Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(7)  Private septic systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system, pursuant to section 104-184(c), to the flood protection elevation and meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(8)  Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system, pursuant to the flood protection elevation, and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(9)  Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. 
(10)  Deposited materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this article. 
(11)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
b.  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor elevated on the flood protection elevation; and 
2.  Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
c.  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in subsection (1) of this section. 
(12)  Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in subsections (11)(b) and (c) of this section. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1991, § 24.403) 
Secs. 104-93-104-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP) 

Sec. 104-113. - Applicability. 
    The provision for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH zones. 
(Code 1991, § 24.501) 
Sec. 104-114. - Permitted uses. 
    Pursuant to section 104-116, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe area. Those uses permitted in floodway (section 104-56) and floodfringe areas (section 104-91) are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of section 104-115, provided that all permits or certificates required under section 104-180 have been issued. 
(Code 1991, § 24.502) 
Sec. 104-115. - Standards for development in the general floodplain district. 
    Article III of this chapter applies to floodway areas, and article IV of this chapter applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this chapter applies to either district. 
(1)  In AO/AH zones the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the conditions listed below, whichever is higher: 
a.  At or above the flood protection elevation; 
b.  Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or 
c.  The depth as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around structures. 
(Code 1991, § 24.503) 
Sec. 104-116. - Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. 
    Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM. 
(2)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height, flood flows, and regional flood elevation, and to determine floodway boundaries: 
a.  A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in section 104-180(b)(3); 
b.  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information; 
c.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(Code 1991, § 24.504) 
Secs. 104-117-104-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 104-146. - General. 
(a)  Applicability. If these standards conform with Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendment thereto. 
(b)  The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use, which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may continue subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The terms "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance. The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent. 
(4)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 104-92(1). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this subsection. 
(5)  No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 104-92(1). 
(6)  If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under subsections (4) and (5) of this section equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 104-92(1). 
(7)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(8) of this section, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current chapter requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. 
(8)  For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of construction. 
a.  Residential structures shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of section 104-184(b). 
2.  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, and shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage. 
3.  Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  In A zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a federal, state or other source. 
5.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in section 104-115(1). 
6.  In AO zones, have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
b.  Nonresidential structures shall: 
1.  Meet the requirements of subsection (b)(8)a1, 2, 5, 6 of this section. 
2.  Either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards in section 104-184(a) or (b). 
3.  In AO zones with no elevations specified, have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in section 104-115(1). 
(c)  A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with section 104-57(a), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with section 104-184 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of subsection (b)(8) of this section if it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Code 1991, § 24.601) 
Sec. 104-147. - Floodway district. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway district, unless such modification or addition: 
(1)  Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all chapter requirements; 
(2)  Meets the requirements of section 104-146; 
(3)  Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height; 
(4)  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 104-184, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; and 
(5)  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
b.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
c.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
d.  The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited storage. 
(b)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section 104-184(c) and Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383. 
(c)  No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the floodway district shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section 104-184(c) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Code 1991, § 24.602) 
Sec. 104-148. - Floodfringe district. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and meets the requirements of section 104-92, except where subsection 104-148(b) of this section is applicable. 
(b)  Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the board of adjustment/appeals, using the procedures established in section 104-182, may grant a variance from those provisions of subsection (a) of this section for modifications or additions using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(1)  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(2)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(3)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed; 
(4)  Flood depths will not exceed two feet; 
(5)  Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and 
(6)  The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in section 104-92(5). 
(c)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, section 104-184(c) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(d)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter, section 104-184(c) and Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Code 1991, § 24.603) 
Secs. 104-149-104-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 104-180. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Duties and powers. The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and ensure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(2)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this chapter and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(3)  Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(4)  Keep records of all official actions, such as: 
a.  All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved. 
b.  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations. 
c.  Floodproofing certificates. 
d.  Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures, including changes, appeals, variances and amendments. 
e.  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures. 
f.  List of nonconforming structures and uses. 
(5)  Submit copies of the following items to the department regional office: 
a.  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments. 
b.  Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required information, including an annual summary of floodplain zoning actions taken. 
c.  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. 
(6)  Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the department regional office. 
(7)  Submit copies of amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA regional office. 
(b)  Zoning permit. Pursuant to chapter 114, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the city before any building or structure is located, relocated, built, erected, enlarged, moved, reconstructed, altered or extended, or before the use of any building, structure or property is commenced, changed or altered. In addition to the application information required by chapter 114, all applications for zoning permits for lots regulated by this chapter shall also include the following: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor; 
b.  Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification. 
(2)  Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot; 
b.  Location of the ordinary high water mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
c.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street centerlines; 
d.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
e.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
f.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps; 
g.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study, either national geodetic and vertical datum (NGVD) or North American vertical datum (NAVD); 
h.  Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD and NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of article III or IV of this chapter are met; and 
i.  Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to section 104-30. This may include any of the information noted in section 104-57(a). 
(3)  Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved by the department. 
a.  Zone A floodplains. 
1.  Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code NR 116.07(3), hydrologic analysis: determination of regional flood discharge. 
2.  Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code NR 116.07(4), hydraulic analysis: determination of regional flood elevation, and the following: 
(i)  Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study. 
(ii)  Channel sections must be surveyed. 
(iii)  Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping. 
(iv)  A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope, including a survey of the channel at each location. 
(v)  The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used. 
(vi)  A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is required at each structure. 
(vii)  Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet. 
(viii)  Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high water marks to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available, adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices. 
(ix)  The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet. 
3.  Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway. 
(i)  If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation. 
(ii)  If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be added to the base model to show the difference between existing and proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on standard accepted engineering practices is provided. 
b.  Zone AE floodplains. 
1.  Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on Wis. Admin. Code NR 116.07(3), hydrologic analysis: determination of regional flood discharge. 
2.  Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code NR 116.07(4), hydraulic analysis: determination of regional flood elevation, and the following: 
(i)  Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is available, models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations shown in the floodway data table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot. 
(ii)  Corrected effective model. The corrected effective model shall not include any manmade physical changes since the effective model date, but shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for department review. 
(iii)  Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing model shall be required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the project associated with the revised (post-project) model or to establish more up-to-date models on which to base the revised (post-project) model. 
(iv)  Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised (post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the existing model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions. 
(v)  Changes to duplicate effective model. All changes to the duplicate effective model and subsequent models must be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes. 
(vi)  Changes to the hydraulic model. Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the effective model and result in water surface elevations and top widths computed by the revised models matching those in the effective models upstream and downstream of the revised reach as required. The effective model shall not be truncated. 
3.  Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the department for review which meet the following conditions: 
(i)  Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or flood boundary floodway maps (FBFMs), construction plans, and bridge plans. 
(ii)  Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may be more easily revised. 
(iii)  Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised one percent and 0.2 percent annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries. 
(iv)  If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all supporting documentation or metadata must be included with the data submission along with the universal transverse mercator (UTM) projection and state plane coordinate system in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications. 
(v)  The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain boundaries. 
(vi)  All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme. 
(vii)  Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the map. 
(viii)  The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream distances in the model shall be visible on the map. 
(4)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause. 
(c)  Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
(3)  If all chapter provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed; 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the requirements of section 104-184 are met. 
(d)  Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including, but not limited to, those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Code 1991, § 24.701) 
Sec. 104-181. - Plan commission. 
(a)  The city plan commission shall: 
(1)  Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; 
(2)  Review and advise the city council on all proposed amendments to this chapter, maps and text; and 
(3)  Exercise the other duties and powers authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  The plan commission shall not: 
(1)  Grant variances to the terms of the chapter in place of action by the board of appeals; or 
(2)  Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the city council. 
(Code 1991, § 24.702) 
Sec. 104-182. - Board of appeals. 
    The board of appeals, created pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e) is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this chapter. The board shall exercise the powers conferred by state statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator shall not be the secretary of the board. 
(1)  Powers and duties. In addition to the powers and duties granted to the board of appeals by the Code, the board shall also: 
a.  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
b.  Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map. 
c.  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the chapter. 
(2)  Appeals to the board of appeals. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 45 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter appealed. 
a.  Notice and hearing for appeals including variances. 
1.  Notice. The board shall: 
(i)  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
(ii)  Publish adequate notice pursuant to state statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; and 
(iii)  Ensure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the department regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
2.  Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall: 
(i)  Resolve boundary disputes according to subsection (3) of this section; 
(ii)  Decide variance applications according to subsection (4) of this section; and 
(iii)  Decide appeals of permit denials according to section 104-183. 
b.  Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
1.  Be made within a reasonable time; 
2.  Be sent to the department regional office within ten days of the decision; 
3.  Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the board; 
4.  State the specific facts which are the basis for the board's decision; 
5.  Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; and 
6.  Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings. 
(3)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the board of appeals in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries: 
a.  If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined. 
b.  The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board. 
c.  If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should inform the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the city for a map amendment according to article VIII of this chapter. 
(4)  Variance. 
a.  The board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
1.  Literal enforcement of the chapter provisions will cause unnecessary hardship; 
2.  The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended; 
3.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; 
4.  The variance is consistent with the purpose of this article as stated in section 104-3. 
b.  In addition to the criteria in subsection (4)a of this section, to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
1.  The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
2.  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; 
3.  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the chapter. 
c.  A variance shall not: 
1.  Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district. 
2.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss. 
3.  Be granted for a hardship which is self-created. 
4.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area. 
5.  Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or map(s) required in section 104-210. 
6.  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
d.  When a floodplain variance is granted the board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property and flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25.00 per $100.00 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record. 
(Code 1991, § 24.703) 
Sec. 104-183. - To review appeal of permit denials. 
(a)  The zoning agency (section 104-182) or board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include: 
(1)  Permit application data listed in section 104-180(b); 
(2)  Floodway/floodfringe determination data in section 104-116; 
(3)  Data listed in section 104-57(a)(2) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator; and 
(4)  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits the board shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of section 104-182; 
(2)  Consider zoning agency recommendations; and 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(c)  For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the board shall: 
(1)  Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners as per the requirements of article VIII of this chapter; and 
(2)  Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Code 1991, § 24.704) 
Sec. 104-184. - Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses. 
(a)  No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate. 
(b)  For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either: 
(1)  Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
(2)  Meets or exceeds the following standards: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(c)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to: 
(1)  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors; 
(2)  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
(3)  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; 
(4)  Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and 
(5)  Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters. 
(Code 1991, § 24.705) 
Sec. 104-185. - Public information. 
(a)  Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood. 
(b)  All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed. 
(c)  Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real property is in. 
(Code 1991, § 24.706) 
Secs. 104-186-104-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 104-209. - Amendments. 
    Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 104-210. 
(1)  In AE zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 104-210. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR. 
(2)  In A zones increases equal to or greater than one foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 104-210. 
(Code 1991, § 24.800) 
Sec. 104-210. - General. 
    The city may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this chapter in the manner outlined in section 104-211. Actions which require an amendment to the chapter and/or submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height; 
(2)  Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM; 
(3)  Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in section 104-5(b)(2); 
(4)  Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain; 
(5)  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain maps; 
(6)  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis. Admin. Code NR 116.05 or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality; and 
(7)  All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(Code 1991, § 24.801) 
Sec. 104-211. - Procedures. 
    Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. The petitions shall include all data required by sections 104-116 and 104-180(b). The land use permit shall not be issued until a letter of map revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes. 
(1)  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(2)  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the department. 
(3)  All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional flood height shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body. 
(Code 1991, § 24.802) 
Secs. 104-212-104-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 104-231. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the city a penalty in the amount established by the city. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Code 1991, § 24.900) 
Secs. 104-232-104-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 104-256. - Definitions. 
    Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A zones means those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
    Accessory structure or use means a facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
    AH zone . See Area of shallow flooding . 
    Alteration means an enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure. 
    AO zone . See Area of shallow flooding . 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM. 
    Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
    Building . See Structure . 
    Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this chapter. 
    Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
    Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use. 
    Certificate of compliance means a certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
    Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
    Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
    Department means the state department of natural resources. 
    Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Dryland access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
    Encroachment means any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in the floodway. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the national flood insurance program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or 
(4)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
    Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the national flood insurance program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood insurance study means a technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A zones. Flood insurance rate maps, that accompany the flood insurance study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the national flood insurance program. 
    Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
    Flood protection elevation means an elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see Freeboard .) 
    Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodfringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
    Floodplain means land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
    Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
    Floodplain management means policy and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
    Freeboard means a safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or streambed. 
    Habitable structure means any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation. 
    Hearing notice means publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985, For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing is required. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
    High flood damage potential means damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 feet, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
    Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see Development .) 
    Lowest adjacent grade means elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of a building. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
    Maintenance means the act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a mobile recreational vehicle. 
    Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision, existing means a parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Mobile/manufactured home park or subdivision, expansion to existing, means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring if concrete pads. 
    Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles." 
    Model, corrected effective, means a hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in the current effective model. 
    Model, duplicate effective, means a copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as the effective model. 
    Model, effective, means the hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective flood insurance study. 
    Model, existing (pre-project), means a modification of the duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any manmade modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected effective model or duplicate effective model. 
    Model, revised (post-project), means a modification of the existing or pre-project conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to reflect revised or post-project conditions. 
    Municipality or municipal means the county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this chapter. 
    NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
    NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
    New construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, the term "new construction" includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming. 
    Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies, such as a residence in the floodway. 
    Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of this chapter, as described in section 104-5(b), which has been approved by the department and FEMA. 
    Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
    Ordinary high water mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
    Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
    Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in the state. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, streambed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
    Subdivision has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12)(am). 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Unnecessary hardship means where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the chapter. 
    Variance means an authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards, not uses, contained in the floodplain zoning chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the chapter. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
    Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
    Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater, regardless of its intended use. 
(Code 1991, § 24.1001) 
Chapter 106 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 106-1-106-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAUSTON-NEW LISBON UNION AIRPORT ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Airport zoning, Wis. Stats. § 114.135 et seq. 

Sec. 106-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means the Mauston-New Lisbon Union Airport located in Section 28, Township 16 north, Range Three east, Juneau County, Wisconsin. 
    Airport hazard means any structure or object of natural growth which obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off. 
    Nonconforming use means any structure or tree which does not conform to a regulation prescribed in this article or an amendment thereto, as of the effective date of such regulation. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof. 
    Runway means a level portion of an airport having a surface specially developed and maintained for the landing and take-off of aircraft. 
    Structure means any object constructed or installed by man. 
    Trees do not include shrubs, bushes or plants which do not grow to a height of more than 20 feet at maturity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § I, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 106-20. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, forfeit an amount established by the city for such offense, and in default of payment of such forfeiture shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture is paid, but not to exceed 30 days for each violation. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § X, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 106-21. - Zones. 
    All zones established by this section are as shown on the map dated June 13, 2013, and any amendments thereafter, entitled, "Height Limitation Zoning Map, Mauston-New Lisbon Union Airport, New Lisbon, Wisconsin." The original, full-scale maps are intended to be the official map, as filed with clerks of both cities and both towns. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § II, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 106-22. - Height limitation zone. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be constructed, altered, located or permitted to remain after such construction, alteration or location, and no trees shall be allowed to grow to a height in excess of the height limit indicated on the map referred to in section 106-21. (As shown in the map, references are to elevations above sea level.) 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § III, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 106-23. - Exceptions. 
    The restrictions contained in section 106-22 shall not apply to objects which are less than 35 feet in height above ground level at the object site within one-half mile of the airport boundary, or to structures less than 50 feet in height above ground within the area beginning one-half mile from the airport boundary and extending to one mile from the airport boundary, or to structures less than 100 feet in height above the ground within the area beginning one mile from the airport boundary and extending to three miles from the airport boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § IV, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 106-24. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in sections 106-21 and 106-22 shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any nonconforming use, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use, except as otherwise provided by section 106-26(b). 
(b)  Changes. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, if the construction or alteration of such was begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and if such is diligently prosecuted to completion. 
(c)  Removal. This section shall not interfere with the removal of nonconforming uses by purchase or the use of eminent domain. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § V, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 106-25. - Administration. 
    It shall be the duty of the airport commission to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the airport commission upon a form furnished by its secretary. Applications which are by this article to be decided by the airport commission shall be granted or denied within 30 days of the date of filing of the applications, unless Federal Aviation Administration approval is requested. Applications for action by the board of appeals shall be forthwith transmitted by the secretary of the commission to the board for hearing and decision. There shall be no charge for applications or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § VI, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 106-26. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected or installed, or be permitted to remain in any zone created by section 106-21 until the owner or his agent shall have applied in writing for a permit therefor and obtained such permit from the airport commission, except structures less than 35 feet in height above the ground and within one-half mile of the airport boundary and structures less than 50 feet in height above the ground within the area beginning one-half mile from the airport boundary and extending to one mile from the airport boundary and structures less than 100 feet in height above the ground within the area beginning one mile from the airport boundary and extending to three miles from the airport boundary. Said permit shall be posed in a prominent place on the premises prior to and during the period of construction, erection, installation or establishment. Application for such permit shall indicate the use for which the permit is desired, and shall describe and locate the use with sufficient particularity to permit the airport commission to determine whether such use would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the airport commission shall issue the permit applied for. 
(b)  Existing uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced, altered, or rebuilt, a permit shall be applied for and secured in the manner prescribed by subsection (a) of this section authorizing such change. No such permit shall be denied if the structure will not become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or than it was when the application for permit was made. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § VII, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 106-27. - Board of appeals. 
    There is hereby created a board of appeals, consisting of three members, one being appointed by the city mayor, a second being appointed by the City of New Lisbon mayor and the third appointed by the Town of Lisbon board, subject to confirmation by both city councils for terms of three years, excepting that of those first appointed. For the first appointed board, the first member shall serve one year; the second member for two years; and the third member for three years. The members of said board of appeals shall receive the sum of $30.00 for each meeting attended by them. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § VIII, 2-24-2015) 
Sec. 106-28. - Appeals and review. 
(a)  Variances. Upon appeal in special cases the board of appeals may, after investigation and public hearing, grant such variance from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this article would result in unnecessary hardship, and such relief will do substantial justice and be in accord with the spirit of this article, and does not create a hazard to the safe, normal operation of aircraft. 
(b)  Aggrieved person. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision or action of the airport commission made in its administration of this article may appeal such decision or action to the board of appeals. 
(c)  Procedure. Any appeal taken pursuant to this section shall be in conformity with the procedure established by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). 
(Ord. No. 2015-1078, § IX, 2-24-2015) 
Chapter 108 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Manufactured homes and mobile homes, Wis. Stats. § 101.91; local regulation of mobile homes, Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 108-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dependent mobile home means a mobile home which does not have complete bathroom facilities. 
    Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park under this chapter. 
    Lot means a plot of ground within a mobile home park, designed and constructed for the accommodation of one non-dependent mobile home. 
    Manufactured and mobile home community means any plot or plots of ground upon which three or more manufactured homes or mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether a charge is made for the accommodation. 
    Manufactured home means any of the following and includes any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and appurtenances: 
(1)  A structure that is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation and that is certified by the federal department of housing and urban development as complying with the standards established under 42 USC 5401 to 5425. 
(2)  A mobile home, unless a mobile home is specifically excluded. 
    Mobile home means a vehicle manufactured or assembled before June 15, 1976, designed to be towed as a single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and equipped and used, or intended to be used, primarily for human habitation, with walls of rigid uncollapsible construction, which has an overall length in excess of 45 feet. The term "mobile home" includes the mobile home structure, its plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems, and all appliances and all other equipment carrying a manufacturer's warranty. The term "mobile home" also includes any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and appurtenances. 
    Non-dependent mobile home means a mobile home equipped with complete bath and toilet facilities, and designed and equipped with sleeping, eating and living quarters for long-term residential occupancy. 
    Occupant means any individual who resides in a mobile home. 
    Outbuilding means any structure affixed to a lot, other than a mobile home. 
    Owner means the person who owns the mobile home park. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between: 
(1)  A lot line and the nearest point of a structure; or 
(2)  A lot line and a park boundary line. 
Distances shall be measured between the two closest points. The eve or overhang of any structure shall be included in measuring the setback for such structure. 
(Code 1991, § 21.12) 
Sec. 108-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; to further the orderly layout and use of land in the city; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to prevent the over-crowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public utilities and facilities; to provide the best possible environment for human habitation in the city; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(Code 1991, § 21.11) 
Sec. 108-3. - Compliance. 
(a)  Mobile homes. No mobile home may be placed, parked, stored or occupied within the city except in compliance with this chapter and except in a licensed mobile home park. 
(b)  Manufactured and mobile home community . No manufactured and mobile home community may be established, operated, maintained, enlarged or expanded except in compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  Recreational mobile vehicles. No recreational mobile vehicles may be placed, parked, stored or occupied within the city except in compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 21.14) 
Sec. 108-4. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Emergencies. Emergencies or temporary stopping or parking of a recreational mobile vehicle or mobile home is permitted on any street, alley, or highway, for no longer than one hour, subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic or parking ordinances for that street, alley, or highway. 
(b)  Existing homes. A mobile home placed on land outside of a mobile home park on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be permitted to remain on said land, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The mobile home may not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, or replaced with a different mobile home, unless the zoning board of appeals determines that such section: 
a.  Will be an aesthetic improvement to the mobile home; and 
b.  Will be in fundamental harmony with the surrounding uses. 
(2)  In the event the existing mobile home is damaged by fire, explosion, flood or other peril to the extent of more than 50 percent of its current value, it shall not be reconstructed or repaired, but instead, shall be demolished and removed. 
(c)  Businesses. This chapter shall not apply to any business engaged in the sale or service of mobile homes, provided the mobile homes located at such business are unoccupied and are only temporarily placed, and further provided that said business complies with the zoning requirements of this Code. 
(d)  Recreational mobile vehicles. The parking of only one recreational mobile vehicle in an accessory private garage or building, or in a driveway, is permitted, provided no living quarters shall be maintained in excess of two weeks during the calendar year, and further provided no business is practiced in said recreational mobile vehicle while it is so parked or stored. 
(e)  Construction. A mobile home or recreational mobile vehicle may be used as a temporary office by a contractor person who lives or sleeps in the mobile home or recreational mobile vehicle. 
(f)  Club parking. Any club or group of persons wishing to park recreational mobile vehicles within the city for a specified period of time shall apply to the city for a permit, which shall be granted in the discretion of the council. 
(g)  Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes may be placed upon real estate outside of manufactured and mobile home communities, provided they satisfy all other requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1991, § 21.15) 
Sec. 108-5. - Variances. 
    A variance from any term of this chapter may be applied for and granted pursuant to the rules and procedures set forth in chapter 114, except the plan commission, not the board of appeals, shall hear and decide variances under this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 21.16) 
Sec. 108-6. - State statutes adopted. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0435 and 710.15 and the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code chs. DHS 178 and ATCP 125, describing and defining regulations with respect to mobile homes and manufactured and mobile home communities, are hereby adopted and, by reference, made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or code incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 21.13) 
Sec. 108-7. - Sale of lots. 
    The sale or conveyance of individual lots or any part of a manufactured and mobile home community is prohibited. The sale or conveyance of any lot or part of a manufactured and mobile home community shall automatically terminate and revoke the manufactured and mobile home community's license. 
(Code 1991, § 21.25) 
Secs. 108-8-108-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 108-33. - Prosecution. 
    Upon learning of a violation, the zoning inspector or other city official shall do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Cause the violator to be served with a notice, informing the violator of the nature of the violation and giving the violator a date by which the violation must be abated or corrected; 
(2)  Refer the violation to the city plan commission, which may investigate the violation, hold meetings with the violator, and take whatever steps it feels necessary and prudent to abate or correct the violation; provided, however, the powers of the plan commission shall not exceed the powers granted herein to the plan commission; or 
(3)  Refer the violation to the city attorney for prosecution. 
(Code 1991, § 21.81) 
Sec. 108-34. - Special penalties. 
    If any person forgets or fails to obtain a license, a variance, or a conditional use, under conditions requiring the same, and if such person subsequently cures this violation by obtaining a license, a variance or a conditional use, then such person shall pay, in addition to the original application fee, a forfeiture equal to two times the original fee for such license, variance or conditional use. Such forfeiture shall be payable within ten days of the issuance of the license, variance or conditional use, and in the event said forfeiture is not paid within ten days, the failure to pay shall constitute a separate violation and the violator shall become subject to the general penalties set forth in section chapter 1, article II. 
(Code 1991, § 21.83) 
Sec. 108-35. - Citation method of enforcement. 
    The citation method of enforcement, set forth in chapter 1, article II, may be used for all violations of this chapter. Citations for violations of this chapter may be issued only by the zoning inspector, the city plan commission, or the building inspector. 
(Code 1991, § 21.84) 
Secs. 108-36-108-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY LICENSE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local licensing of mobile homes, Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 108-59. - Licenses required. 
(a)  New manufactured and mobile home communities. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate, own or maintain within the city any manufactured and mobile home community unless such person first obtains a license. 
(b)  Additions to manufactured and mobile home communities. It shall be unlawful for any person to enlarge or construct any addition to any manufactured and mobile home community within the city unless such person first obtains a license. 
(Code 1991, § 21.20) 
Sec. 108-60. - Contents. 
    Licenses for manufactured and mobile home communities shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner and manager (if any) of the manufactured and mobile home community. 
(2)  The number of authorized lots in the manufactured and mobile home community. 
(3)  Reference to the approved original application on file with the city clerk. 
(4)  Statement that the manufactured and mobile home community plan may not be changed, altered, enlarged or expanded without first obtaining city approval. 
(Code 1991, § 21.22) 
Sec. 108-61. - Fees. 
(a)  Original application fee. A nonrefundable fee in the amount established by the city shall be submitted with each original application for a new manufactured and mobile home community. A nonrefundable fee established by the city shall be submitted with each application for an extension of an existing manufactured and mobile home community. 
(b)  Annual license fee. An annual license fee in the amount established by the city shall be paid by each licensee. This fee shall be submitted with each application for renewal, and shall be refunded to the licensee if the application is not renewed. 
(c)  Transfer of license fee. A fee in the amount established by the city shall be paid with each application for a transfer of license. 
(d)  Parking fee. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(3)(c), each manufactured and mobile home community operator shall collect the monthly parking fee from each mobile home owner and remit the same to the city clerk. The owner of a mobile home parked outside of a licensed manufactured and mobile home community shall remit his monthly fee directly to the city clerk unless the mobile home is assessed as part of the real estate, and then he shall pay no monthly fee. 
(Code 1991, § 21.26) 
Sec. 108-62. - Transfer of license. 
    Upon application to the city clerk and upon review and certification by the zoning inspector that the entire manufactured and mobile home community is in full compliance with the then-existing license, a new license may be transferred to a new owner. 
(Code 1991, § 21.24) 
Sec. 108-63. - Term of license. 
    The term of each license shall be for one year, unless sooner revoked, and shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1991, § 21.21) 
Sec. 108-64. - Termination of license. 
    Any license granted under this chapter may be revoked or suspended, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(2), for any violation of one or more of the terms or conditions of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 21.23) 
Secs. 108-65-108-86. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ORIGINAL APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 108-87. - Original license applications. 
    Each person who wishes to construct a new manufactured and mobile home community or who wishes to enlarge or expand an existing manufactured and mobile home community or who wishes to redesign any part of an existing manufactured and mobile home community shall prepare and file an original application and fee with the city clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 21.30) 
Sec. 108-88. - Original application information. 
    Each original application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of each owner and developer of the proposed manufactured and mobile home community or proposed extension. 
(2)  The legal description and acreage of the proposed manufactured and mobile home community or extension. 
(3)  Three copies of preliminary site plans drawn to scale showing the location of the following: 
a.  Each mobile home lot. 
b.  All roadways, sidewalks and parking sites. 
c.  Recreation areas and facilities. 
d.  Storage areas. 
e.  Underground utilities, including cable TV, if provided. 
f.  Street lighting. 
g.  Topography and drainage. 
(4)  Landscaping plans and specifications. 
(5)  Road construction plans, specifications and elevations. 
(6)  An explanation of how garbage and refuse will be disposed. 
(7)  An explanation of the staging and timing of the proposed construction. 
(8)  The names and addresses of all persons who own property located within 100 feet of the proposed manufactured and mobile home community or extension. 
(9)  Any additional information necessary to show compliance with this chapter. 
(10)  Any additional information which the plan commission may request. 
(Code 1991, § 21.31) 
Sec. 108-89. - Review. 
    Upon receipt of an original application, the city clerk shall refer the application to the plan commission. The plan commission shall review the application, the site, existing and proposed structures, site plans, neighboring uses, highway access, traffic patterns, drainage, sewerage and water systems, and all other factors deemed relevant to the future use and operation of the proposed manufactured and mobile home community or extension. 
(Code 1991, § 21.32) 
Sec. 108-90. - Hearings. 
    After study and review of the application and other facts, the plan commission shall hold a public hearing within a reasonable period of time, but in no event later than seven weeks after submission of the application to the clerk. The plan commission shall give public notice of the hearing by publishing a Class II notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 specifying the date, time, place and subject-matter of the hearing. A notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the public hearing, by certified mail, to the applicant and to the owners of all property located within 100 feet of the proposed manufactured and mobile home community. This notice and hearing may be combined with any notice and hearing required for the granting of a conditional use for the manufactured and mobile home community or extension. 
(Code 1991, § 21.33) 
Sec. 108-91. - Tentative approval. 
(a)  Upon consideration of the application and the standards applicable thereto, and after the conducting of the public hearing, the plan commission shall determine whether the proposed plan shall be tentatively approved and, based upon such determination, shall either issue or refuse to issue tentative approval. 
(b)  If the plan commission refuses to issue tentative approval, it shall provide the applicant with a brief written statement of the reasons for the refusal. The plan commission may make recommendations which, if included in a new application, might permit the tentative approval of the application. 
(c)  If the plan commission issues its tentative approval, it may attach various conditions to the approval, in addition to those conditions required by this chapter, which it determines are necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: erosion controls, increased setbacks, additional landscaping and planting, changes in parking areas, lot modifications, special easements, etc. 
(d)  Tentative approval shall be effective for a maximum period of 12 months, unless, upon application by the owner, the plan commission grants an extension of time. Within said 12-month period, construction must commence on the proposed manufactured and mobile home community or manufactured and mobile home community extension. 
(Code 1991, § 21.34) 
Sec. 108-92. - Final approval. 
(a)  Upon completion of construction of the manufactured and mobile home community or manufactured and mobile home community extension pursuant to the terms and conditions of the tentative approval, the owner shall notify the city clerk of said completion. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the completion notice, the city clerk shall refer the matter to the zoning inspector, who shall conduct a review and inspection of the manufactured and mobile home community to determine compliance with the plan's specifications and conditions of the tentative approval. 
(c)  If the manufactured and mobile home community or manufactured and mobile home community extension has been constructed in accordance with the tentative approval, the zoning inspector shall certify the same to the city clerk. If the construction of the manufactured and mobile home community or manufactured and mobile home community extension is not in accordance with any part of the tentative approval, the zoning inspector shall provide a brief written statement to the owner of those items which must be completed or performed to comply with the tentative approval, and the zoning inspector shall withhold his certification of compliance until such items have been completed or performed. 
(Code 1991, § 21.35) 
Sec. 108-93. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon receipt of the certification from the zoning inspector that the manufactured and mobile home community or manufactured and mobile home community extension has been satisfactorily completed, the city clerk shall issue a manufactured and mobile home community license or, in the case of an extension of an existing manufactured and mobile home community, shall issue an amendment to the existing license. 
(Code 1991, § 21.36) 
Secs. 108-94-108-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RENEWAL APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 108-115. - Application form. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(6), an application for renewal shall be submitted by each licensee on or before June 1 of each year, on forms furnished by the city. 
(Code 1991, § 21.40) 
Sec. 108-116. - Review. 
    Upon receipt of an application for renewal, the city clerk shall refer the application to the zoning inspector, who shall inspect the manufactured and mobile home community to determine compliance with this chapter and all other restrictions or conditions placed on said manufactured and mobile home community by previous city action. Upon completion of his inspection, the zoning inspector shall either provide a certification to the city clerk that the manufactured and mobile home community is in compliance, or provide the licensee and the city clerk with a brief written description of the violations found. 
(Code 1991, § 21.41) 
Sec. 108-117. - Council approval. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the report from the zoning inspector, the city clerk shall refer the report to the common council for action. 
(b)  If the zoning inspector has found no violations, the common council shall approve the renewal of the license. If the zoning inspector has found violations, the council can either approve the license renewal upon the condition that the violations be corrected within a stated time, or the common council can schedule hearings on the revocation or suspension of the license pursuant to the procedures authorized by Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. The council shall act on the renewal on or before June 30. Nothing herein shall limit or prevent the commencement of legal proceedings pursuant to chapter 1, article II for violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 21.42) 
Secs. 108-118-108-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 108-148. - Standards adopted. 
    The following design and construction standards shall apply to the design and construction of any new manufactured and mobile home community, and to the design and construction of any enlargement of or addition to any existing manufactured and mobile home community, and to the redesign or reconstruction of any part of an existing manufactured and mobile home community after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. These standards shall be additional to all state statutes, codes and regulations. 
(Code 1991, § 21.50) 
Sec. 108-149. - Unique design. 
    Although the following standards are mandatory, nothing herein should be construed to prevent or limit the submission of unique, innovative designs to the plan commission. Such designs are encouraged and, if approved by the plan commission, can be permitted through the variance procedure of section 108-5. 
(Code 1991, § 21.51) 
Sec. 108-150. - Other codes. 
    All plumbing, electrical, building and other work in or at any manufactured and mobile home community shall be performed in compliance with all applicable city ordinances and state statutes, codes and regulations. Any license granted under this chapter shall not constitute a waiver or limitation of any other applicable ordinance, statute, code or regulation. 
(Code 1991, § 21.66) 
Sec. 108-151. - Manufactured and mobile home community size. 
    The minimum size of any manufactured and mobile home community shall be ten acres. 
(Code 1991, § 21.52) 
Sec. 108-152. - Lot size. 
(a)  Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than as follows: 
(1)  Minimum width: 50 feet. 
(2)  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum area: 5,000 square feet. 
(b)  All lots shall abut on a street within the manufactured and mobile home community for at least 30 feet and shall have unobstructed access to said street. No lot shall abut on a city street, right-of-way, or property line of the manufactured and mobile home community. 
(c)  Corner lots located on the inside of any corner shall be of extra width sufficient to maintain front setback requirements on both streets. 
(d)  No mobile home unit shall be parked outside of a designated lot. 
(e)  The corners of each lot shall be clearly staked so that an occupant can easily determine his lot boundaries. 
(Code 1991, § 21.53) 
Sec. 108-153. - Mobile home size. 
    The minimum width of each mobile home shall be 14 feet. 
(Code 1991, § 21.54) 
Sec. 108-154. - Setbacks. 
    The following setback requirements shall apply to each mobile home on each lot: 
(1)  The minimum front yard setback shall be 20 feet. All yards which abut a street are "front yards." 
(2)  The minimum rear yard setback shall be ten feet. 
(3)  The minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
(Code 1991, § 21.55) 
Sec. 108-155. - Streets. 
(a)  Each street and parking area shall be paved within two years after initial construction thereof. 
(b)  A streetlight shall be placed at each street corner within the manufactured and mobile home community, at each entrance to the manufactured and mobile home community, and at such other places along the street so that the distance between each light does not exceed 225 feet as measured down the center line of the street. 
(c)  All streets shall be maintained and plowed by the owner. 
(Code 1991, § 21.56) 
Sec. 108-156. - Parking. 
(a)  Each lot shall have an off-street parking space having either: 
(1)  A minimum width of 20 feet and a minimum depth of 24 feet; or 
(2)  A minimum width of 12 feet and a minimum depth of 40 feet. 
(b)  If parking on any street is prohibited within the manufactured and mobile home community, an additional parking area within the manufactured and mobile home community shall be established containing one parking space for every five lots (or fraction thereof) which abut on a street where parking is prohibited. 
(c)  No parking shall be permitted on lot yards. 
(Code 1991, § 21.57) 
Sec. 108-157. - Walkways. 
(a)  Walkways not less than three feet wide comprised of a hard surface shall be provided from the parking area of each lot up to and including the steps to the front door of each mobile home. 
(b)  Walkways shall be installed on each lot within one month of the occupancy of the lot, except in those cases where winter weather conditions require a longer period. 
(Code 1991, § 21.58) 
Sec. 108-158. - Utilities. 
(a)  Water, sewer, natural gas and electrical utilities shall be provided to each lot. Propane tanks shall not be permitted. 
(b)  All utilities, including telephone and cable TV, shall be placed underground. 
(c)  Each lot shall be furnished with a minimum 200 amp electrical service. 
(d)  The owner shall install one large water meter for the entire manufactured and mobile home community contained in a manhole. The design and construction of the manufactured and mobile home community water distribution system, the water meters and the manhole shall meet such requirements as may be established by the director of public works. 
(e)  The manufactured and mobile home community owner shall be liable for the payment of all city utilities. 
(Code 1991, § 21.59) 
Sec. 108-159. - Open areas. 
(a)  Each manufactured and mobile home community shall have one or more designated open areas which shall be easily accessible to all manufactured and mobile home community residents, which shall not include a street or the manufactured and mobile home community boundary, and which shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards. 
(b)  The total size of such open areas shall be a minimum of five percent of the total land area of the manufactured and mobile home community. 
(c)  For every 25 lots in the park, there shall be at least one open area in the manufactured and mobile home community having a minimum size of 50 feet by 100 feet. 
(Code 1991, § 21.60) 
Sec. 108-160. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Each lot shall be planted with at least two trees, one of which shall be a deciduous tree. 
(b)  All lots shall be sodded or planted in grass within two months of occupancy of the lot, except where winter weather conditions require a longer period. 
(c)  Trees, grass and landscape material shall be properly maintained and replaced to conform to the approved landscape plans and specifications. 
(Code 1991, § 21.61) 
Sec. 108-161. - Manufactured and mobile home community boundary. 
(a)  A buffer zone shall be placed around the entire perimeter of the manufactured and mobile home community. Each lot within the manufactured and mobile home community shall be set back from the manufactured and mobile home community perimeter a minimum of five feet. 
(b)  A visual screen consisting of compact hedges, decorative fences, coniferous trees and shrubs, and other landscape materials approved by the plan commission, shall be installed and maintained in the five-foot buffer zone described in subsection (a) of this section, to substantially inhibit eye-level vision of the interior of the manufactured and mobile home community from any adjacent street or property. 
(c)  The five-foot buffer zone described in subsection (a) of this section shall be maintained by the owner free of rubbish, debris, weeds and paper. 
(Code 1991, § 21.62) 
Sec. 108-162. - Mobile home installation. 
(a)  Each mobile home shall be placed and leveled on stands (a/k/a blocking piers) consisting of a 16-inch by 16-inch by four-inch deep concrete solid base, with a double tier of eight-inch cement core blocks on the cement base, and with wood shimming resting on the concrete blocks. 
(b)  Each mobile home shall be secured with tie-downs and anchoring equipment. 
(c)  All mobile home units shall have skirts around the entire mobile home made of plastic, fiberglass, aluminum, metal or vinyl, and shall be of a permanent color or painted to match the mobile home so as to enhance the general appearance thereof. 
(Code 1991, § 21.63) 
Sec. 108-163. - Outbuildings. 
(a)  Only one outbuilding may be placed on each lot. 
(b)  The following setback requirements shall apply to each outbuilding on each lot: 
(1)  The minimum front yard setback shall be 20 feet. 
(2)  The minimum rear yard setback shall be three feet. 
(3)  The minimum side yard setback shall be three feet. 
(c)  All outbuildings, except for automobile garages, shall be located in the rear one-half of the lot. 
(d)  No outbuilding shall exceed one story in height. 
(Code 1991, § 21.64) 
Sec. 108-164. - Building additions. 
    No structure may be attached or added to any mobile home, except as follows: 
(1)  The proposed design and construction standards shall be submitted to the plan commission before commencement of work on the structure. 
(2)  The plan commission shall review and approve the project only if: 
a.  The structure is designed to architecturally blend with the mobile home; 
b.  The structure is designed to be safe. 
(3)  If the plan commission approves a project, such approval shall be placed in writing and given to the clerk, who shall place it in the manufactured and mobile home community file. 
(4)  If the plan commission approves a project, it shall be completed within 60 days from the date of the approval. 
(Code 1991, § 21.65) 
Chapter 110 - SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning of wetlands and shorelands, Wis. Stats. § 62.231. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 281.31. 
(Code 1991, § 23.10) 
Sec. 110-2. - Findings of fact and purpose. 
    Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and the pollution of the navigable waters of Lake Decorah and the Lemonweir River would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare; 
(2)  Maintain the storm and flood water storage capacity of wetlands; 
(3)  Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
(4)  Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitats; 
(5)  Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and 
(6)  Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth moving activities. 
(Code 1991, § 23.11) 
Sec. 110-3. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be referred to as the "Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Ordinance for the City of Mauston, Wisconsin." 
(Code 1991, § 23.12) 
Sec. 110-4. - Compliance. 
    The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland area of the city shall be in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. (However, see section 110-59 for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) All permitted development shall require the issuance of a permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 23.13) 
Sec. 110-5. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(Code 1991, § 23.14) 
Sec. 110-6. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 63.23 or 87.30, which relate to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Code 1991, § 23.15) 
Sec. 110-7. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. Where a provision of this chapter is required by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and where the ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the chapter NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 23.16) 
Secs. 110-8-110-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-33. - Shoreland-wetland zoning maps. 
    The following maps are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter and are on file in the office of the city clerk: 
(1)  State wetland inventory maps stamped "FINAL" on August 9, 1985. 
(2)  The official city map, including a demarcation of the floodplain dated December 6, 1977. 
(3)  The Mauston Park Oasis amended wetland map dated March 27, 1992, prepared by Vierbicher Associates, which map shall amend and supersede those parts of the maps identified in subsections (1) and (2) of this section which are covered by the Mauston Park Oasis map. 
(Code 1991, § 23.20) 
Sec. 110-34. - District boundaries. 
(a)  The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the city, which are five acres or more and are shown on the final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the city shall contact the appropriate district office of the department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped, is in error. If department staff concur with the city that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the zoning inspector shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps, the zoning inspector shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period. 
(Code 1991, § 23.21) 
Secs. 110-35-110-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USES 

Sec. 110-57. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31 and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable: 
(1)  Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs: 
a.  Hiking, cross country skiing, fishing, trapping, swimming, snowmobiling, and boating; 
b.  The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops; 
c.  The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber; 
d.  The pasturing of livestock; 
e.  The cultivation of agricultural crops; 
f.  The construction and maintenance of duck blinds; 
g.  The construction and maintenance of ice fishing houses during the ice fishing season; and 
h.  The temporary placement of a car on the ice for the annual "car dunk" competition. 
(2)  Uses which do not require the issuance of a permit and which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
a.  The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected; 
b.  The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries; 
c.  The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore pre-existing levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible; 
d.  The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
e.  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on piling, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
f.  The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in section 110-110(3); and 
g.  The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction. 
(3)  Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
a.  The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under this section, provided that: 
1.  The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
2.  The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 110-110(3); 
3.  The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use; 
4.  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and 
5.  Any wetland alteration must be reasonably necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
b.  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings, provided that: 
1.  The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows, or other wetland or aquatic animals; 
2.  The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
3.  The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and 
4.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support and reasonable landscaping for the building is allowed. 
c.  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that: 
1.  Any private development allowed under this subsection shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose; 
2.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed; 
3.  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in subsection (3)a of this section; and 
4.  Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
d.  The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage collection lines and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines provided that: 
1.  The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
2.  Only limited filling or excavation necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and 
3.  Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 110-110(3). 
(Code 1991, § 23.30) 
Sec. 110-58. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Any use not listed in section 110-57 is prohibited unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this chapter in accordance with article V of this chapter. 
(b)  The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited. 
(Code 1991, § 23.31) 
Sec. 110-59. - Nonconforming uses. 
    The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the time that the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or an applicable amendment to this chapter, took effect and which is not in conformity with the provision of this chapter, including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure in existence at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, adopted under Wis. Stats. § 63.231 or of an environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to that structure, is permitted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(5). Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h) applies to any environmental control facility that was not in existence on May 7, 1982, but was in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment thereof. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to this chapter. 
(3)  Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived adopted under Wis. Stats. § 63.231 may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of the article. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended. 
(4)  The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121. 
(5)  Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(6)  Restoration of certain nonconforming structures. 
a.  Restrictions that are applicable to damaged or destroyed nonconforming structures do not prohibit the restoration of a nonconforming structure if the structure will be restored to the size, subject to subsection (6)a.2 of this section, location, and use that it had immediately before the damage or destruction occurred, or impose any limits on the costs of the repair, reconstruction, or improvement if all of the following apply: 
1.  The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or after March 2, 2006. 
2.  The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation. 
b.  An ordinance enacted under this section to which subsection (6)a.2 of this section applies shall allow for the size of a structure to be larger than the size it was immediately before the damage or destruction if necessary for the structure to comply with applicable state or federal requirements. 
(Code 1991, § 23.32) 
Secs. 110-60-110-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 110-77. - Zoning inspector. 
    The zoning inspector shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter and assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms. 
(2)  Issue permits, revoke permits, issue certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this chapter. 
(3)  Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions. 
(4)  Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties. 
(5)  Submit copies of decisions on variances, use permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments within ten days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate district office of the department. 
(6)  Investigate violations, serve notices of violations, and report violations of this chapter to the commission or the city attorney. 
(Code 1991, § 23.40) 
Sec. 110-78. - Permits. 
(a)  When required. Unless another section of this chapter specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a permit shall be obtained from the zoning inspector before any of the following is initiated within the shoreland-wetland zoning district: 
(1)  Before any new development, as that term is defined herein, is initiated; 
(2)  Before any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated; and 
(3)  Before any use set forth in section 110-57(3) is initiated. 
(b)  Application. An application for a permit shall be made to the zoning inspector upon forms furnished by the municipality and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the following information: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property owner and contractor, where applicable. 
b.  Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed use or development. 
c.  Whether or not a private water supply or sewage system is to be installed. 
(2)  Site development plan. The site development plan shall be submitted as part of the permit application and shall contain the following information drawn to scale: 
a.  Dimensions and area of the lot; 
b.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and center line of all abutting streets or highways; 
c.  Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
d.  Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
e.  Boundaries of all wetlands; 
f.  Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover; 
g.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from floodplain zoning maps; 
h.  Location of existing or future access roads; and 
i.  Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration. 
(c)  Issuance of permit. 
(1)  Upon consideration of the permit application and the standards applicable thereto, the zoning inspector shall determine whether the proposed development, change or use is permitted by this chapter and, based upon such determination, shall either issue a permit or refuse to issue a permit. 
(2)  If the zoning inspector refuses to issue a permit, he shall provide the applicant with a brief written statement of his reasons for the refusal. 
(3)  If the zoning inspector issues a permit, he may attach various conditions to the permit, in addition to those required by this chapter, which he determines are necessary to further the purposes of this chapter as stated in section 110-2. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion controls; increased setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon which to base his determination, the zoning inspector may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent information which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this chapter. 
(4)  If the zoning inspector refuses to issue a permit, the applicant may appeal the decision to the board of appeals pursuant to the procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(5)  Violation of any term or condition of a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and shall be punishable in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 23.41) 
Sec. 110-79. - Certificates of compliance. 
(a)  Except where no permit is required, no land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be issued by the zoning inspector subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or the premises or a part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after notification of the work specified in the permit, provided the building or premises and proposed use thereof conform with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The zoning inspector may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and regulations established by the city council or the city plan commission. 
(c)  Upon written request from the owner, the zoning inspector shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, certifying, after inspection, the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 23.42) 
Sec. 110-80. - Fees. 
    The municipal governing body may establish fees for the following: 
(1)  Permits. 
(2)  Certificates of compliance. 
(3)  Public hearings. 
(4)  Legal notice publications. 
(5)  Rezoning petitions. 
(6)  Appeals. 
(Code 1991, § 23.43) 
Sec. 110-81. - Recording. 
    An appropriate record shall be made by the zoning inspector for the issued permits and certificates of compliance, showing thereon the uses and structures permitted. 
(Code 1991, § 23.44) 
Sec. 110-82. - Revocation. 
    At any time after a permit is issued, if the conditions of the permit are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the zoning inspector or, if the zoning inspector refuses to revoke, by the board of appeals. When a permit is revoked, a written notice of revocation shall be served upon the permit holder. Upon receipt of a notice of revocation, all activity being performed pursuant to revocation is canceled in writing. The failure to cease all activity shall be a violation of this chapter. The notice of revocation may require the abatement of any activity or conditions and the failure to abate such activity or condition within the time set in the notice shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 23.45) 
Sec. 110-83. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  Membership. The board of appeals, as that term is used herein, shall consist of the same members appointed to the city zoning board of appeals. 
(b)  Rules. The board of appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The board of appeals: 
(1)  Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(2)  May authorize upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the dimensional terms of this chapter as shall not be contrary to the public interest, where due to special conditions unique to a property, a literal enforcement of the article will result in unnecessary hardship as defined in section 110-161. In issuing a variance, the purpose of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. The granting of a variance shall not have the effect of granting or extending any use of property which is prohibited in that zoning district by this chapter. 
(d)  Appeals to the board of appeals. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or commission of the city affected by any order, requirement, decision, refusal, or determination of the zoning inspector or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board, but in no event later than 30 days after the receipt of a notice sent pursuant to section 110-78(c) or 110-82. An appeal shall be commenced by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board of appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The zoning inspector or other official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record on the matter appealed. 
(e)  Public hearings. 
(1)  Before making a decision on an appeal, the board of appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The board shall give public notice of the hearing by publishing a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board. At the public hearing, any party may present testimony in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(2)  A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the department at least ten days prior to the public hearing. 
(f)  Decisions. 
(1)  The final disposition of an appeal before the board of appeals shall be in the form of a written decision, made within a reasonable time after the public hearing and signed by the board chairperson. Such decision shall state the specific facts which are the basis of the board's determination and shall either: 
a.  Affirm, reverse, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part; or 
b.  Dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution. 
(2)  A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the department within ten days after the decision is issued. 
(Code 1991, § 23.46) 
Secs. 110-84-110-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 110-110. - Power to amend. 
    The city council may alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this chapter in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 63.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 117, and the following: 
(1)  Copy to department. A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the council. 
(2)  Hearing. All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning regulations shall be referred to the city plan commission and a public hearing shall be held as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2. The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
(3)  Standard of review. In order to ensure that this chapter will remain consistent with the shoreland protection objectives of Wis. Stats. § 281.31, the city may not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning will result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions: 
a.  Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity; 
b.  Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area, or the flow of groundwater through a wetland; 
c.  Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
d.  Shoreline protection against erosion; 
e.  Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds; 
f.  Wildlife habitat; 
g.  Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species. 
(4)  Department determination. Where the district office of the department determines that a proposed amendment will have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (3) of this section, the department shall so notify the city, in writing, of its determination, either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment. Said written notice shall state and explain, in detail, the department's reasons for its determination. 
(5)  Commission determination. Within 30 days after the public hearing, the city plan commission shall submit to the city council a written report, including a recommendation, on the proposed amendment. A copy of the written report shall be mailed to the district office of the department within ten days after submission to the city council. 
(6)  City council determination. Within 30 days after receiving the commission's report, the council shall act on the proposed amendment. Notice of the council's action shall be mailed to the district office of the department within ten days after action. If enacted, publication of the amendment shall be postponed until the time for action by the department has expired. 
(Code 1991, § 23.50) 
Sec. 110-111. - Department disapproval. 
(a)  Notice. Within 30 days after receipt of notice regarding the amendment enacted by the city council, the department may notify the city clerk, in writing, of any objection the department has to said amendment. The written notice from the department shall state and explain, in detail, the department's reasons for its objection. Except for good cause shown, the department shall be stopped from raising any reason which it failed to raise pursuant to section 110-110(4). 
(b)  City action. If the city receives an objection from the department: 
(1)  The city will indefinitely postpone the publication of the amendment; and 
(2)  The city, within 30 days of receipt of the department's objection, will either: 
a.  Elect to modify the amendment to satisfy the objection of the department; or 
b.  Seek the review of the department's objection under Wis. Stats. ch. 227. 
(c)  Modification of amendment. If the city elects to modify an amendment after receipt of an objection from the department, then the same procedure will apply under this chapter as if the modification were being submitted for the first time. 
(d)  Inaction by city. If the city fails to act under subsection (b) of this section, then the proposed amendment shall be null and void, and no publication shall take place. 
(Code 1991, § 23.51) 
Secs. 110-112-110-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 110-136. - Violation defined. 
    Any act in violation of the provisions of the article, by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation and shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1991, § 23.60) 
Sec. 110-137. - Prosecution. 
    Upon learning of a violation, the zoning inspector shall do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Cause the violator to be served with a notice, informing the violator of the nature of the violation and giving the violator a set date by which the violation must be corrected or stopped; 
(2)  Refer the violation to the city plan commission, which may investigate the violation, hold meetings with the violator, and take whatever steps it feels necessary and prudent to correct or stop the violation; or 
(3)  Refer the violation to the city attorney for prosecution. 
(Code 1991, § 23.61) 
Sec. 110-138. - Penalties. 
(a)  Each violation shall be punishable by a forfeiture as established by the city. 
(b)  In addition to a forfeiture, the court shall order the removal or abatement of the violation by the: 
(1)  Violator; or 
(2)  City at the sole expense of the violator, said expense to be added to the forfeiture. 
(c)  Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and the prosecution of two or more offenses by the same violator may be joined in one action. 
(d)  Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by the action of the city, the state, or a citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30(2). 
(Code 1991, § 23.62) 
Secs. 110-139-110-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 110-160. - Rules of construction. 
    For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, the terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number; words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally. 
(Code 1991, § 23.70) 
Sec. 110-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure or use means a detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principal structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use. 
    Boathouse means a structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials which has one or more walls or sides. 
    Class 2 public notice means publication of a public hearing notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 in the Juneau County Star-Times newspaper. Publication is required on two consecutive weeks, the last at least seven days prior to hearing. 
    Department means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the depositing or extraction of earthen materials. 
    Draining system means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge. 
    Environmental control facility means any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
    Fixed houseboat, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.121(1), means a structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway. 
    Navigable waters means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within the state, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the state portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. Under Wis. Stats. § 281.31(2m), notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Wis. Stats. § 62.221 and Wis. Admin Code ch. NR 117 do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if: 
(1)  Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable streams before ditching. 
(2)  Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
    Ordinary high-water mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Service/served whenever this chapter requires any document to be served, such service may be accomplished either: 
(1)  In the manner required for service of a summons under Wis. Stats. § 801.11; or 
(2)  By mailing the document by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the recipient. The address provided pursuant to section 110-78(b) shall be sufficient for obtaining service upon a party by certified mail. 
    Shoreland-wetland district means the zoning district, created in this chapter, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
    Shorelands means lands within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
    Unnecessary hardship means that circumstances where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purpose of this chapter. 
    Variance means an authorization granted by the board of appeals to construct or alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards of this chapter. 
    Wetlands means those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions. 
    Wetland alteration means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
(Code 1991, § 23.71) 
Chapter 112 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Platting of land, Wis. Stats. ch. 236; local subdivision regulations, Wis. Stats. § 236.45. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 112-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a strip of land, dedicated to public use, primarily to provide vehicular service access to the side or rear of properties otherwise abutting on the street. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land to the public or to one or more persons or corporations for a specific purpose or purposes. 
    Improvement means a public improvement consisting of any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main, roadway, street grading and surfacing with or without curbs and gutter, sidewalk, planting strip, crosswalk, off-street parking areas or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
    Lot means a piece of real estate described or identified as a "lot" in any formal, recorded "addition" or "subdivision" to the city. 
    Parcel means any piece of real estate located within the city. 
    Plan commission means the plan commission of the city. 
    Street jog means a discontinuity in the street centerline by an offset of the dedicated street right-of-way. 
    Street, major, means a street of great continuity, sometimes called an arterial street or highway which serves or is intended to serve as a principal traffic-way for fast or heavy traffic, and which taken together comprise the basic structure of the street system of the city and surrounding area. 
    Street, minor, means a street of limited continuity intended primarily to provide a pedestrian and vehicular access to the abutting properties. 
    Street, private, means a roadway designated to serve one or more lots or properties without dedication to the public. 
    Street, secondary, means a street of considerable continuity sometimes called a collector street which serves or is intended to serve as a secondary traffic-way and as a feeder between minor streets in a neighborhood and one or more major streets. 
    Subdivide/subdivision means a division of a lot or parcel into two or more smaller lots or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development, including any plat or plan which includes the creation of any part of one or more streets, public easements, or other rights-of-way for access to or from such lots or parcels, and/or including the creation of new or enlarged parks, playgrounds, plazas, or open spaces. The term "subdivision" includes the resubdivision of one or more lots or parcels in a subdivision or addition made and recorded prior to or after the date these regulations were adopted. The construction of or application to construct two or more dwellings on a parcel or lot, or the construction of or application to construct one or more additional dwellings on a parcel or lot where one or more dwellings already exist, shall be construed as a building development envisioning future transfer of ownership and shall be regarded as a subdivision. 
    Unnecessary hardship means a circumstance where special conditions affect a particular lot or parcel and make strict conformity with this chapter unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the intended use of the lot or parcel and the purposes of this chapter. 
    Variance means an authorized departure from the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 20.16) 
Sec. 112-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalties for a violation of this chapter shall be as provided in chapter 1, article II. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalty provided herein, the court shall order, to the extent permitted by equity, one or more of the following to correct, remove or abate the violation of this chapter: 
(1)  The cancellation or rescission of any deed, conveyance or plat in violation of this chapter; 
(2)  The equitable refund of any purchase price paid to the subdivider by the purchaser of a parcel of land or lot comprising or contained in a subdivision which violates this chapter; and/or 
(3)  An injunction preventing any or all improvements on the lot or parcel of land which has been subdivided in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 20.40) 
Sec. 112-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight for solar collectors; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public requirements; to facilitate the further re-subdivision of large tracts into smaller parcels of land; to conserve the value of the buildings presently placed upon lands; to provide the best possible environment for human habitation in the city; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land through the city. 
(Code 1991, § 20.11) 
Sec. 112-4. - Application. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all governmental entities, local, state and federal, and all private entities, natural and corporate, are required to comply with this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 20.14) 
Sec. 112-5. - Compliance. 
(a)  No lot or parcel shall be subdivided, and no plat, deed, or other conveyance creating the subdivision of a lot or parcel shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds, until such subdivision shall comply with the terms, conditions and procedures of this chapter. 
(b)  Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order; 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements; 
(3)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances; and 
(4)  Subdivisions exempted by another city ordinance. 
(Code 1991, § 20.13) 
Sec. 112-6. - Effect upon other ordinances and restrictions. 
(a)  This chapter supersedes the provisions of any other ordinance which may affect the subdivision of land, except where another ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter, such other ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restriction. 
(b)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deeds, conveyances, plats, restrictions, covenants or easements. However, such existing documents shall be subject to any ordinance in effect at the time such documents were executed. 
(Code 1991, § 20.15) 
Sec. 112-7. - Variances. 
    Any person affected by any requirement of this chapter may apply to the plan commission for a variance. Such application shall be in writing, shall identify the applicant's problem, and shall state the reason why the applicant believes a variance is warranted. The plan commission may grant such variances from the terms of this chapter where, due to special conditions unique to a lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. In issuing any variance, the public interest and the purpose of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. The granting of a variance shall not have the effect of waiving or limiting the applicability of the provisions of this chapter to any other lot or parcel. 
(Code 1991, § 20.34) 
Secs. 112-8-112-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION APPROVALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Plat approvals, Wis. Stats. § 236.10 et seq. 

Sec. 112-33. - Required. 
    Before executing or recording any document which would result in the subdivision of land, the subdivider shall apply, in writing, to the plan commission for approval. 
(Code 1991, § 20.30) 
Sec. 112-34. - Fees. 
    The fees for the approval of a subdivision plat shall be as established by the city. Fees charged for the filing of the subdivision plat shall be paid in full, on the basis of the number of lots created, at the time of submission of any application. If the fee is submitted with an application for tentative approval, the fee for final approval will be increased based upon the actual number of additional lots created by the final subdivision plat, but no refund of a previous fee will be received for a reduction of lots. 
(Code 1991, § 20.33) 
Sec. 112-35. - Tentative approval. 
(a)  When required. Whenever a subdivider intends to subdivide a lot or parcel into four or more lots or parcels, the subdivider shall apply, in writing, to the plan commission for tentative approval. In all other cases, the subdivider may, but is not required to, apply for tentative approval. 
(b)  Application. An application for tentative approval shall be made to the plan commission and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the subdivider and the owner of the land to be subdivided. 
(2)  The street address and the legal description of the property to be subdivided. 
(3)  Three prints of the preliminary plan of subdivision. 
(4)  A brief explanation of the purpose and scope of the subdivision. 
(5)  Any additional information which the plan commission deems pertinent to its decision. 
(c)  Issuance of tentative approval. 
(1)  Upon consideration of the application and the standards applicable thereto, the plan commission shall determine whether the proposed subdivision shall be tentatively approved and, based upon such determination, shall either issue or refuse to issue tentative approval. 
(2)  If the plan commission refuses to issue a tentative approval, it shall provide the applicant with a brief written statement of the reasons for the refusal. The plan commission may make recommendations which, if included in a new application, might permit the tentative approval of the application. 
(3)  If the plan commission issues its tentative approval, it may attach various conditions to the approval, in addition to those conditions required by this chapter, which it determines are necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: erosion controls, increased setbacks, landscaping and planting screens, parking areas and signs, type of construction, lot modifications, special easements, etc. In any conditional approval, the plan commission may require the subdivider to submit a revised preliminary plan. 
(d)  Records. The action of the plan commission regarding an application for tentative approval shall be entered in the official records of the plan commission, including any conditions imposed and the reason for any disapproval of the preliminary plan. The approval or disapproval of the plan commission shall be noted on the prints of the preliminary plan, one of which shall be retained by the plan commission. 
(e)  Effect of tentative approval. Tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the plan commission is not an acceptance of the subdivision plat for record, but it is rather an expression of approval of a general plat as a guide to preparation of the subdivision plat for final approval and recording upon fulfillment of all requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Expiration. Tentative approval shall be effective for a maximum period of 36 months, unless, upon application by the subdivider, the plan commission grants an extension of time. If the final plat has not been submitted for final approval within this time limit, the previously issued tentative approval shall be null and void, and a new preliminary plat must again be submitted to the plan commission for tentative approval. 
(Code 1991, § 20.31) 
Sec. 112-36. - Final approval. 
(a)  When required. Whenever a subdivider intends to subdivide a lot or parcel into two or more lots or parcels, the subdivider shall apply, in writing, for final approval. 
(b)  Application. An application for final approval shall be made to the plan commission and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the subdivider and owner of the land to be subdivided. 
(2)  The street address and the legal description of the property to be subdivided. 
(3)  Two original tracings and three prints of the final subdivision plat. In place of one of the original tracings, the subdivider may submit a reproduced tracing or a bandyke negative of the plat. 
(4)  Such other documents and information as may be required by this chapter, by a previously granted conditional approval, or by request of the plan commission. 
(c)  Hearing. After receipt of the application for final approval, the plan commission shall give public notice of a public hearing on such proposed subdivision by publishing a Class 1 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. The plan commission shall also send notice of the public hearing to the subdivider and the owner of the land, by registered mail, not less than five days before the date fixed for the public hearing. Said notices shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing, the name and address of each subdivider, the general location of the property to be subdivided, and whether the subdivision involves the creation, enlargement, decreasing, or vacation of any streets or other lands devoted to public use. The public hearing may be held at a regular meeting or special meeting of the plan commission. At the public hearing, any party or interested person may present testimony in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(d)  Decision. Within 30 days after the public hearing, the plan commission will act upon the application for final approval. Failure by the plan commission to act within such period shall be deemed an approval of the application, and the plan commission shall issue a certificate to that effect upon demand. However, the subdivider may waive this 30-day requirement and agree to an extension of this period. If the plan commission approves the subdivision, such approval will be entered upon the original tracings and prints, and will be signed by the secretary or chairperson of the plan commission. The plan commission shall, at the same time and without further public hearing, approve the creation, enlargement, decreasing or vacation of any streets or other lands devoted to public use. If the plan commission disapproves the subdivision, such disapproval shall be set forth in writing, together with the reasons therefor. The original disapproval shall be entered in the official records of the plan commission and a copy of such disapproval will be sent to the subdivider. 
(e)  Council approval. Upon final approval of a subdivision by the plan commission, the application and accompanying documentation shall be submitted to the city council, which shall act upon the application within 30 days. The failure by the city council to act within such period shall be deemed an approval of the subdivision; however, the subdivider may waive this time requirement and agree to an extension of time. Upon approval, the city clerk shall enter such approval upon each tracing and print and shall issue a certificate of approval. 
(f)  Recording. A subdivision plat that is approved by the city council shall be recorded, by the subdivider, in the office of the county register of deeds, within 30 days after final approval. 
(Code 1991, § 20.32) 
Secs. 112-37-112-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 112-61. - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, and to the proposed use of lands to be served thereby. 
(b)  The arrangements of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to the plan adopted by the plan commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance of or conformance to existing streets impractical. 
(c)  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic is discouraged. 
(d)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed main street, the plan commission may, at its discretion, require marginal access streets, reverse frontage of lots with a screen planting contained in a no-access reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service alleys, or other treatments that it deems advisable to give adequate protection to residential properties and afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(e)  Private streets shall be avoided. 
(f)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed with the city or county under conditions approved by the plan commission. 
(g)  Street jogs shall be avoided. 
(h)  A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on major and secondary streets. 
(i)  When connecting street lines deflect from each other by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve of adequate radius to ensure clear visibility for all vehicles. 
(j)  Intersecting streets shall be laid out as nearly right angles as possible, and no such angle of intersection shall be less than 60 degrees. 
(k)  Right-of-way and roadway widths shall be not less than as follows: 
Class of Street Right-of-Way Roadway Major 80 feet 50 feet Secondary 66 feet 40 feet Minor 50 feet 30 feet Alleys 20 feet 20 feet  
(l)  Half-streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other standards of these regulations, and where the plan commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever there exists a half street adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half shall be platted within such tract. 
(m)  Dead-end streets designed to be permanently without outlets shall be avoided. When it shall be necessary to provide dead-end streets in order to economically develop the plat, they shall be no longer than 300 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 115 feet and a street property line diameter of at least 130 feet. 
(n)  No street names shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. All street names shall conform to the street name pattern already developed for the city. 
(o)  Alleys shall be required in commercial and industrial districts to provide off-street loading and cargo discharge. 
(p)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the closed end, with not less than a 20-foot radius. 
(Code 1991, § 20.20) 
Sec. 112-62. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided at least 20 feet wide where necessary for overhead or underground utilities. 
(b)  When a subdivision is traversed by a water course, coulee, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction or both that will be adequate for such purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection with such drainage easement. 
(Code 1991, § 20.21) 
Sec. 112-63. - Blocks. 
(a)  Block length should not exceed 1,320 feet nor be less than 500 feet. 
(b)  Pedestrian rights-of-way not less than 15 feet wide may be required in blocks longer than 900 feet where such rights-of-way are deemed by the plan commission to be essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. 
(c)  The width of blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots, except as may be required under section 112-61(d). 
(d)  Blocks intended for business and industrial use should be specifically designated for such purpose with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities. 
(Code 1991, § 20.22) 
Sec. 112-64. - Lots. 
(a)  Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than shown in the following table: 
Minimum Width Minimum Depth Minimum Area Lots served by public water supply and sanitary sewers 70 feet 80 feet 8,000 
square feet Lots served by either public water supply or sanitary sewers, but not both 100 feet 90 feet 10,000 
square feet Lots served by neither public water supply nor sanitary sewers 100 feet 100 feet 20,000 
square feet  
(b)  Platting of lots for commercial purposes should be avoided in favor of the comprehensive design of a balanced shopping center providing for off-street parking and loading space. 
(c)  All lots shall abut on a dedicated and improved street for at least 30 feet. 
(d)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except as required under section 112-61(d). 
(e)  Corner lots shall be of extra width sufficient to maintain building lines on both streets. 
(f)  Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street lines. 
(Code 1991, § 20.23) 
Sec. 112-65. - Materials of construction. 
    All materials of construction and methods of construction shall conform to the standards and requirements established by this Code. 
(Code 1991, § 20.24) 
Sec. 112-66. - Land dedication. 
(a)  Park land; subdivision plats. Except as provided below, from and after the effective date of this section, each subdivider of a subdivision major plat within the city shall designate on every new preliminary plat of a residential subdivision an area of land suitable for park or playground purposes and shall dedicate said land to the public. The amount of land to be provided shall be at least one acre of land for every 25 proposed residential dwelling units within the plat. However, the total amount of land dedicated for public purposes need not exceed one-third of the total area of the plat. Where a definite commitment is made to the city by the subdivider with respect to the number of dwelling units to be constructed on any parcel of land which has a zoning classification that permits multifamily use, the dedication shall be based on that number. Where no such commitment exists, the dedication shall be based upon the maximum number of dwelling units which the zoning classification of the parcel will permit. The city reserves the right to select those lands within the plat it considers best suited to meeting the recreational needs of the city, based on the recommendation of the board of park commissioners, provided such selection does not violate other provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Fee in lieu of dedication. Where, at the discretion of the board of park commissioners and the common council, there is not land suitable for parks within the proposed subdivision, the dedication of land is not feasible, the dedication of land would not be compatible with the city master plan, or the city council determines that a cash contribution will better serve the public interest, the city council may require the subdivider to pay a fee in lieu of making the required land dedication. 
(c)  Certified survey maps. All subdividers proceeding under Wis. Stats. § 236.34 with the use of a certified survey map (subdivision minor plat), shall pay to the city a fee as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Mobile home parks. All persons developing new mobile home parks or additions to existing mobile home parks, shall pay to the city a fee set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Fee schedule and payment. If no land in the plat is selected for recreational purposes due to unsuitability or other reasons, the subdivider/developer shall be required to pay to the city treasurer a set fee per dwelling unit as each unit is sold or developed in the amount established by the city, such fee to be paid by applicants submitting subdivision applications. 
(f)  Building permits. A building permit for a new dwelling shall not be issued until it is determined that the park fees paid under the provisions of this chapter are in accordance with the established fee schedule. If the fees are not in accordance with the fee schedule, the appropriate additional fee must be paid before a building permit will be issued. 
(g)  Use of park fees. Fees collected by the city shall be used exclusively for the acquisition, improvement or maintenance of city park land or for other public recreational purposes in the city. Until so used, the fees shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account with only the interest being available for park purposes, except to the extent that the use of principal shall be authorized by resolution of the common council on the recommendation of the board of park commissioners. 
(Code 1991, § 20.25) 
Chapter 114 - ZONING[1] 

(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-1092 , §§ 1, 2, adopted Apr. 11, 2017, repealed the former ch. 114, §§ 114-1-114-17, 114-38-114-61, 114-81-114-87, 114-118-114-130, 114-159-114-187, 114-213-114-223, 114-255-114-260, 114-284-114-302, and enacted a new ch. 114 as set out herein. The former ch. 114 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1991, §§ 22.100-22.106, 22.108-22.110, 22.115, 22.120-22.125, 22.200-22.206, 22.206(2), 22.207(1-6), 22.208(1-9), 22.209, 22.301-22.307, 22.401-22.414, 22.501, 22.503, 22.505, 22.506, 22.508, 22.509, 22.511, 22.512, 22.514, 22.515, 22.517-22.519, 22.521, 22.522, 22.524-22.526, 22.529, 22.530, 22.532, 22.533, 22.535-22.537, 22.539-22.542, 22.601-22.604, 22.608-22.611, 22.613-22.615, 22.801, 22.803, 22.805, 22.807, 22.809, 22.810, 22.901-22.912, 22.914, 22.932-22.934, 22.936, 22.938, 22.940; and Ord. No. 2015-1080, §§ 1-3, adopted May 26, 2015.   The city official zoning map and overlay districts map contained therein, as previously placed on file with the city clerk for a period of not less than two weeks open for public inspection in accordance with Wis. Stats., § 66.0103, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the city zoning ordinance. 
State Law reference- Zoning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "City of Mauston Zoning Ordinance," except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this chapter." 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by state statutes. (See generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23(7), 62.231, 87.30 and 289.35.) Specific statutory references are provided within the body of this chapter solely as a means of assisting the reader. Such references are not to be considered as all inclusive and shall in no manner be construed to limit the application or interpretation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-3. - Legislative intent. 
    In enacting this chapter, special attention has been given to ensuring a direct relationship between these regulations and the city's comprehensive master plan. The general intent of this chapter is to implement those goals and objectives of the comprehensive master plan which are best addressed through zoning approaches, as enabled by state statutes. In developing the specific regulations of this chapter, much effort has gone into balancing the goals and objectives of the comprehensive master plan. The current status of this chapter and its components, including the official zoning maps, represent the cohesive result of carefully considered plan implementation practices. Amendments to these provisions and/or the official zoning map shall seriously consider the effect of such changes on the interrelationships which exist within this chapter, and between this document, the comprehensive master plan, and related long-range planning policies and programs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-4. - Purpose. 
(a)  The overall purpose of this chapter is to implement the city's comprehensive plan to the extent possible under zoning, as authorized by state statutes. This chapter is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of city residents and visitors by regulating the use of all structures, lands and waters. 
(b)  Specifically, this chapter is designed, among other things, to: 
(1)  Lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of the streets and highways; 
(2)  Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(3)  Promote health and general welfare by the adoption of standards for such things as noise, odors, vibration, air pollution, glare and heat, and hazardous or dangerous materials; 
(4)  Encourage the protection of groundwater resources by regulating and promoting such things as stormwater drainage, natural resource areas and landscaping; 
(5)  Regulate population distribution and density, and the size and location of all structures; 
(6)  Preserve, protect and promote property values by the adoption of standards for such things as landscaping, lighting, fencing, antennas, and exterior storage; 
(7)  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public facilities; and 
(8)  Provide penalties for its violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Purposes of zoning ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(c). 
Sec. 114-5. - Appearance of ordinance text. 
(a)  Appearance of chapter text. The underlined or boldfaced headings used in this chapter are inserted primarily for convenience, and are in no way to be construed as a limitation on the scope of the particular sections or subsections which they head. 
(b)  Omitted sections. Throughout this chapter, sections, subsections, paragraphs and subparagraphs may be omitted from the outline of numbers and letters found herein. These omitted items are intended to be reserved for future use, and should not reflect the existence of a defect or typographical error. In some cases, the phrase "reserved for future use" may be inserted for purposes of clarification. 
(c)  References to amendments. Throughout this chapter, there will be references to ordinances which have amended the text of this chapter. These references are inserted primarily for convenience and should not be construed as an interpretation or limitation on the particular sections to which they refer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-6. - Separability and non-liability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the several provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any portion of this chapter to a particular property, water, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, water, building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment. 
(3)  If any requirement or limitation which is attached to an authorization given under this chapter is found invalid, it shall be presumed that the authorization would not have been granted without the requirement or limitation and, therefore, said authorization shall also be invalid. 
(4)  The city does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as floodlands, wetlands, or shorelands will be subject to periodic inundation. The city, its officers, employees, agents or representatives, shall not be liable for any flood damages, sanitation problems, or structural damages caused by any such inundation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-7. - Abrogation. 
    It is not intended that this chapter abrogate or interfere with any constitutionally protected vested right. It is also not intended that this chapter abrogate, repeal, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-8. - Jurisdiction. 
    This chapter is applicable to all territory located within the corporate limits of the city. This chapter is also applicable to those extraterritorial zoning jurisdictions which specifically incorporate, by reference, all or part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-9. - Re-enactment and repeal. 
    This chapter, in part, carries forward by re-enactment some of the prior provisions of the regulations governing zoning and related matters, being previously known collectively as the "Zoning Code," section 114 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Mauston, adopted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. It is not the intention of this chapter to repeal, but rather to re-enact and continue in force such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued hereunder are preserved and may be enforced, unless explicitly surrendered by specific provisions of this chapter or altered by the official zoning map. 
(1)  All provisions of former section 114 of the City of Mauston Code of Ordinances which are not re-enacted herein are hereby repealed, except the provisions of extraterritorial zoning, are not repealed. 
(2)  The adoption of this chapter shall not waive or adversely affect the city's right to prosecute any violation of the predecessor zoning ordinance, provided the violation occurred while that ordinance was in effect. 
(3)  The adoption of this chapter shall not repeal, amend or adversely affect extraterritorial zoning, of section 114, and its continued application to the extraterritorial zoning district, until such time as is repealed and replaced by a new separate extraterritorial zoning ordinance. To the extent that repealed portions of section 114 are incorporated by reference into the extraterritorial zoning ordinance, such portions shall remain in full force and effect, but only as they relate to the extraterritorial zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Extraterritorial zoning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7a). 
Sec. 114-10. - Effective date. 
    All plans approved under previous zoning regulations shall be valid and may be used to obtain permits for a period of not more than six months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, except where subject to developer's agreement provisions. This chapter shall become effective upon: 
(1)  The passage and posting of an enabling ordinance which adopts this chapter according to law; and 
(2)  The adoption of a new zoning map, whichever occurs later. (This effective date was October 31, 2001.) 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-11. - Appendices and checklists. 
    Incorporated herein by this reference are various appendices and checklists. The appendices and checklists are instructions on how to use this chapter and are not to be construed as a repetition of or a replacement for the text of this chapter. These instructions are intended to be an aide to outline a step-by-step procedure for applying the rules and regulations of this chapter to a particular development. Appendices and checklists may be revised from time to time by the city administrator whenever, in his discretion, an appendix or checklist needs revision to accomplish its purpose. If the information contained in any appendix or checklist is found to be inconsistent with the text of this chapter, the text shall be controlling. If the information contained in any appendix or checklist omits information found in the text of this chapter, the text shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-12. - Rules of interpretation. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare, and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the city. 
(b)  Where property is affected by the regulations imposed by any provision of this chapter and by other governmental regulations, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail. Regardless of any other provision of this chapter, no land shall be developed or used, and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(c)  No structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a zoning permit, and without full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable local, county and state regulations. 
(d)  Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in plans, construction, size or designated use of any building or part thereof, for which a zoning or building permit has been issued before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and the construction of which shall have been started within six months from the date of such permit. 
(e)  Except as provided in this chapter, under provisions for nonconforming uses (section 114-51), nonconforming developments, substandard lots (section 114-77), and nonconforming structures and buildings (section 114-78), no building, structure, development or premises shall be hereinafter used or occupied and no applicable permit granted that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  In cases of mixed-occupancy or mixed-use, the regulations for each land use shall apply to the portion of the structure or land so occupied or so used. 
(g)  Except for outlots authorized under the city's land division regulations to contain permanently protected green space area, no yard or open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building or structure on another lot. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-13. - Word usage. 
    The interpretation of this chapter shall abide by the provisions, definitions and rules of this section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise, or where the result would clearly be inconsistent with the manifest intent of this chapter: 
(1)  The terms "shall", "must" and "will" are mandatory. 
(2)  The terms "may, "can" and "might" are permissive. 
(3)  The term "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, trusts, and any other legal entity. 
(4)  The term "city" means the City of Mauston, Wisconsin. 
(5)  The term "county" means the County of Juneau, Wisconsin. 
(6)  The term "state" means the State of Wisconsin. 
(7)  The term "commission" means the City of Mauston Plan Commission. 
(8)  The terms "council," "city council," and "common council" refer to the City of Mauston Common Council. 
(9)  The term "board" shall mean the City of Mauston Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(10)  If there is any ambiguity between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-14. - Statutory references. 
    The provisions of state statutes and administrative code regulations listed herein, including any future revisions or amendments thereto or replacements thereof, are hereby made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of any statute or code referred to herein shall also be made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-15. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations in this chapter are intended to have the following meanings: 
Table 114-15(a) 
Abbreviation Meanings ABC Accessory building coverage Ac Acre Acc Accessory AFH Adult family home AG Agriculture (zoning district) Bldg Building CB Central business (zoning district) CG Community gateway overlay zoning district CLA Community living arrangement Db Decibel DD Downtown design overlay zoning district DNR Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources DW Drainageway overlay zoning district DPW Mauston's director of public works Du Dwelling unit ER-1 Estate residential-1 (zoning district) F Floor FAR Floor area ratio FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency Ft Foot/feet FP Floodplain overlay zoning district GB General business (zoning district) GDP General development plan GFA Gross floor area GI General industrial (zoning district) GSA Gross site area GSR Green space ratio HI Heavy industrial (zoning district) HP Historic preservation overlay zoning district ISR Impervious surface ratio J Lot width (when shown on drawing) K Street frontage (when shown on drawing) L Front setback to principal building (when shown on drawing) LA Landscaped area LSR Landscape surface ratio M Front setback to accessory building (when shown on drawing) Max Maximum MBC Maximum building coverage MBS Maximum building size MGD Maximum gross density Min Minimum MH Maximum height MLA Minimum lot area MSA Minimum site area MR-8 Multifamily residential-8 (zoning district) MR-10 Multifamily residential-10 (zoning district) MWR Municipal well recharge area overlay zoning district MZA Minimum zoning district area N Side setback to principal building (when shown on drawing) Na Not applicable NB Neighborhood business (zoning district) Nonres nonresidential O Side setback to accessory building (when shown on drawing) P Rear setback to principal building (when shown on drawing) PB Planned business (zoning district) PBC Principal building coverage PD (_-_) Planned development (zoning district) PIP Precise implementation plan (section 114-296) POZ Park overlay zoning district Princ Principal Q Rear setback to accessory building (when shown on drawing) R Peripheral setback (when shown on drawing) Res Residential RPA Resource protection area S Paved surface setback (when shown in drawing) Sq. ft. Square feet SR-3 Single-family residential-3 (zoning district) SR-4 Single-family residential-4 (zoning district) SS Steep slope overlay zoning district SW Shoreland-wetland overlay zoning T Separation of principal buildings (when shown on drawing) TR-6 Two-family residential-6 (zoning district) U Separation of accessory buildings (when shown on drawing) WECS Wind energy conversion system WL Woodland overlay zoning district X Parking space (when shown on drawing) Y Dwelling core dimensions (when shown ZDA Zoning district area #F Number of floors "-" or fewer (e.g., "8-" means "8 or fewer") "+" or more (e.g., "9+" means "9 or more")  
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutting means having a common border with, or being separated from, such common border only by an alley or easement. 
    Access means a means of vehicular or nonvehicular approach, i.e., entry to or exit from a property, street or highway. 
    Access, direct, means a condition of immediate physical connection resulting from adjacency of a road or right-of-way abutting a property. 
    Access, secondary, means a means of vehicular or nonvehicular approach, entry to, or exit from property from a source other than a public street or highway. 
    Activity center means an area which is typified by a concentration of nonresidential and/or multifamily development. 
    Addition. In addition to the definition provided by the Wis. Admin. Code SPS 20.07(2), the term "addition" includes, but is not limited to, the following: decks made of any material and elevated more than two feet; balconies; swimming pools; and fireplaces. 
    Adjacent means abutting, or being located directly across a right-of-way from a separate lot. 
    Alley means a public right-of-way usually of reduced width which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Animal unit means a measure which represents a common term for the purpose of defining a husbandry or intensive agricultural land use. The animal unit measure relates to the carrying capacity of one acre of land and is related to the amount of feed various species consume, and the amount of waste they produce. The following table indicates the number of common farm species which comprise a single animal unit: 
Animal Unit Table Number of
Animals/Unit   
Type of Livestock 1.0 Horse (> 2 yrs), cattle (> 2 yrs) 2.0 Colt (< 2 yrs), cattle (< 2 yrs) 2.5 Brood sow or boar 4.0 Calves (< 1 yr) 5.0 Hogs (up to 220 lbs) 7.0 Sheep 14.0 Lamps 200.0 Chicken and other poultry  
    Antenna means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices, external to or attached to the exterior of any building, and used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves (e.g., television, radio, microwave, telephone, internet access or shortwave signals). 
    Appeal means a means for obtaining review of a decision, determination, order, or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this chapter as expressly authorized by the provisions of section 114-295. 
    Attic means the area of a building which is used only for long-term storage or mechanical equipment and is not used for habitation or work space, and which is located between the roof framing and the ceiling of the highest habitable floor. Improvement to habitable status shall make it a story. 
    Average ground elevation means the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or structure. 
    Awning means a roof-like cover, often fabric, metal or glass, designed and intended for protection from weather or for decorative embellishment, which projects from a wall or from a roof of a structure, and is located over a window, walk, door or the like. 
    Awning, fixed, means an awning constructed with a rigid frame that cannot be routinely retracted, folded or collapsed, and then opened or unfolded. 
    Awning, illuminated, means a fixed awning covered with a translucent membrane that is, in whole or in part, illuminated by light passing through the membrane from within or underneath the awning structure. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (a/k/a the 100-year flood). 
    Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having one-half or less of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Bedroom means a room in a residence marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to function primarily for sleeping. 
    Blanket variance means a variance which is automatically granted by a provision of this chapter in order to reduce the creation of legal nonconforming developments or legal nonconforming residential structures. 
    Bufferyard means any permitted combination of distance, vegetation, fencing and berming which results in a reduction of visual and other interaction with an adjoining property. 
    Building means a structure built, maintained, or intended for use for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. The term "building" is exclusive of structures or portions of structures which are not intended for shelter, such as open air decks and patios, open air balconies, outdoor pools, etc., which do not have a roof or other enclosure surrounding them. Where independent units with separate entrances are divided by shared walls, each unit is a building. 
    Building, accessory, means a building which: 
(1)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal use; 
(2)  Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or use served; 
(3)  Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions of this chapter; and 
(4)  Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. Any portion of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory building. 
    Building coverage means the percentage of a lot covered by the principal and accessory buildings, including all structures with a roof. 
    Building front means that exterior wall of a building which faces the front lot line of the lot. 
    Building height means the vertical distance between: 
(1)  The lowest elevation of either the: 
a.  Adjoining ground level; or 
b.  Established grade; and 
(2)  The highest elevation of the: 
a.  Top of the cornice of a flat roof; 
b.  Deck line of a mansard roof; 
c.  Point of the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof; 
d.  Uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof; 
e.  Mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof; or 
f.  Top of any structure attached to a building. 
    Building line means an imaginary line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or road right-of-way line, located a sufficient distance away to provide for the minimum yards required by this chapter. The building lines on a lot determine the area in which buildings may be placed, subject to all other applicable provisions of this chapter. The building line is also referred to as a setback line. 
    Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted, or in which is intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
    Building separation means the narrowest distance between two buildings. See Minimum building separation. 
    Building size means the total gross floor area of all the floors of a building, including basements but not crawl spaces. See Maximum building size. 
    Bulk (of a building) means the combination of building height, size, and location on a lot. 
    Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the department of natural resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11 and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this chapter. 
    Caliper means a measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measurement one-half foot above natural grade. Used for trees in a nursery setting. 
    Candlepower means the amount of light that will illuminate a surface one foot distant from a light source to an intensity of one foot-candle. Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source, or luminaire. 
    Canopy means a freestanding, permanently-roofed shelter projecting over a sidewalk, driveway, entry, service area, gas pump area or similar area, which shelter is supported, in whole or in part, by columns, poles or braces extending from the ground. 
    Carport (land use) means an open sided, roofed vehicle shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof from the side of a building. See section 114-128(3). 
    Cellar means that portion of the building having more than one-half of the floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Clerestory window means a window in which the lowest glassed area is a minimum of seven feet above the level of the floor located directly under the window. 
    Climax tree means a tree that would occupy the uppermost canopy of a forest in a natural ecological situation. These trees are often referred to as shade trees. Examples include hickory, oak, maple, etc. 
    Commercial vehicle means any motor vehicle used for business or institutional purposes or having painted thereon or affixed thereto a sign identifying a business or institution or a principal product or service of a business or institution. Agricultural equipment used as part of a permitted agricultural principal use shall not be considered as a commercial vehicle. 
    Communication tower means a structure, whether free-standing or attached to an existing building or structure, other than a building or structure which is owned by the city in which located and dedicated to a governmental use or used as a warning siren site, that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
    Community character means the impression which an area makes in regard to the type, intensity, density, quality, appearance, and age of development. 
    Comprehensive master plan means the comprehensive master plan of the city, adopted November 22, 2016, and as subsequently amended. 
    Conditional use. See Use, conditional. 
    Conditional use, limited. See Use, limited conditional. 
    Conservation envelope means the area on a site which contains the resource protection area (RPA), within which site disruption, e.g., grading, vegetation clearing, building, etc., is limited or prohibited. 
    Construction, start of, means the installation of foundation footings and/or materials for road construction. 
    Conventional residential development means all residential land uses except institutional residential development, mobile home residential development and mobile home park residential development. 
    Crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for limited access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
    Daycare. See Family day care home, Intermediate day care home, or Group day care center. 
    Deck means a structure that has no roof or walls. A deck can be attached or detached to the principle structure. If attached, the deck is required to have main supports and continuous footings below grade by 48 inches and must be raised above grade and must comply with the principle setback requirements or as modified by section 114-53(c). If detached, the deck shall be an accessory structure. 
    Dedication means the transfer of property interest from private to public ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee simple interest or of a less than fee simple interest, including an easement. 
    Density means a term used to describe the maximum number of dwelling units and the minimum amount of landscaping required for residential projects. Each zoning district contains density standards which determine the maximum amount of development permitted on any given site, taking into consideration a variety of factors, including, but not limited to the: 
(1)  Area of the site; 
(2)  Proportion of the site not containing sensitive natural resources; 
(3)  Zoning district in which the site is located; 
(4)  Development option under which the site is developed; and 
(5)  Use considered for development. (See Intensity, which is the term used to describe the same standards for nonresidential sites.) 
    Developer means the legal or beneficial owner of a lot or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion in a development, including an optionee or contract purchaser. 
    Development means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, or the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any building; or any use or change in use of any buildings or land; or any extension of any use of land; or any clearing, grading, or other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this chapter. 
    Development option means the type of residential or nonresidential land uses which may develop on a lot as determined by the requirements of this chapter. 
    Development pad means the area of a lot where site disruption will occur, including building areas, paved areas, yards and other areas of non-native vegetation, and areas devoted to septic systems. 
    Drainage means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means. The term "drainage" includes the control of runoff, to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development, and the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding. 
    Drainage way means non-navigable, aboveground watercourses, detention basins and/or their environs which are identified by the presence of one or more of the following: 
(1)  All areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a perennial stream as shown on USGS 7.5-minute topographic maps for the city and its environs; 
(2)  All areas within 50 feet of the ordinary high water mark of an intermittent stream or open channel drainage way as shown on USGS 7.5-minute topographic maps for the city and its environs. 
    Dryland access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land which is outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above the regional flood elevation and wide enough to accommodate wheeled vehicles. 
    Dwelling means a residential building or one or more portions thereof occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residence purpose, but not including habitations provided in nonresidential uses such as lodging uses and commercial campgrounds. 
    Dwelling, attached, means a dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls. 
    Dwelling, detached, means a dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
    Dwelling, single-family detached. means a dwelling located on an individual lot or within a group development and which is fully detached from another dwelling unit or building. 
    Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms providing or intended to provide permanent living quarters for not more than one family. 
    Dwelling unit separation means the narrowest distance between two dwelling units. See Minimum dwelling unit separation. 
    Easement means written authorization by a property owner for another party to use for a specified purpose any designated part of his property which has been recorded in the register of deeds' office. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have its lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings columns (post and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
    Encroachment means any unauthorized and/or unpermitted fill, structure, building, use, or development in or on a floodway, easement, right-of-way or property. 
    Environmental control facility means any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce, or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air, or water pollutants, solid waste or thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
    Environs (of the city) mean the area in which the city may exercise extraterritorial powers. 
    Erosion means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, and/or gravity. 
    Essential services mean facilities that are: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by public utility companies or public agencies; 
(2)  Located in public ways or in easements provided for the purpose, or on a customer's premises and not requiring a private right-of-way; 
(3)  Reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate water, sewer, gas, electric, communication, or similar services to adjacent customers; and 
(4)  Do not include any cross-country lines on towers. 
    Extraterritorial area means the area outside of the city limits in which the city exercises extraterritorial powers pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7a). 
    Family means an group of individuals living together as the functional equivalent of a family where the residents may share living expenses, chores, eat meals together and are a close group with social, economic and psychological commitments to each other. A family includes, for example, the residents of residential care facilities and group homes for people with disabilities. A family does not include larger institutional group living situations such as dormitories, fraternities, sororities, monasteries or nunneries. 
    Fence means an artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal or other manufactured material or combination of materials, erected to enclose, screen or separate areas. 
    Fence, solid, means any fence which cannot be seen through. Such fences include basket weave fences, stockade fences, plank fences, and similar fences. 
    First habitable floor. means the top surface above an unfinished basement, cellar, or crawl space that is intended for living quarters. 
    Floor (F) means a habitable level of a building, typically not including unfinished basement, cellar, crawlspace, or attics that are unintended for living quarters. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached accessory buildings, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized as dead storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space. Measurements shall be made from the inside of the exterior walls and to the center of interior walls. 

    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the ratio calculated by dividing the total floor area of all buildings on a site by the area of the subject lot. See Maximum floor area ratio. 
    Foot candle means a unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors may include, but are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development and the sedimentation of a river or streambed. 
    Garage, residential, means a detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers or one truck of a rated capacity not in excess of 10,000 pounds. 
    General floor plans means a graphic representation of the anticipated utilization of the floor area within a building or structure, but not necessarily as detailed as construction plans. 
    Glare means the brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort. 
    Green space means the area of a site upon which site disruption and site development are strictly limited. The term "green space" consists of the following: 
(1)  Resource protection areas (RPA); 
(2)  Areas devoted to land uses which incorporate natural resources, such as passive outdoor public recreational land use (section 114-123(a)), or outdoor institutional land use (section 114-123(d)); 
(3)  Portions of a site which are prevented from development by deed restrictions; and 
(4)  Any area included within a lot that: 
a.  Is not defined as an impervious surface under this section; and 
b.  Maintains living vegetation. 
    Gross density means the result of dividing the number of dwelling units located on a site by the gross site area. See Maximum gross density. 
    Gross floor area (GFA) means the total habitable floor area on all levels of a building. 
    Gross site area (GSA). 
(1)  The term "gross site area" means the total area of a site or parcel, minus all of the following: 
a.  Existing and proposed rights-of-way of roads and public facilities; 
b.  Land which, although part of the same site, parcel or lot, is not contiguous to, or is not accessible from, the existing or proposed road network serving the site; 
c.  Land which is proposed for a different development option or a different zoning district; and 
d.  Areas of navigable waters (lakes and streams). 
(2)  GSA is calculated whenever a person wishes to develop a parcel or site, e.g., any subdivision of land or the creation of a plat. The determination of GSA is designed to help the developer calculate how much land is available for development after subtracting the undevelopable land from the proposed site. 
    Hearing notice means publication or posting which meets the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. Class 1 notice is the minimum required for appeals, published once at least one week (seven days) before hearing. Class 2 notice is the minimum required for enactment of all new zoning ordinances and amendments including map amendments, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. 
    High flood damage potential means any danger to human life or public health or the potential for any significant economic loss to a structure or its contents. 
    Holding zone means a zoning district designed to limit development potential until adequate public services and infrastructure are provided. 
    Impervious surface means areas which prohibit infiltration of storm water. Concrete, brick, asphalt and similar paved surfaces are considered impervious. Gravel areas and areas with landscaped pavers which are intended for vehicular traffic are considered to be impervious. 
    Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal or greater than one one-hundredth of a foot, resulting in comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
    Institutional residential unit means a dwelling unit contained in an institutional residential development. 
    Intensity means a term used to describe the maximum amount of gross floor area and the minimum amount of landscaping required for nonresidential projects. Each zoning district contains intensity standards which determine the maximum amount of development permitted on any given site, taking into consideration a variety of factors, including, but not limited to the: 
(1)  Area of the site; 
(2)  Proportion of the site not containing sensitive natural resources; 
(3)  Zoning district in which the site is located; 
(4)  Development option under which the site is developed; and 
(5)  Use considered for development. See Density, which is the term used to describe the same standards for residential sites. 
    Interchange means a grade-separated highway intersection with one or more turning lanes for travel between intersecting roads or highways. 
    Lakeshore. 
(1)  The term "lakeshore" means those lands lying between the ordinary water line of navigable waters and either: 
a.  The backside of the principal structure on the lot; or 
b.  A point 75 feet from said water line, whichever is closer to said water line. 
(2)  The term "lakeshore" shall not include those lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches where: 
a.  Such lands are not adjacent to a navigable stream or river; 
b.  Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching or had no previous stream history; and 
c.  Such lands are maintained in non-structural agricultural use. 
    Landscape surface ratio (LSR) means the percentage of the Gross Site Area (GSA) which must be preserved for landscaped area. LSR is calculated by dividing the total landscaped area of a lot by the GSA. 
    Landscaped area (LA) means the area of a site which is not covered by impervious surfaces and continually maintained in vegetation, including grasses, flowers, herbs, garden plants, native or introduced ground covers, shrubs, bushes, and trees. Landscaped area includes the area located within planted and continually maintained landscaped planters and the area landscaped pursuant to article VI of this chapter. The term "landscaped area" may also include resource protection areas (RPA) and other green space. 
    Lawn ornament means walks, drives, paved terraces and purely decorative garden accessories, such as small pools (not intended for human use), fountains, bird baths, statuary, sun dials, flag poles, etc. 
    Local residential street means a road which primarily serves to collect traffic originating directly from residential driveways and private residential courts and streets. 
    Lot means a parcel of land that is: 
(1)  Undivided by any street or private road; 
(2)  Occupied by, or is designated to be developed for, one building or one principal use; and 
(3)  Either: 
a.  Designated as a single lot on a plat or certified survey map; or 
b.  Is a combination of contiguous lots owned by a single entity and identified as a single tax parcel (e.g., a group of three contiguous lots in a residential neighborhood, which are combined into a single tax parcel, and upon which a single home and accessory structures are placed). 
    Lot area means the area contained within the property boundaries of a recorded lot. Lot area has the effect of limiting the density and intensity of development on a lot. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersection streets or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees. 
    Lot depth means the average distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot, as measured at each side lot line. 
    Lot frontage means lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot has more than one street lot line, lot width shall be measured, and the minimum lot width required by this chapter shall be provided at each such line. 
    Lot interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line means the property line bounding a lot, except that where any portion of a lot extends into an existing or proposed public right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this chapter. 
    Lot line, front, means a lot line which abuts a public or private street right-of-way. In the case of a lot which has two of more street frontages, the lot line along the street from which the house is addressed shall be the front lot line. 
    Lot line, rear, means, in the case of rectangular or most trapezoidal shaped lots, that lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of lots which have frontage on more than one road or street, the rear lot line shall be the lot line opposite the front lot line as defined above. 
    Lot line, side, means any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line, a street side lot line, or a rear lot line. 
    Lot line, street side, means any lot line which abuts a public or private street right-of-way which is not the front lot line. 
    Lot of record means a platted lot; or lot described in a certified survey map by metes and bounds, which has been approved by the city or by the county and has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds. 
    Lot, through, means a lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two substantially parallel streets, one or more of which may be a portion of a cul-de-sac; Except for through lots which abut an arterial or nonresidential collector street, through lots are prohibited. 
    Lot width means the maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured parallel to the front lot line and at the rear of the required front yard. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest enclosed floor, including basement. Any unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor. 
    Manufactured dwelling (modular) means a dwelling structure or component thereof, as defined in the state uniform dwelling code, Wis. Admin. Code SPS 320.07(52m), which bears the state department of commerce insignia certifying that it has been inspected and found to be in compliance with subchapter V of said uniform dwelling code (Wis. Admin. Code SPS 320.12 et seq.). 
    Manufactured home means a single-family dwelling structure or component thereof, fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility, for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing HUD label or insignia certifying that it is built in compliance with the federal manufactured housing construction standards under 42 USC 5401 to 5426. 
    Maximum accessory building coverage means the largest permitted area of all accessory buildings on a lot. 
    Maximum building coverage (MBC) means the largest permitted area (footprint) of all buildings on a lot. 
    Maximum building size (MBS) means the largest permitted total gross floor area a building may contain. See Building size. 
    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) means the largest floor area ratio permitted on a lot. See Floor area ratio. 
    Maximum gross density (MGD) means the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on one acre (or 43,560 square feet) of lot area in a specific zoning district and land use. 
    Maximum height means the maximum height of the highest portion of any structure. See Height. 
    Maximum number of floors means the maximum number of floors a building is permitted to contain in a zoning district. 
    Minimum building separation means the narrowest permitted building separation. 
    Minimum dwelling unit separation means the narrowest permitted dwelling unit separation. 
    Minimum floor elevation means the lowest elevation permissible for the construction, erection, or other placement of any floor, including a basement or cellar floor, but not a crawl space. 
    Minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR) means the minimum permitted percentage of area of a lot that must be preserved as landscaped area. See landscape surface ratio. 
    Minimum lot area (MLA) means the minimum size lot permitted within the specified zoning district and land use. MLA has the effect of limiting the density of a residential site, and the intensity of a nonresidential site. 
    Minimum lot width means the smallest permissible lot width for the applicable dwelling unit type or nonresidential development option. 
    Minimum setback means the narrowest distance permitted from a street, side, or rear property line to a structure. 
    Minimum site area (MSA) means the minimum gross site area in which the specified development option may occur. See Gross site area (GSA). 
    Minimum zoning district area (MZA) means the minimum area of a zoning district. This is intended to prevent spot zoning of small areas. 
    Mobile home means a type of residential land use defined and regulated in section 114-121(i). 
    Mobile home/manufactured home park means a type of residential land use defined and regulated in section 114-121(j). 
    Natural resource protection area. See Resource protection area (RPA). 
    Natural resource protection overlay zoning districts means zoning districts which primarily identify and regulate the disturbance of areas containing protected natural resources. 
    Navigable water means rivers and streams will be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle maps until such time that the DNR has made a determination that the waterway is not, in fact, navigable. 
    Net developable area (NDA) means the area of a parcel or site which may be disturbed by development activity. Net developable area is the result of subtracting resource protection areas (RPA) from the gross site area (GSA). The purpose for calculating NDA is to assist a developer in determining what percentage of a site is available for development 
    Nonconforming building or structure means any building, or other structure, which is lawfully existing under provisions preceding this chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the building or structure were to be erected under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming development means a lawful development approved under provisions preceding the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the development were to be created under the current provisions of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use means an active and actual use of land, buildings or structures lawfully existing prior to this chapter which has continued as the same use to the present and which does not comply with all the applicable regulations of this chapter. 
    Noxious matter or materials means material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals. 
    Obstruction to flow means any development which physically blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development by itself or in conjunction with any future similar development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Official map means the map adopted by the common council which indicates the existing and proposed location of streets, highways, parks, playgrounds, roads, rights-of-way, waterways, public transit facilities and other public facilities as authorized by state statutes. 
    Off-site parking lot (land use). See section 114-126(a). 
    On-site means located on the lot in question, except in the context of on-site detention, when the term means within the boundaries of the development site as a whole. 
    Opacity means the degree to which vision is blocked by bufferyard. Opacity is the proportion of a bufferyard's vertical plane which obstructs views into an adjoining property. 
    Open sales lot means an unenclosed portion of a lot or lot of record where goods are displayed for sale, rent or trade. 
    Ordinary high water mark means the point on the bank or shore of a body of water up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristics. 
    Overlay zoning district means a zoning district which imposes uniform restrictions on all properties within its area which are in addition to the restrictions specific to the standard zoning districts described in article II of this chapter, as well as the general restrictions of this chapter. 
    Owner means the person or entity which holds legal title to a lot or parcel of land. 
    Parcel (a/k/a site) means a tract of land designated for development or redevelopment. Typically, a parcel is either: 
(1)  A tract of land under single ownership, which typically has not been divided by streets, has not been designated for a principal use, and has not been divided into recorded lots; or 
(2)  In the case of redevelopment, a tract of multiple lots with multiple principal uses which the developer intends to acquire or has acquired for combination into a single redevelopment. A parcel is to be differentiated from a lot, which is ready for development without combination with other property or without subdivision into smaller lots. 
    Performance guarantee means a financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by this chapter will be completed in compliance with the chapter, regulations and the approved plans and specifications of a development. 
    Performance standard means criterion established to control and limit the impacts generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. 
    Peripheral setback means the distance between a structure and the boundary of a zoning district or development option. Peripheral setbacks are used to provide a setback in addition to, not overlapping with, regularly required building setbacks. Bufferyards are distinct from peripheral setbacks, but may be located within the peripheral setback. 
    Principal use means any and all of the primary uses of a property, as determined by the zoning administrator, which uses are allowable as uses permitted by right or by conditional use, and not allowable as an accessory use or a temporary use per articles II, III and IV of this chapter. 
    Private sewage system means any sewage treatment and disposal system within the city which is not owned and operated by the city. The term "private sewage system" includes alternative sewage systems approved by the department of safety and professional services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure, or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
    Protected natural resources means resources, such as floodways, floodfringes, floodplain conservancy areas, wetlands, drainageways, woodlands, steep slopes, and lakeshores, which are protected by the provisions of this chapter. 
    Public improvement means any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, intended to provide for public needs, such as streets, roads, alleys or pedestrian walks or paths, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility and energy services. 
    Public sewer means the sanitary sewer system owned and operated by the city. 
    Recorded lot. See Lot of record. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle designed and used principally for the transport of persons. 
    Residentially zoned means a property located in a residential district per article II of this chapter. 
    Resource protection area (RPA) means the area of a site which contains floodways, floodplain areas, floodfringes, wetlands, drainageways, lakeshores, woodlands and steep slopes, and in which development activity is limited to protect these natural resources. 
    Restrictive, more (less). Regulation imposed by this chapter is more (less) restrictive than another if it prohibits or limits development to a greater (lesser) extent or by means of more (less) detailed specifications. 
    Scale (of development) means the gross floor area, height, or volume of a single structure or group of structures. 
    Sedimentation means the deposition of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a result of erosion. 
    Setback means the shortest distance between a building's or structure's exterior and the nearest point on the referenced lot line. Various setback requirements are established in each zoning district 
    Shrub means a low lying deciduous or evergreen plant. See article VI of this chapter. 
    Site evaluation worksheet means a worksheet designed to assist persons interested in developing a site, parcel or lot in the city, e.g., development of a parcel into a residential subdivision, or a multifamily development, or a commercial development. This worksheet helps calculate the amount of land which is actually available for development, after things like wetlands and rights-of-way have been subtracted from the total area of the parcel. For example, if a developer needs one acre of developable property, this worksheet will help the developer determine whether a proposed site will accommodate a one-acre development after subtracting rights-of-way, lakes, streams, floodplains, drainageways, and other areas protected under this chapter. 
    Skylight means a window or other paned area located on the ceiling or roof of a structure. 
    Standard industrial classification code (SIC) means the numeric code for categorizing land uses developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce. SIC codes in this chapter are based on the listing contained within the 1987 manual. 
    Standard pavement width means required pavement width per the city subdivision ordinance in residential subdivisions on a street that allows parking or as otherwise determined by the director of public works. 
    Standard zoning districts means zoning districts which primarily regulate the use of land and intensity or density of such use. See article II of this chapter. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit is issued, provided the actual start of activity was within 730 calendar days of the permit date. The actual start of activity means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on the site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, or the construction of columns. The term "permanent construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations; nor does it include the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Basements, cellars, crawl spaces and attics shall not be counted as a story. 
    Street means, unless specifically designated otherwise by the common council, any public or private way that is dedicated or permanently open to pedestrian and vehicular use, which is 22 feet or more in width if it exists at the time of enactment of this chapter; and any such public right-of-way 60 feet or more in width when established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Street, arterial, means a street which is anticipated to carry in excess of 3,500 vehicles per day in traffic volume, at desirable speeds ranging from 30 to 45 miles per hour, and which is used for travel between areas within and outside the city and is defined specifically as such on the zoning map. 
    Street, collector, means a street which is anticipated to carry from 2,500 to 5,000 vehicles per day in traffic volume, at desirable speeds ranging from 25 to 35 miles per hour, which serves a collecting function by distributing traffic between local streets and arterial streets and is defined specifically as such on the zoning map. 
    Street, local, means a street which is anticipated to carry less than 2,500 vehicles per day in traffic volume at desirable speeds up to 25 miles per hour, and which provides access to abutting property and primarily serves local traffic and is defined specifically as such on the zoning map. 
    Street, local residential, means a local street serving primarily to collect traffic originating directly from residential driveways and private residential courts and streets. 
    Street, residential collector, means a collector street serving primarily residential land uses which serves to connect local residential streets to collector or arterial streets. 
    Strip development means a pattern of land uses typified by nonresidential and/or multifamily development located along one or both sides of a street which is generally only one lot deep and which is characterized by many curb cuts, low green space ratios, low landscape surface ratios, high floor area ratios, and/or low quantities of landscaping. 
    Substandard lot means a lot of record which lawfully existed prior to this chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the lot were to be created under the current provisions of this chapter. See section 114-77. 
    Substantial improvement means any structural repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project to improve a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; and 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the state historical society, or listed on the National Register of Historic Places. 
    Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions. Such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the replacement of doors, windows, and other non-structural components. For purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, excepting public utility fixtures and appurtenances. 
    Swale means a linear depression in land running downhill or having a marked change in contour direction in which sheet runoff would collect and form a temporary watercourse. 
    Trademark architecture means a structure using combinations of building styles, forms, configurations, patterns or arrangements of solids and voids, materials, finishes, colors, signage, lighting and/or appurtenances typically associated with and frequently used by a specific land use, tenant, or corporations part of a self-identified image, character or marketing strategy. 
    Unnecessary hardship means the circumstance where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter. 
    Use, conditional, means a land use which requires a conditional use permit in order to develop. In general, conditional uses are those land uses which are of such a special nature or which are so dependent upon actual contemporary circumstances, as to make impractical the predetermination of permissibility, or the detailing in this chapter of specific standards, regulations or conditions which would permit such determination in each and every individual situation. Conditional uses, when granted, are subject to all the requirements of the specific standard zoning district (article II of this chapter) and overlay zoning district (article III of this chapter) in which the use is located, plus any requirements applicable to that particular land use as contained in article IV of this chapter, plus any additional requirements imposed as part of the conditional use process contained in article VIII of this chapter. Each application for, and instance of, a conditional use shall be considered a unique situation and shall not be construed as creating a precedent for similar requests. Conditional uses are granted pursuant to the procedures of section 114-288. 
    Use, permitted, means a land use which is allowed to develop without special oversight by the plan commission through the conditional use process (section 114-288), but instead, is allowed to develop subject to the zoning permit process (section 114-287) administered by the zoning administrator. However, permitted uses, like conditional uses, are subject to all the requirements of the specific standard zoning district (article II of this chapter) and overlay zoning district (article III of this chapter) in which the use is located, plus the general land use requirements of article IV of this chapter, the general standards and regulations of article II of this chapter, and the other applicable provisions of this chapter. Before any permitted use is commenced, changed or altered, a zoning permit must be obtained. 
    Use, temporary, means a land use, identified in section 114-129, which is present on a property for a limited and specified period of time, and which is subject to all the requirements of the specific standard zoning district (article II of this chapter) and overlay zoning district (article III of this chapter) in which the temporary use is located, plus any requirements applicable to that particular temporary land use as contained in article IV of this chapter. Temporary uses are granted pursuant to the procedures of section 114-289. 
    Utility vehicle means a vehicle designed and used primarily for the transport of equipment and/or materials. 
    Variance means permission to depart from the literal requirements of this chapter granted pursuant to section 114-293. 
    Vision clearance triangle means an occupied triangular space at the corner of intersecting roads, designed for the purpose of maintaining an unobstructed area at each intersection to assist motorists and pedestrians using such intersections. 
    Wisconsin wetland inventory map means maps prepared by the state department of natural resources. 
    Woodland means areas of trees whose combined canopies cover a minimum of 80 percent of an area of one acre or more, as shown on USGS 7.5-minute topographic maps for the city and its environs. 
    Yard means a required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky, except as expressly permitted in this chapter. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending along each street that abuts a lot, and extending from the street right-of-way line to a depth required by the front yard regulations of the district in which such lot is located. Lots which abut on more than one street, e.g., corner lots, have a front yard on each abutting street. (See section 114-53(c) regarding yard setback adjustments.) 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, street, means any yard which extends along a street right-of-way, and which shall have a consistent depth equal to the distance from the street right-of-way to the closest edge of the principal structure on the lot. The term "street yard" may include front yards, rear yards and side yards. 
    Zoning administrator means the person authorized and charged by the city with the administration of this chapter. See section 114-297. 
    Zoning district means a geographic area of the city which is identified on the official zoning map and which is subject to the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter. Article II of this chapter identifies the standard zoning districts into which the entire city is divided, and article III of this chapter identifies the overlay zoning districts which cover part of the city. 
    Zoning district categories means categories of similar districts. For example, zoning districts which establish different types of residential land uses are all contained in the residential category. See article II of this chapter for agricultural, residential, nonresidential and planned development categories, and see article III of this chapter for natural resource protection and community character overlay categories. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 114-17-114-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 114-38. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to identify and describe the standard zoning districts into which the entire city is divided, and to list various regulations and requirements which are specific for each district. Additionally, to identify the different types of land uses and to set forth various general requirements applicable to all development for all land uses in all zoning districts within the jurisdiction of this chapter. These requirements cover a broad array of issues which are important for the promotion and protection of the safety and general welfare of the public, including, but not limited to, requirements for density, intensity, bulk, access, visibility, off-street parking, off-street loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odors, electromagnetic radiation, glare and heat, fire and explosion, toxic and noxious materials, waste materials, drainage, exterior construction materials, and hazardous materials for all development occurring in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-39. - Standard zoning district categories and standard zoning districts. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, all areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into the following standard zoning districts, and standard zoning district categories, which shall be designated as follows: 
(1)  Agricultural category. 
a.  Agricultural (AG) district. 
(2)  Residential category. 
a.  Estate residential-1 (ER-1) district. 
b.  Single-family residential-3 (SR-3) district. 
c.  Single-family residential-4 (SR-4) district. 
d.  Two-family residential-6 (TR-6) district. 
e.  Multifamily residential-8 (MR-8) district. 
f.  Multifamily residential-10 (MR-10) district. 
(3)  Nonresidential category. 
a.  Neighborhood business (NB) district. 
b.  Planned business (PB) district. 
c.  General business (GB) district. 
d.  Central business (CB) district. 
(4)  Industrial category. 
a.  General industrial (GI) district. 
b.  Heavy industrial (HI) district. 
(5)  Planned development category. Planned development district (PD year-order of approval in that year) e.g., (PD 97-2). 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-40. - Map of standard zoning districts. 
(a)  Map established. There is hereby established an official zoning map of the city, which shall be maintained in the office of the city administrator. The standard zoning districts established by this chapter are shown on the official zoning map of the city, which, together with all explanatory materials thereon, is hereby made part of this chapter. 
(b)  Electronically stored. The official zoning map may be maintained and stored electronically, i.e., on computer and/or on paper. 
(c)  Annexation. Upon annexation, a parcel shall be automatically placed into the agriculture (AG) district, unless the ordinance of annexation designates otherwise, and shall remain in the AG district until formal action is taken to establish different zoning. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-41. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
    The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any zoning district boundary shown on the official zoning map of the city: 
(1)  Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the limits of any city, village, town or county boundary shall be construed as following such limits. 
(2)  Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets or railroad lines shall be construed as following the centerline of such streets or railroad lines. 
(3)  Zoning district boundary lines shown as following or approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(4)  Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the channel centerlines of such watercourses, and, in the event of a natural change in the location of such streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel centerline. 
(5)  Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following ridgelines or watershed boundaries shall be construed as following such lines. 
(6)  Zoning district boundaries shown as separated from any of the features listed in subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall be construed to be at such distances there from as are shown on the official zoning map. 
(7)  Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary line, as shown on the official zoning map, the location of the line shall be determined by the zoning administrator, who shall then take appropriate action to officially clarify the location of the line. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-42. - Relationship to overlay zoning districts. 
    Overlay zoning districts are a set of zoning requirements imposed in addition to the requirements of the standard zoning districts found in this chapter. Development within the overlay zones must conform to the requirements of both the standard zoning district and the overlay zoning districts, and if the two zones are inconsistent, then the development shall comply with the requirements of the more restrictive of the two zones. Overlay districts are used for the protection of natural resource features and the preservation and enhancement of significant community character features. For specific overlay zoning districts and regulations see article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-43. - Reserved. 
Sec. 114-44. - Agriculture (AG) district. 
(a)  Description and purpose. This district provides for the continuation and preservation of agriculture. The specific regulations of this district are intended to comply with the Wis. Stats. ch. 71, so that owners of lands in this district may be eligible for the farmland preservation credit permitted pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 71, subch. IX (Wis. Stats. § 71.57 et seq.). In addition, this district is intended to protect farming from the intrusion of incompatible uses, including urban and suburban development, and to sustain the economic base of agriculture as well as preserve its rural lifestyle. The possibility of agribusiness uses, which are not part of a typical farm, but which are necessary at limited suitable locations to support the farm industry, are provided for in this district as conditional uses. 
(b)  Table of principal and accessory land uses. 
Agriculture District-Principal Land Uses Principal Land Uses Accessory Land Uses Civic and Institutional AG AG Development
Standards Indoor institutional C 114-123(a) Outdoor institutional C C 114-123(b) Communication tower C C 114-131 Retail, Service, Recreation, Entertainment, Lodging, and other uses AG AG Development
Standards Bed and breakfast establishment C 114-124(k) Commercial animal boarding C 114-124(i) Outdoor commercial entertainment C 114-124(h) Storage or Disposal Land Uses AG AG Development
Standards Composting operation C 114-125(f) Junkyard or salvage yard C 114-125(d) Waste disposal facility C 114-125(e) Industrial Uses AG AG Development
Standards Extraction use C 114-127(d) Agricultural AG AG Development
Standards Cultivation P P 114-122(b) Husbandry P 114-122(c) Farm residence P 114-122(a) Agricultural service C 114-122(e) Transportation Land Uses AG AG Development
Standards Airport/heliport C 114-126(b) Indoor vehicle storage C 114-126(d) Accessory Land Uses AG AG Development
Standards Minor accessory structures P 114-128(b) Exterior communications P 114-128(d) Family day care home (four to eight children) P 114-128(g) Home occupation P 114-128(f) Individual septic disposal system C 114-128(m) Intermediate day care home (nine to 15 children) C 114-128(h) Piers and wharfs C 114-128(p) Private residential recreational facility P 114-128(j) Private residential kennel C 114-128(k) Private residential stable C 114-128(l) Caretaker's residence C 114-128(o)  
Note: P = Permitted use; C = Conditional use 
(c)  Table of temporary uses. 
Agriculture District-Temporary Uses AG Development Standards General temporary outdoor sales T 114-129(a) Outdoor assembly T 114-129(b) Seasonal outdoor sales of farm products T 114-129(e)  
T = Temporary use 
(d)  Residential districts-Residential and non-residential use regulations. 
Agriculture (AG) Regulations Residential Uses Non-Residential Uses (A) Min. zoning district area 35 acres 35 acres (B) Min. lot area 35 acres per du 1 35 acres 2 (C) Max. princ. bldg. coverage 5 percent 20 percent (D) Max. acc. bldg. coverage 10 percent 20 percent (E) Max. coverage of all bldgs. 15 percent 20 percent (F) Max. bldg. size n/a n/a (G) Max. gross density/intensity 0.03 du/acre MGD 1 F; 0.10 FAR (H) Min. landscaping surface ratio 90 percent 90 percent (I) Princ. bldgs. per lot 1 1 (J) Min. lot width 100 feet 100 feet (K) Min. street frontage 50 feet 50 feet (L) Front setback to princ. bldg. 100 feet 4 100 feet 4 (M) Front setback to acc. bldg. 100 feet 4 100 feet 4 (N) Side setback to princ. bldg. 50 feet 4 50 feet 4 (O) Side setback to acc. bldg. 50 feet 4 50 feet 4 (P) Rear setback to princ. bldg. 100 feet 4 50 feet 4 (Q) Rear setback to acc. bldg. 50 feet 4 50 feet 4 (R) Peripheral (bufferyard) setback 4 4 (S) Min. paved surface setback 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street 4 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street 4 (T) Min. separation of princ. bldgs. 100 feet 100 feet (U) Min. separation of acc. bldg. 10 feet (or less with UDC compliance) 6 10 feet (V) Max. princ. bldg. height 35 feet 5 35 feet 5 (W) Max. acc. bldg. height 15 feet 5 35 feet 5 (X) Min. parking 4 spaces on 66+ ft. wide street 8 spaces on 65- ft. wide street (Y) Min. dwelling core dimensions 24 feet by 40 feet n/a  
1 The acreage may be reduced to a minimum of one acre with a conditional use permit, which shall require a total minimum of 35 acres, contiguous to the one acre subject parcel, to be deed restricted to prohibit subsequent development of additional principal structures on the 35 acres unless rezoned for higher density development. 
2 20 acres with a conditional use permit. 
3 Standard 35 feet, but 40 feet for a lot adjacent to a street within an officially mapped right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet. 
4 Accessory uses shall not be located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same lot, nor within any required front yard or street side yard. Adjustment to setbacks are provided in section 114-53(c). 
5 Exceptions to height regulations are found in section 114-53(d). 
6 A minimum separation of ten feet shall be maintained unless the owner complies with those regulations of the uniform dwelling code (Wis. Admin. Code SPS 321.08) which permit a separation of less than ten feet if fire-rated construction is employed. 
    Regulations. The following regulations apply to this district, in addition to the performance standards of article V of this chapter, the landscaping regulations of article VI of this chapter, and the signage regulations of article VII of this chapter: 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-45. - Residential districts. 
(a)  Residential districts descriptions. 
(1)  Estate residential-1 (ER-1) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a low density, estate community character. The land use standards for this district permit primarily single-family detached residential development and a variety of related institutional land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the estate residential-1 district shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the estate character of its area. 
(2)  Single-family residential-3 (SR-3) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a moderate density community character. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the single-family residential-3 district shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the residential community character of its area. Residential development with a maximum gross density (MGD) of three and one-half dwelling units per gross acre is available within this district. 
(3)  Single-family residential-4 (SR-4) description and purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a moderate density, community character. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the single-family residential-4 (SR-4) district shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the residential community character of its area. Residential development with a maximum gross density (MGD) of four dwelling units per gross acre is available within this district. 
(4)  Two-family residential-6 (TR-6) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a moderate density community character. The land use standards for this district permit both single-family detached residential development and twin-house/duplexes permitted by right and two flat, mobile home parks, and mobile home subdivisions permitted as a conditional use. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the two-family residential-6 (TR-6) district shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the moderate density residential community character of its area. Various residential development options are available in this district, with a maximum gross density (MGD) of six dwelling units per gross acre. 
(5)  Multifamily residential-8 (MR-8) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a moderate density community character. The land use standards for this district permit single-family detached, twin-house/duplex, two-flats, townhouses, and multiplexes and apartments up to four units permitted by right and related institutional land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the multifamily residential-8 (MR-8) district shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the community character of its area. A variety of residential development options are available in this district, with a maximum gross density (MGD) of eight dwelling units per gross acre. 
(6)  Multifamily residential-10 (MR-10) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit development which has a higher density community character. The land use standards for this district permit single-family detached, twin-house/duplex, two-flats, townhouses, multiplexes, and apartments permitted by right and related institutional land uses. Density and intensity standards for this district are designed to ensure that the multifamily residential-10 (MR-10) district shall serve as a designation which preserves and protects the community character of its area. A variety of residential development options are available in this district, with a maximum gross density (MGD) of ten dwelling units per gross acre. 
(b)  Residential districts-Principal land uses table. 
Residential Districts-Principal Land Uses Residential-Family Living ER SR3 SR4 TR6 MR8 MR10 Development
Standards Apartment (three- or four-unit building) P 114-121(g) Apartment (three- to 16-unit building) C C 114-121(g) Apartment (five- to 16-unit building) C 114-121(g) Duplex C P P P 114-121(b) Multiplex (three- or four-unit building) P P 114-121(f) Multiplex (five- to 16-unit building) C C 114-121(f) Single-family detached P P P P P P 114-121(a) Townhouse P P 114-121(e) Twin-house C P P P 114-121(c) Two-flat house C C C P P 114-121(d) Mobile home C 114-121(i) Residential-Group Living ER SR3 SR4 TR6 MR8 MR10 Development
Standards Adult family home P C C C C C 114-121(k) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) P P P P P P 114-123(d) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) C C C P P 114-123(d) Community living arrangement (16 or more residents) C C P 114-123(d) Institutional residential C C 114-123(c) Civic and Institutional ER SR3 SR4 TR6 MR8 MR10 Development
Standards Group day care center (nine or more children) C C C 114-124(l) Boardinghouse C C 114-124(m) Indoor institutional C C C C C C 114-123(a) Outdoor institutional C C C C C C 114-123(b) Communication towers C C C C C C 114-131 Retail, Service, Recreation, Entertainment, Lodging, and other uses ER SR3 SR4 TR6 MR8 MR10 Development
Standards Bed and breakfast establishment C C C C C C 114-124(k) Agricultural ER SR3 SR4 TR6 MR8 MR10 Development
Standards Cultivation C C C C C C 114-122(a)  
Note: P = Permitted use; C = Conditional use 
(c)  Residential districts-Accessory land uses table. 
Residential Districts-Accessory Land Uses ER SR3 SR4 TR6 MR8 MR10 Development
Standards Communication towers C C C C C C 114-131 Cultivation P P P C C C 114-122(a) Exterior communications P P P P P P 114-128(n) Family day care home (four to eight children) P P P P P P 114-128(g) Home occupation P P P P P P 114-128(f) Intermediate day care home (nine to 15 children) C C C C C C 114-128(h) Minor accessory structures P P P P P P 114-128(b) On-site parking P P P P P P 114-128(i) Outdoor institutional C C C C C C 114-123(b) Piers and wharfs C C C C C C 114-128(p) Private residential recreational facility P P P P P P 114-128(j)  
Note: P = Permitted use; C = Conditional use 
(d)  Residential districts-Temporary uses table. 
Residential Districts-Temporary Uses ER SR3 SR4 TR6 MR8 MR10 Development
Standards Outdoor assembly T T T T T T 114-129(b) On-site real estate sales office T T T T T T 114-129(d)  
Note: T = Temporary use 
(e)  Residential districts-Residential use regulations. The following regulations apply to the residential districts, in addition to the performance standards of article V of this chapter, the landscaping regulations of article VI of this chapter, and the signage regulations of article VII of this chapter: 
Residential Uses ER SR3 SR4 TR6 MR8 MR10 (A) Min. zoning district area 35 acres 1 acre 24,000 sq. ft. 1 acre; 10 acres per mobile home park 1.5 acres (B) Min. lot area 1 acre per du 12,000 sq. ft. per du 8,000 sq. ft. per du 8,000 sq. ft. per du; 11,000 sq. ft. per twin-house; 7,500 sq. ft. per mobile home park 4,500 sq. ft. per du (C) Max. princ. bldg. coverage 30 percent 40 percent 40 percent (D) Max. acc. bldg. coverage 10 percent 10 percent (E) Max. coverage of all bldgs. 40 percent 50 percent 50 percent (F) Max. bldg. size n/a n/a (G) Max. gross density/intensity 1.00 du/acre MGD 3.0 du/acre MGD 4.0 du/acre MGD 6.0 du/acre MGD 8.0 du/acre MGD 10.0 du/acre MGD (H) Min. landscaping surface ratio 60 percent 50 percent (I) Princ. bldgs. per lot 1 1 1 7 (J) Min. lot width 100 feet 80 feet 75 feet 75 feet; 60 feet per mobile home park 80 feet 8 (K) Min. street frontage 50 feet 50 feet; 30 feet per mobile home park 50 feet (L) Front setback to princ. bldg. 25 feet/40 feet 2, 3 25 feet/40 feet 2, 3 (M) Front setback to acc. bldg. 25 feet/40 feet 2, 3 25 feet/40 feet 2, 3 (N) Side setback to princ. bldg. 20 feet 3 10 feet 3 8 feet 3 15 feet 3 (O) Side setback to acc. bldg. 3 feet from property line; 6 feet from alley 3 5 feet from property line; 8 feet from alley 3 (P) Rear setback to princ. bldg. 40 feet 3 25 feet 3 30 feet 3 (Q) Rear setback to acc. bldg. 3 feet from property line; 6 feet from alley 3 5 feet from property line; 8 feet from alley 3 (R) Peripheral (bufferyard) setback 3 3 (S) Min. paved surface setback 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street 3 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street 3 (T) Min. separation of princ. bldgs. 60 feet 20 feet 10 feet (or less with UDC 12 feet 20 feet (U) Min. separation of acc. bldg. 10 feet (or less with UDC compliance) 6 12 feet 10 feet (or less with UDC compliance) 6 10 feet (or less with UDC compliance) 6 (V) Max. princ. bldg. height 35 feet 4 (W) Max. acc. bldg. height 15 feet 4, 5 15 feet 4,5 (X) Min. parking 3 spaces per du 3 spaces 2.5 spaces per 3 bedroom 2 spaces per 2 bedroom 1 space per 1 bedroom (Y) Min. dwelling core dimensions 24 feet by 40 feet 24 feet by 40 feet, 13.5 feet by 66 feet, or 15.5 feet by 56 feet per mobile home park 24 feet by 40 feet  
1 20,000 square feet with a conditional use permit. 
2 The first number is for lots adjacent to streets with a right-of-way less than 100 feet, and the second number is for lots adjacent to a street with a right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet. 
3 Accessory uses shall not be located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same lot, nor within any required front yard or street side yard. Adjustment to setbacks are provided in section 114-53(c). 
4 Exceptions to height regulations are found in section 114-120(f). 
5 Or the height of the principal building, whichever is lower. 
6 A minimum separation of ten feet shall be maintained unless the owner complies with those regulations of the uniform dwelling code (Wis. Admin. Code SPS 321.08) which permit a separation of less than ten feet if fire-rated construction is employed. 
7 More than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot upon the granting of a conditional use permit for a group development in compliance with section 114-130. 
8 Twenty feet for townhouse on interior row; 30 feet for townhouse on end of row. 
(f)  Residential district-Nonresidential uses regulation. 
Regulations. The following regulations apply to the residential districts, in addition to the performance standards of article V of this chapter, the landscaping regulations of article VI of this chapter, and the signage regulations of article VII of this chapter: 
Non-Residential Uses ER SR3 SR4 TR6 MR8 MR10 (A) Min. zoning district area 35 acres 1 acre 2 acres (B) Min. lot area 40,000 sq. ft. 1 (C) Max. princ. bldg. coverage 20 percent 40 percent (D) Max. acc. bldg. coverage 20 percent 10 percent (E) Max. coverage of all bldgs. 40 percent 50 percent (F) Max. bldg. size n/a n/a (G) Max. gross density/intensity 1 F; 0.10 FAR 1 F; 0.15 FAR 2 F, 0.22 FAR 2 F; 0.25 FAR (H) Min. landscaping surface ratio 60 percent 50 percent 30 percent 25 percent (I) Princ. bldgs. per lot 1 1 6 1 4 (J) Min. lot width 100 feet (K) Min. street frontage 50 feet (L) Front setback to princ. bldg. 35 feet/40 feet 2, 3 25 feet/40 feet 2, 3 (M) Front setback to acc. bldg. 35 feet/40 feet 2, 3 25 feet/40 feet 2, 3 (N) Side setback to princ. bldg. 30 feet 3 10 feet 3 6 feet 3 10 feet 8 (O) Side setback to acc. bldg. 3 feet from property line; 6 feet from alley 3 5 feet from property line; 8 feet from alley 3 (P) Rear setback to princ. bldg. 30 feet 3 (Q) Rear setback to acc. bldg. 3 feet from property line; 6 feet from alley 3 5 feet from property line; 8 feet from alley 3 (R) Peripheral (bufferyard) setback 3 3 (S) Min. paved surface setback 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street 3 (T) Min. separation of princ. bldgs. 60 feet 20 feet 12 feet 20 feet (U) Min. separation of acc. bldg. 10 feet (V) Max. princ. bldg. height 35 feet 4 35 feet 4 (W) Max. acc. bldg. height 35 feet 4, 5 15 feet 4, 5 (X) Min. parking See Parking Table (Y) Min. dwelling core dimensions n/a  
1 20,000 square feet with a conditional use permit. 
2 The first number is for lots adjacent to streets with a right-of-way less than 100 feet, and the second number is for lots adjacent to a street with a right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet. 
3 Accessory uses shall not be located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same lot, nor within any required front yard or street side yard. Adjustment to setbacks are provided in section 114-53(c). 
4 Exceptions to height regulations are found in section 114-120(f). 
5 Or the height of the principal building, whichever is lower. 
6 More than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot upon the granting of a conditional use permit for a group development in compliance with section 114-130. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-46. - Non-residential districts. 
(a)  Non-residential districts-Descriptions and purpose. 
1.  Neighborhood business (NB) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit small scale commercial development, high quality office, and institutional land uses which are compatible with the desired overall neighborhood community character of the area in general, and with adjacent residential development in particular. The desired neighborhood community character of the development is attained through landscape surface area ratio (LSR) requirements, and by restricting the maximum building size (MBS) of all buildings within each instance of this district to 5,000 square feet. Significant areas of landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
2.  Planned business (PB) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit large and small scale commercial development, high quality office and institutional land uses which is compatible with the desired overall community character of the area in general. Significant areas of landscaping are required in this district to ensure that this effect is achieved. A wide range of office, retail, and lodging land uses are permitted within this district. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
3.  General business (GB) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both large and small scale commercial development at intensities which provide significant incentives for infill development and the continued economic viability of existing development. To accomplish this effect, minimum required green space ratios (GSRs) are substantially lower than those required in the planned business district. A wide range of office, retail, and lodging land uses are permitted within this district. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
4.  Central business (CB) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both large and small scale downtown mixed-use development at an intensity which provides significant incentives for infill development, redevelopment, and the continued economic viability of existing development. To accomplish this effect, minimum landscape surface ratios (LSRs) permitted in this district are much lower than those allowed in the planned business and general business districts. A wide range of office, retail, lodging, and mixed-use land uses are permitted within this district. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. This district is strictly limited to the central city locations. 
(b)  Non-residential district-Principal land uses table. 
Non-Residential Districts-Principal Land Uses Residential-Family Living NB PB GB CB Development
Standards Apartment (three- to five-unit building) C C 114-121(g) Apartment (five- to 16-unit building) C C C 114-121(g) Duplex C 114-121(b) Commercial apartments P C C P 114-121(h) Multiplex (three- to five-unit building) C 114-121(f) Multiplex (five- to 16-unit building) C C C 114-121(f) Single-family detached P 114-121(a) Townhouse C 114-121(e) Townhouses (three- to eight-unit building) C 114-121(e) Twin-house C 114-121(c) Two-flat house C 114-121(d) Residential-Group Living NB PB GB CB Development
Standards Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) C 114-123(d) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) C 114-123(d) Institutional residential C C C C 114-123(c) Civic and Institutional NB PB GB CB Development
Standards Group day care center (nine or more children) C C C C 114-124(l) Boardinghouse C C C C 114-124(m) Indoor institutional C C C C 114-123(a) Outdoor institutional C C C C 114-123(b) Communication towers C C C C 114-131 Retail, Service, Recreation, Entertainment, Lodging, and other uses NB PB GB CB Development
Standards Bed and breakfast establishment C C C C 114-124(k) Commercial animal boarding C C 114-124(i) Commercial indoor lodging C C C C 114-124(j) Indoor commercial entertainment C C C C 114-124(g) Indoor maintenance service P P P 114-124(e) Indoor sales or services C P P P 114-124(c) In-vehicle sales or service C C C C 114-124(f) Office P P P P 114-124(a) Outdoor commercial entertainment C C 114-124(h) Outdoor sales and services C C 114-124(d) Personal or professional services P P P P 114-124(b) Vehicle repair and maintenance C C C 114-124(o) Storage or Disposal Land Uses PB GB CB Development Standards Personal storage facility C C 114-122(c) Agricultural NB PB GB CB Development
Standards Cultivation C C C C 114-122(a) Transportation Land Uses NB PB GB CB Development
Standards Indoor vehicle storage C C P P 114-126(d) Off-site parking lot C C 114-126(a)  
Note: P = Permitted Use; C = Conditional Use 
(c)  Non-residential district-Accessory land use table. 
Non-Residential Districts-Accessory Land Uses NB PB GB CB Development
Standards Company provided on-site recreation C C C C 114-128(c) Communication towers C C C C 114-131 Minor accessory structures P C C C 114-128(b) Exterior communication devices P P P P 114-128(n) Home occupation P C C C 114-128(f) In-vehicle sales and service C C C C 114-124(f) Light industrial incidental to indoor sales or service activities land use C C C 114-128(f) On-site parking P P P P 114-128(i) Outdoor commercial entertainment C C C 114-124(f) Outdoor institutional C C C C 114-123(b) Piers and wharfs C C C 114-128(t)  
Note: P = Permitted Use; C = Conditional Use 
(d)  Non-residential districts-Temporary uses. 
Non-Residential Districts-Temporary Uses NB PB GB CB Development
Standards General temporary outdoor sales T T T T 114-129(a) On-site real estate sales office T T T T 114-129(d) Outdoor assembly T T T T 114-129(b) Relocatable building T T T T 114-129(c) Seasonal outdoor sales of farm products T T T T 114-129(e)  
Note: T = Temporary Use 
(e)  Non-residential districts-Non-residential use regulations. 
    Regulations. The following regulations apply to the non-residential districts, in addition to the performance standards of article V of this chapter, the landscaping regulations of article VI of this chapter, and the signage regulations of article VII of this chapter: 
Non-Residential Uses NB PB GB CB (A) Min. zoning district area 9,000 sq. ft. 3 acres 1.5 acres 1 acre (B) Min. lot area 9,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 9,000 sq. ft. 1,750 sq. ft. (C) Max. princ. bldg. coverage 40 percent 40 percent 50 percent 100 percent (D) Max. acc. bldg. coverage 10 percent 10 percent (E) Max. coverage of all bldgs. 50 percent 50 percent 60 percent 100 percent (F) Max. bldg. size 5,000 sq. ft. per n/a (G) Max. gross density/intensity 2 F; 0. 25 FAR 4 F; 0.50 FAR 4 F; 0.60 FAR 4 F; 3.00 FAR (H) Min. landscaping surface ratio 30 percent 25 percent 15 percent 0 percent (I) Princ. bldgs. per lot 1 2 (J) Min. lot width 75 feet 100 feet 75 feet 20 feet (K) Min. street frontage 50 feet 50 feet 20 feet (L) Front setback to princ. bldg. 25 feet/40 feet 1, 3 0 feet 6 (M) Front setback to acc. bldg. 25 feet/40 feet 1, 3 (N) Side setback to princ. bldg. 6 feet 3 10 feet 3 0 feet 3,6 (O) Side setback to acc. bldg. # 3 5 feet from property line; 8 ft from alley 3 3 feet from property line; 6 feet from alley 3 (P) Rear setback to princ. bldg. 30 feet 3 25 feet 3 8 feet 3 (Q) Rear setback to acc. bldg. # 3 5 feet from property line; 8 ft from alley 3 (R) Peripheral (bufferyard) Setback # 3 3 (S) Min. paved surface setback 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street 3 0 feet 6 (T) Min. separation of princ. bldgs. 12 feet 20 feet 20 ft or 0 ft on zero lotline side 0 feet 6 (U) Min. separation of acc. bldg. 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet (V) Max. princ. bldg. height 35 feet 4 45 feet 4 35 feet or greater with conditional use permit 4 45 feet 7 (W) Max. acc. bldg. height 15 feet 4,5 (X) Min. parking See land use table 8  
#  For single-family and two-family dwellings, follow standards of TR-6 district. For townhouse, multiplex, apartment and institutional residential development, follow standards of MR-10 district. 
1  The first number is for lots adjacent to streets with a right-of-way less than 100 feet, and the second number is for lots adjacent to a street with a right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet. 
2  More than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot upon the granting of a conditional use permit for a group development in compliance with section 114-130. 
3  Accessory uses shall not be located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same lot, nor within any required front yard or street side yard. Adjustment to setbacks is provided in section 114-161(c). 
4  Exceptions to height regulations are found in section 114-120(f). 
5  Or the height of the principal building, whichever is lower. 
6  Maximum permitted setbacks of zero feet, except where permitted by conditional use if determined by the plan commission as an essential component of site design. 
7  For architectural consistency, buildings shall be a minimum of two stories in height, except when otherwise permitted by conditional use. Other exceptions to height regulations are found in section 114-161(d). 
8  Existing parking/loading spaces shall not be reduced on existing structures, except by conditional use. Parking requirements for all new buildings and additions to existing buildings shall be established by conditional use. 
(f)  Non-residential district-Residential uses regulation. 
    Regulations. The following regulations apply to the non-residential districts, in addition to the performance standards of article V of this chapter, the landscaping regulations of article VI of this chapter, and the signage regulations of article VII of this chapter: 
Residential Uses NB PB GB CB (A) Min. zoning district area 9,000 sq. ft. 3 acres 1.5 acres 1 acre (B) Min. lot area # 20,000 sq. ft. 9,000 sq. ft. (C) Max. princ. bldg. coverage 40 percent 40 percent 70 percent (D) Max. acc. bldg. coverage 10 percent 10 percent (E) Max. coverage of all bldgs. 50 percent 50 percent 60 percent 80 percent (F) Max. bldg. size 5,000 sq. ft. per story n/a (G) Max. gross density/intensity Up to 6 du/acre per limits of the conditional use permit Up to 50 du/acre per limits of the conditional use permit (H) Min. landscaping surface ratio 30 percent 50 percent 10 percent (I) Princ. bldgs. per lot 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 (J) Min. lot width # 100 feet 75 feet 20 feet (K) Min. street frontage # 50 feet 20 feet (L) Front setback to princ. bldg. # 3 25 feet/40 feet 1, 3 0 feet 3 (M) Front setback to acc. bldg. # 3 25 feet/40 feet 1, 3 (N) Side setback to princ. bldg. # 3 10 feet 3 10 feet to residential lot line; 0 to nonresidential lotline 3 0 feet (O) Side setback to acc. bldg. # 3 5 feet from property line; 8 ft from alley 3 (P) Rear setback to princ. bldg. # 3 30 feet 3 25 feet 3 (Q) Rear setback to acc. bldg. # 3 5 feet from property line; 8 ft from alley 3 5 feet from property line; 8 feet from alley 3 3 feet from property line; 6 feet from alley 4 (R) Peripheral (bufferyard) Setback # 3 3 3 4 (S) Min. paved surface setback # 3 5 feet from side or rear; 10 ft from street 3 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street 3 0 feet (T) Min. separation of princ. bldgs. # 20 feet 12 feet 0 feet 6 (U) Min. separation of acc. bldg. 10 10 feet (V) Max. princ. bldg. height # 4 35 feet 4 35 feet or greater with conditional use permit 4 45 feet 7 (W) Max. acc. bldg. height # 4, 5 15 feet 4, 5 (X) Min. parking 3 spaces 3 spaces 3 spaces 1 space per 1 bdrm or efficiency du; 2 spaces per 2+ bdrm. du. (Y) Min. dwelling core dimensions # 24 ft x 40 ft  
# For single-family and two-family dwellings, follow standards of TR-6 district. For townhouse, multiplex, apartment and institutional residential development, follow standards of MR-10 district. 
1 The first number is for lots adjacent to streets with a right-of-way less than 100 feet, and the second number is for lots adjacent to a street with a right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet. 
2 More than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot upon the granting of a conditional use permit for a group development in compliance with section 114-130. 
3 Accessory uses shall not be located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same lot, nor within any required front yard or street side yard. Adjustment to setbacks are provided in section 114-53(c). 
4 Exceptions to height regulations are found in section 114-53(d). 
5 Or the height of the principal building, whichever is lower. 
6 Maximum permitted setback of zero feet, except where permitted by conditional use if determined by the plan commission as an essential component of site design. 
7 For architectural consistency, buildings shall be a minimum of two stories in height, except when otherwise permitted by conditional use. Other exceptions to height regulations are found in section 114-53(d). 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-47. - Industrial districts. 
(a)  Industrial districts description and purpose. 
(1)  General industrial (GI) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both large and small scale industrial and office development at an intensity which is consistent with existing transition and suburban community character. Beyond a relatively high minimum green space ratio (GSR), the primary distinguishing feature of this district is that it is geared to indoor industrial activities which are not typically associated with high levels of noise, soot, odors and other potential nuisances for adjoining properties. To ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
(2)  Heavy industrial (HI) district description and purpose. This district is intended to permit both large and small scale industrial and office development at an intensity which provides ample incentive for infill development and redevelopment of industrial areas existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. This district is designed to permit a very wide variety of industrial uses which may occur both indoors and outdoors, including certain land uses which are permitted in no other zoning district because of their potential to create nuisances for adjoining properties. In order to ensure a minimum of disruption to residential development, no development within this district shall take direct access to a local residential street or a residential collector street. 
(b)  Industrial districts-Principal land uses table. 
Industrial Districts-Principal Land Uses Industrial Uses GI HI Development
Standards Extraction use C 114-125(d) Heavy industrial C 114-125(b) Light industrial P P 114-125(a) Civic and Institutional GI HI Development
Standards Group day care center (nine or more children) C 114-124(l) Indoor institutional C C 114-123(a) Outdoor institutional C C 114-123(b) Communication tower C C 114-131 Retail, Service, Recreation, Entertainment, Lodging, and other uses GI HI Development
Standards Commercial animal boarding C C 114-124(i) Indoor maintenance service C C 114-124(e) Indoor sales or services C 114-124(c) Office C C 114-124(a) Personal or professional services C C 114-124(b) Sexually oriented land uses C 114-124(n) Vehicle repair and maintenance C C 114-124(o) Storage or Disposal Land Uses GI HI Development
Standards Composting operation C 114-125(f) Indoor storage or wholesaling P P 114-125(a) Junkyard or salvage yard C 114-125(d) Outdoor storage or wholesaling C P 114-125(b) Personal storage facility C C 114-125(c) Solid waste transfer station and material recovery facility C C 114-125(g) Waste disposal facility C 114-125(e) Agricultural GI HI Development
Standards Cultivation P P 114-122(a) Transportation Land Uses GI HI Development
Standards Airport/heliport C C 114-126(b) Indoor vehicle storage P P 114-126(d) Off-site parking lot C C 114-126(a) Trucking facility P P 114-126(c)  
Note: P = Permitted Use; C = Conditional Use 
(c)  Industrial districts-Accessory land uses table. 
Industrial Districts-Accessory Land Uses GI HI Development
Standards Caretaker's residence C C 114-128(o) Company provided on-site recreation C C 114-128(c) Communication tower C C 114-131 Cultivation C C 114-122(a) Minor accessory structure C C 114-128(b) Exterior communication devices P P 114-128(n) Indoor sales incidental to storage or light industrial land use C 114-128(d) In-vehicle sales and service C C 114-124(f) On-site parking P P 114-128(i) Outdoor institutional C C 114-123(b) Piers and wharfs C C 114-128(p)  
Note: P = Permitted Use; C = Conditional Use 
(d)  Industrial districts-Non-residential use regulations. 
    Regulations. The following regulations apply to the non-residential districts, in addition to the performance standards of article V of this chapter, the landscaping regulations of article VI of this chapter, and the signage regulations of article VII of this chapter: 
Non-Residential Uses GI HI (A) Min. zoning district area 3 acres (B) Min. lot area 9,000 sq. ft. (C) Max. princ. bldg. coverage n/a (D) Max. acc. bldg. coverage n/a (E) Max. coverage of all bldgs. n/a (F) Max. bldg. size n/a (G) Max. gross density/intensity n/a (H) Min. landscaping surface ratio Less than 15 percent, minimum of 10 percent permitted as a conditional use (I) Princ. bldgs. per lot 1 2 (J) Min. lot width 75 feet 100 feet (K) Min. street frontage 50 feet (L) Front setback to princ. bldg. 25 feet/40 feet 1, 3 (M) Front setback to acc. bldg. 25 feet/40 feet 1, 3 (N) Side setback to princ. bldg. 15 feet 50 feet to residential; 20 feet to nonresidential 3 (O) Side setback to acc. bldg. 5 feet from property line; 8 feet from alley 3 (P) Rear setback to princ. bldg. 30 feet 3 40 feet 3 (Q) Rear setback to acc. bldg. 5 feet from property line; 8 feet from alley 3 (R) Peripheral (bufferyard) Setback 3 (S) Min. paved surface setback 5 feet from side or rear; 10 feet from street 3 (T) Min. separation of princ. bldgs. 40 feet (U) Min. separation of acc. bldg. 10 feet (V) Max. princ. bldg. height 45 feet 4 (W) Max. acc. bldg. height 25 feet 4, 5 (X) Min. parking See Land Use  
1. The first number is for lots adjacent to streets with a right-of-way less than 100 feet, and the second number is for lots adjacent to a street with a right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet. 
2. More than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot upon the granting of a conditional use permit for a group development in compliance with section 114-130. 
3. Accessory uses shall not be located between a principal building and a street frontage on the same lot, nor within any required front yard or street side yard. Adjustment to setbacks are provided in section 114-161(c). 
4. Exceptions to height regulations are found in section 114-120(f). 
5. Or the height of the principal building, whichever is lower. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-48. - Planned development (PD) district. 
(a)  Description and purpose. This district is intended to provide more incentives for redevelopment in areas of the community which are experiencing a lack of reinvestment, or which require flexible zoning treatment because of factors which are specific to the site. The intent of this district is to require higher levels of development quality in both design and materials in exchange for carefully controlled flexibility on matters of land use, density, intensity, setbacks and/or bulk. This district is designed to forward both aesthetic and economic objectives of the city by controlling the site design and the land use, appearance, density, or intensity of development within the district in a manner which is consistent with sound land use, urban design, and economic revitalization principles. The application of these standards will ensure long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles. Refer to section 114-296 for the procedures applicable to proposal review in this standard zoning district. 
(b)  Development standards. Development standards are flexible within this zoning district. Refer to section 114-296(b) for the range of development standards potentially available in this zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 114-49-114-80. - Reserved. 

(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
ARTICLE III. - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 114-81. - Purpose. 
    Overlay zoning districts are a set of zoning requirements imposed in addition to those of the underlying standard zoning district. Development within the overlay zone must conform to the requirements of both zones, or the more restrictive of the two. These districts are used for the protection of natural resource features and the preservation and enhancement of significant community character features. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-82. - Overlay zoning categories and districts. 
    For purposes of this chapter, certain specified areas within the city are hereby divided into the following overlay zoning categories and overlay zoning districts: 
(1)  Natural resource protection overlay category. 
(2)  Floodplain overlay district (FP). 
(3)  Shoreland-wetland overlay district (SW). 
(4)  Lakeshore overlay district (LS). 
(5)  Drainageway overlay district (DW). 
(6)  Municipal well recharge area overlay district (MWR). 
(7)  Community character overlay category. 
(8)  Downtown design overlay district (DD). 
(9)  Community gateway overlay district (CG). 
(10)  Entry corridor overlay district (EC). 
(11)  Park overlay zoning district (POZ). 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-83. - Map of overlay zoning districts. 
    The overlay zoning districts established by this article are shown on the official zoning maps of the city, which, together with all explanatory materials thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-84. - Interpretation of overlay zoning district boundaries. 
(a)  The rules applicable to standard zoning district boundaries shall also apply to overlay zoning district boundaries, subject to the following additional rules: where an apparent discrepancy exists between the location of the outermost boundary of the floodfringe district or the floodplain district shown on the official zoning map and actual field conditions, the location shall be initially determined by the zoning administrator using the criteria described in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. Where the zoning administrator finds that there is a significant difference between the map and the actual field conditions, the map shall be amended using the procedures established in section 114-286. Disputes between the zoning administrator and the applicant over the location of the district boundary line shall be settled using the procedures outlined in section 114-295. 
(b)  Where flood profiles exist, the location of the district boundary line shall be determined by the zoning administrator using both the scale appearing on the map and the elevations shown on the water surface profile of the regional flood. Where a discrepancy exists between the map, and actual field conditions, the regional flood elevations shall govern. A map amendment is required where there is a significant discrepancy between the map and actual field conditions. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to grant or deny a land use permit on the basis of a district boundary derived from the elevations shown on the water surface profile of the regional flood, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for initiating any map amendments required under this section within a reasonable period of time. 
(c)  Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the district boundary line shall be determined by the zoning administrator using the scale appearing on the map, visual on-site inspection and any available information provided by the department of natural resources. Where there is a significant difference between the map and actual field conditions, the map shall be amended. Where a map amendment has been approved by both the common council and the department of natural resources, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to grant or deny a land use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-85. - Natural resource protection overlay zoning categories. 
(a)  Introduction. This section contains the standards governing the protection, disturbance, and mitigation of disruption of all natural resource areas. These provisions are intended to supplement those of the city, county, state, and the federal government pertaining to natural resource protection. Prior to using the provisions of these sections to determine the permitted disruption of such areas, the requirements provided below should be reviewed. These sections recognize the important and diverse benefits which natural resource features provide in terms of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Each of these sections is oriented to each natural resource type, and is designed to accomplish several objectives: 
(1)  A definition of the natural resource is provided. 
(2)  The specific purposes of the protective regulations governing each natural resource type are provided. 
(3)  The required method of identifying and determining the boundaries of the natural resource area is given. 
(4)  A list of land uses which are permitted by right, permitted by conditional use, or prohibited are provided. 
(5)  Mandatory protection requirements are identified. 
(b)  Purpose. This section sets forth the requirements for the mandatory protection of natural resources resource protection area (RPA) within the jurisdiction of this chapter. The provisions of this section interact closely with the regulations applicable to each zoning district in article II of this chapter, with the regulations applicable to each land use of article IV of this chapter, and with the density and intensity standards of section 114-52. 
(c)  Floodplain overlay zoning districts (FP). Floodplain overlay zoning, including zoning in floodway districts, floodfringe districts and floodplain districts, is governed by chapter 104. 
(d)  Shoreland-wetland overlay zoning district (SW). Shoreland-wetland overlay zoning is governed by chapter 110. 
(e)  Lakeshore overlay zoning district (LS). 
(1)  Definition. The term "lakeshore" means those lands lying between the ordinary water line of navigable waters and either: the backside of the principal structure on the lot; or a point 75 feet from said water line, whichever is closer to said water line. The term "lakeshore" shall not include those lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches where: such lands are not adjacent to a navigable stream or river; those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching or had no previous stream history; and such lands are maintained in non-structural agricultural use. Decorative water features shall not be considered navigable waters for the purposes of this section. This meaning of the term "lakeshores" shall remain distinct from the meaning of the term as employed by the state statutes and the DNR. 
(2)  Purpose of lakeshore protection requirements. Lakeshores serve to protect land/water margins from erosion due to site disruption. Because of regular contact with wave action, currents, and runoff, such areas are highly susceptible to continuous, and in some cases, rapid erosion. Lakeshore protection also provides a natural vegetation buffer which serves to reduce water velocities and wave energy, and filters significant amounts of water-borne pollutants and sediments. Lakeshores also promote infiltration and groundwater recharging, and provide a unique habitat at the land/water margin. Lakeshores also protect and promote the natural beauty of the shore by controlling and limiting the development of structures within the lakeshore overlay district. 
(3)  Determination of lakeshore boundaries. General LS boundaries are depicted on the official zoning map. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which contains a LS depicted on the official zoning map, the petitioner shall prepare a detailed map which depicts the location of the LS and all existing and proposed structures and improvements in the LS. 
(4)  List of land uses permitted by right. 
a.  Husbandry (per section 114-122(c)). 
b.  Passive outdoor recreational (per section 114-123(a)). 
c.  Selective cutting (per section 114-122(g)), subject to the additional requirements of subsection(e)(6) of this section. 
d.  Road, bridge and/or appurtenances thereto (per section 114-128(v)). 
e.  Piers and wharfs (per section 114-128(u)). 
f.  The practice of silviculture, including but not limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected; 
g.  The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries. 
h.  The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance. 
i.  The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in section 110-110(3). 
j.  The construction and maintenance of duck blinds. 
k.  The construction and maintenance of ice fishing houses during the ice fishing season. 
(5)  List of land uses permitted as a conditional use. 
a.  All residential land uses (per section 114-121). 
b.  Outdoor commercial entertainment (golf facilities only) (per section 114-124(i)). 
c.  Drainage structure (per section 114-128(o)). 
d.  Filling (per section 114-128(p)). 
e.  Utility lines and related facilities. 
f.  The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under this section, provided that: 
1.  The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
2.  The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 110-110(3); 
3.  The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use; 
4.  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and 
5.  Any wetland alteration must be reasonably necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
g.  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings provided that: 
1.  The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the Lakeshore district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows, or other wetland or aquatic animals. 
2.  The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located out side of the Lakeshore. 
3.  The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area. 
4.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support and reasonable landscaping for the building is allowed. 
h.  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that: 
1.  Any private development allowed under this subsection shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose; 
2.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed; 
3.  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this subsection are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in subsection (f) of this section; and 
4.  Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
i.  The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage collection lines and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines provided that: 
1.  The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
2.  Only limited filling or excavation necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and 
3.  Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 110-110(3). 
(6)  Mandatory lakeshore protection requirements. LSs shall remain in an undisturbed state, except for the land uses authorized above and except for the activities permitted below. 
a.  Tree removal. The intent and purpose of this subsection is to preserve the city's character as a natural wooded community, maintain property values by improving and preserving the aesthetic appeal of the city through tree regulations, preserve the natural resources of the city and state, reduce the amount of erosion in the city due to tree removal, protect the quality of the waters of the state and the city, and protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the people by minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff to surface waters due to the erosion of land not protected by a naturally wooded environment. 
b.  Scope. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all zoning districts, except that these provisions may be modified in the SR-3 and SR-4 districts through the conditional use process. 
c.  Clear cutting prohibition. 
1.  Shoreland areas. In a strip of land 35 feet wide inland from the bulkhead line, no more than 30 feet in any 100 feet shall be clear-cut. Where the lot is less than 100 feet, no more than 30 percent of this strip shall be clear-cut. Natural shrubbery shall be preserved as far as practicable and, where removed, it shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion and preserving natural beauty. 
2.  Tree preservation area. Except for circumstances identified under subsection (e)(6)d.2 of this section, it is prohibited to remove any tree or cause any trees to be removed from the tree preservation area of each lot. During construction, no equipment movement, construction or placement of equipment or material storage shall be permitted in the tree preservation area. 
d.  Cutting exceptions. 
1.  Trees may be removed from the building activities area. This area shall be as small as possible, including the entire area affected by building, grading and temporary material storage areas. In no case shall the amount of trees with a six-inch tree diameter removed within the building activities area exceed the following: 
(i)  Eighty percent of the total of such trees on lots of one-fourth acre or less. 
(ii)  Sixty percent of the total of such trees on lots of one-fourth acre to one acre, except in the ER-1 district. 
(iii)  Forty percent of the total of such trees on lots of one acre to two and one-half acres, except in the ER-1 district. 
(iv)  Twenty percent of the total of such trees on lots of two and one-half acres or more, except in the ER-1 district. 
(v)  Ten percent of the total of such trees on all lots in the ER-1 district. 
2.  Trees removed in excess of the above reasons will require a permit from the zoning administrator. Conditions under which a permit may be issued include, but will not be limited to, the following: 
(i)  The tree is dead, dying or diseased. 
(ii)  The tree is damaged or injured to the extent that it is likely to die or become diseased. 
(iii)  The removal of the tree will enhance the tree preservation area and the health of the remaining trees. 
(iv)  The removal of the tree will avoid or alleviate an economic hardship or hardship of another nature to the property or residences. 
(v)  The removal of the tree is consistent with good arboriculture practices. 
e.  Replacement trees. When in keeping with good arboriculture practices, replacement trees shall be planted for all removed trees. They may be planted in the tree preservation area or in the building activities area after the initial construction activities are completed. All replacement trees shall be planted within 30 days of final grading. The determination of good arboriculture shall be based on tree density and spacing as described in subsections (e)(6)e.1 through 3 of this section. The zoning administrator shall review proposals for, and the applicability of, species not contained in subsections (e)(6)e.1 through 3 of this section, and is authorized to approve appropriate similar species. 
1.  Small trees. Trees which have an ultimate height of 20 feet to 30 feet and 15-foot to 25-foot spread. Small trees should be planted 15 feet to 20 feet on center or roughly at a density of 115 trees per acre. 
(i)  Apricot. 
(ii)  Crabapple, flowering (sp). 
(iii)  Hawthorne (sp). 
(iv)  Lilac, Japanese tree. 
(v)  Peach, flowering. 
(vi)  Plum, purpleleaf. 
(vii)  Redbud. 
(viii)  Golden train tree. 
(ix)  Soapberry. 
(x)  Pear, Bradford. 
(xi)  Serviceberry. 
2.  Medium trees. Trees which have an ultimate height of 30 feet to 50 feet and 30-foot to 40-foot spread. Medium trees should be planted 25 feet to 30 feet on center or roughly at a density of 30 trees per acre. 
(i)  Ash, green. 
(ii)  Hackberry. 
(iii)  Honeylocust (thornless). 
(iv)  Linden or basswood (sp). 
(v)  Mulberry, red (fruitless, male). 
(vi)  Oak, English. 
(vii)  Oak, red pagodatree, Japanese. 
(viii)  Pecan. 
(ix)  Birch. 
(x)  Osageorange (thornless). 
(xi)  Persimmon. 
(xii)  Poplar. 
(xiii)  Sassafras. 
3.  Large trees. Trees which have an ultimate height greater than 50 feet and over 40-foot spread. Large trees should be planted 40 feet on center or roughly at a density of 25 trees per acre. 
(i)  American elm. 
(ii)  Walnut. 
(iii)  Kentucky coffee tree. 
(iv)  Silver maple. 
(v)  Sugar maple. 
(vi)  Oaks. 
(vii)  Sycamore. 
(viii)  Cottonwood. 
f.  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall be subject to a penalty per tree illegally cut or removed, which shall be determined by the assessed value of the trees removed. The assessed value shall be determined by a qualified tree appraiser in accordance with the Manual for Plant Appraisers. In addition to this penalty, a replacement tree shall be planted to replace all trees cut illegally. 
(f)  Drainageway overlay zoning district (DW). 
(1)  Definition. Drainageways are non-navigable, above-ground watercourses, detention basins and/or their environs which are identified by the presence of one or more of the following: 
a.  All areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a perennial stream as shown on USGS 7.5-minute topographic maps for the city and its environs; 
b.  All areas within 50 feet of the ordinary high water mark of an intermittent stream or open channel drainageway as shown on USGS 7.5-minute topographic maps for the city and its environs. 
(2)  Purpose of drainageway protection requirements. Drainageways serve in the transporting of surface runoff to downstream areas. As such, drainageways serve to carry surface waters, supplement floodplain, wetland, and lakeshore water storage functions in heavy storm or melt events, filter water-borne pollutants and sediments, promote infiltration and groundwater recharging, and provide a unique habitat at the land/water margin. Drainageway protection requirements preserve each of these functions as well as greatly reducing the potential for soil erosion along drainageways by protecting vegetative groundcover in areas which are susceptible to variable runoff flows and moderate to rapid water movement. 
(3)  Determination of drainageway boundaries. General drainageway boundaries are depicted on the official zoning map. Upon the proposal of development activity on any property which contains a drainageway depicted on the official zoning map, the petitioner shall prepare a detailed map which shall depict the location of all drainageway areas on the subject property and all existing and proposed structures and improvement therein. 
(4)  List of land uses permitted by right. 
a.  Lawn care (per section 114-128(q)). 
b.  Passive outdoor recreational (per section 114-123(a)). 
c.  Piers and wharfs (per section 114-128(u)). 
(5)  List of land uses permitted as a conditional use. 
a.  Outdoor commercial entertainment (golf facilities only) (per section 114-124(i)). 
b.  Drainage structure (per section 114-128(o)). 
c.  Filling (per section 114-128(p)). 
d.  Road, bridge and/or appurtenances thereto (per section 114-128(v)). 
e.  Utility lines and related facilities. 
(6)  Mandatory drainageway protection requirements. Drainageways shall remain in an undisturbed state except for the land uses allowed above. Vegetation clearing to maintain drainageway functions is permitted with the written approval of the director of public works. 
(g)  Municipal well recharge area overlay zoning district (MWR). 
(1)  Definition. Municipal well recharge areas are designated areas surrounding the city's public wells. Because the city relies on these wells to provide the public with fresh, safe drinking water, it is extremely important for these wells to be protected from those land uses which pose a high threat of contamination. 
(2)  Purpose. The city recognizes that consequences of certain land use activities, whether intentional or accidental, can seriously impair groundwater quality. The purpose of the municipal well recharge area overlay district (MWR) is to protect municipal groundwater resources from certain land use activities by imposing appropriate restrictions upon lands located within the approximate groundwater recharge area of the city's municipal wells, either existing or planned. The restrictions imposed in this section are in addition to those of the underlying zoning district or any other provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Determination of well recharge area boundaries. The municipal well recharge area overlay district is indicated by zone MWR on the official zoning map. Zone MWR is identified as the primary source of water for the municipal well aquifer and as the most likely to transmit groundwater contaminants to the municipal wells. 
(4)  Land uses allowed as permitted or conditional uses. Subject to the uses prohibited by subsection (g)(5) of this section, and subject to the additional regulations in subsection (g)(8) of this section, all uses identified as permitted uses within an applicable zoning district shall be permitted, and all uses identified as conditional uses shall be allowed as conditional uses. 
(5)  Prohibited uses. The following uses have a high potential to contaminate groundwater, or have already caused groundwater contamination, in the state and elsewhere. Therefore, the following principal or accessory uses are prohibited within the MWR district: 
a.  Agricultural use of pesticides, insecticides, or fungicides. 
b.  Animal waste storage areas and facilities. 
c.  Areas for dumping or disposal of garbage, refuse, trash, or demolition material. 
d.  Application of fertilizer to manicured lawns or grasses in excess of the nutrient requirements of the grass. 
e.  Asphalt product manufacturing plants. 
f.  Automobile laundries and car washes. 
g.  Automobile service stations. 
h.  Building materials and products sales. 
i.  Cartage and express facilities. 
j.  Cemeteries. 
k.  Center-pivot or other large scale irrigated agricultural operations. 
l.  Chemical storage, sale, processing, or manufacturing. 
m.  Commercial exterior storage of any objects containing petroleum or other hazardous fluids. 
n.  Dry cleaning establishments. 
o.  Electronic circuit assembly plant. 
p.  Electroplating plants. 
q.  Exterminating shop/business. 
r.  Fertilizer manufacture plants. 
s.  Foundries and forge plants. 
t.  Garages for repair and servicing of motor vehicles, including body repair, painting, or engine rebuilding. 
u.  Highway salt storage areas. 
v.  Industrial liquid waste storage areas. 
w.  Intensive agriculture (i.e., locations of livestock confinement exceeding three head per acre). 
x.  Junkyards and auto graveyards. 
y.  Landfills. 
z.  Metal reduction and refinement plants. 
aa.  Mining operations. 
bb.  Motor and machinery service and assembly shops. 
cc.  Motor freight terminals. 
dd.  Motorized trails, such as snowmobile or RV trails. 
ee.  Paint products manufacturing. 
ff.  Pesticide, insecticide, fungicide, or fertilizer storage. 
gg.  Petroleum products storage or processing. 
hh.  Photography studios, including the development of film and pictures. 
ii.  Plastics manufacturing. 
jj.  Printing and publishing establishments. 
kk.  Pulp and paper manufacturing. 
ll.  Recycling facilities. 
mm.  Residential dwelling units on lots less than 15,000 square feet in area. However, in any residential district, on a lot of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, a single-family dwelling may be established regardless of the lot size, provided compliance with all other requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
nn.  Sewage disposal sites. 
oo.  Septic waste/sewage sludge landspreading. 
pp.  Sludge disposal sites. 
qq.  Storage, manufacture, or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials. 
rr.  Underground petroleum products storage tanks. 
ss.  Unsewered residential development. 
tt.  Woodworking and wood products manufacturing. 
(6)  Requirements for existing prohibited facilities. Where any of the uses listed in subsection (g)(4) of this section exist within the MWR district on the effective day of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the facilities shall, upon request by the city, provide copies of all state, federal and local facility operation approvals or certificates and ongoing environmental monitoring results. The facilities shall further provide additional environmental or safety structures/monitoring as deemed necessary by the city, which may include, but are not limited to, stormwater runoff management and monitoring. When the owners of said facilities determine, in the exercise of their own discretion, that existing equipment needs to be replaced, said equipment shall be replaced in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already at the facility. The facilities shall be responsible for the preparation and filing with the city of a contingency plan satisfactory to the city for the immediate notification of the city in the event of an emergency. 
(7)  Separation distances. The separation distances for particular land uses established by Wis. Admin. Code NR 812.08(4) are hereby established. 
(8)  Additional land use regulations. 
a.  Sewered and unsewered residential uses with a maximum lot area of 20,000 square feet are allowed to have an area of manicured lawn or grass up to 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Use of drywells or other subsurface drains for stormwater is prohibited. 
c.  Pesticide, insecticide, fungicide or fertilizer storage is permitted for "on site" use by the owner or farm operator only. 
d.  Animal waste, septic, and sewer sludge shall not be applied at rates exceeding the nutrient requirements of the crop growing on the application site. Application of these materials to frozen or snow covered ground is prohibited. 
e.  Except for existing lots of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or developments that will be served by municipal sewer within five years of the approval of the development, unsewered residential uses shall have a minimum lot size of two acres. Lots smaller than two acres may be approved, provided that sufficient land area will be maintained in an undeveloped state so that no more than one residence is allowed for each two acres of the overall development. 
(9)  Enforcement. 
a.  In the event of a release of any contamination which endangers, in the opinion of the city, a MWR district, the activity causing the release shall immediately cease and a cleanup satisfactory to the city shall occur. 
b.  The person or entity causing a release of contamination shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup, and all costs and expenses incurred by the city in responding to the release, including, but not limited to, administrative costs, employee time associated with the cleanup, equipment expenses, engineering fees, attorneys' fees and legal costs. 
c.  Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall remove and abate the prohibited use and shall forfeit the amount established by the city. Any person, firm, or corporation in default of payment of such forfeiture shall, in addition to all other penalties imposed by the court, have those costs added to their real property as a lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-86. - Community character overlay zoning. 
(a)  Introduction. This section contains the standards governing the preservation, protection, and enhancement of significant community character features in the community. This section recognizes the important and diverse benefits to the general welfare of the community in preserving and enhancing these key community character features. Each of the following districts is oriented to a particular community character feature. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set forth the requirements for the mandatory protection and enhancement of significant community character features within the jurisdiction of this chapter. In part, the provisions of this section are designed to ensure the implementation of the city's comprehensive master plan and Wis. Stats. §§ 62.231 and 87.30. 
(c)  Downtown design overlay zoning district (DD). 
(1)  Description and purpose. This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of the comprehensive master plan and the city's downtown revitalization plan, by preserving and enhancing the historical and aesthetic quality of the downtown, and by attaining a consistent visually pleasing image for the downtown area. As emphasized by the plan, this district is designed to forward both aesthetic and economic objectives of the city by controlling the site and building design and appearance of development within the district in a manner which is consistent with sound land use, urban design, and economic revitalization principles. The application of these standards will ensure long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles. 
(2)  Regulations. This district includes properties on: both sides of State Street (Beach Street to Pine Street), La Crosse Street (Division Street to Pine Street), Division Street (State Street to La Crosse Street), Oak Street (entire street), and Hickory Street (State Street to Prairie Street). The district includes historic structures that should be preserved and non-historic structures and uses that are candidates for redevelopment. Historic is a subjective designation not necessarily requiring official designation on a state or a federal registry. All buildings or site improvements activities normally requiring a permit must conform to the standards within the downtown design standards handbook, which includes the following elements: 
a.  Site plan review 114-291. 
b.  Building design (scale and articulation, facade-street level, facade-roofline, signage, projections, colors and materials). 
c.  Waterfront facing rear yards. 
d.  Restoration and preservation (cleaning and restoration, architectural details). 
(3)  Standards vs. recommendations. Required standards are located in the box at the bottom of each page in the downtown design standards handbook. These standards will be enforced unless a waiver is granted. Each section of this manual also includes design recommendations. Property owners/leaseholders should consider these recommendations and the city may encourage conformance to the recommendations, but they will not be enforced as part of the city zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Waivers. Applicants that do not believe they can or should follow a standard must negotiate with the plan commission for a waiver of that requirement. Waivers are granted by the plan commission on a case-by-case basis and are decided based on the applicants' ability to demonstrate one or more of the following conditions: 
a.  The required design feature cannot be met on the site. 
b.  The requirement would create undue hardship for the applicant as compared to other properties in the district. 
c.  The intent of the standards can be successfully met with an alternative design. 
(5)  Review process. Applicants should review the downtown design standards handbook at the beginning of the design process. The following items must be submitted for review: 
a.  Design standards checklist. 
b.  Illustrations, diagrams, samples, and spec. sheets. 
City staff completes an initial review and the city administrator is authorized to approve those applications that both meet the standards and require no additional permit approval by the city. Applications determined by staff to not meet the standards, that require a site plan, and/or that require additional zoning or building permit approval will be forwarded to the plan commission for their review with any applicable staff notes. The applicant will be informed of the outcome of this initial review within five business days of submittal and may decide at that time to withdraw or revise the submittal or to proceed to the plan commission for review. Submission must be made 45 days before a plan commission meeting. Applicants that wish to appeal the decision of the plan commission may do so to the city council. Requests for appeal should be made to the city administrator. 
(d)  Community gateway design overlay zoning district (CG). 
(1)  Description and purpose. This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of the comprehensive master plan, by requiring that development located at and around the most important entrances to the community has a character which recognizes the city's adopted objectives of establishing an attractive and high-quality image. As emphasized by the plan, this district is designed to forward both aesthetic and economic development objectives of the city by controlling the site design and appearance of development within the district in a manner consistent with sound land use, urban design, and economic development principles. The application of these standards will ensure long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles. 
(2)  Regulations. Reserved for future use. 
(3)  Procedures. Reserved for future use. 
(e)  Entry corridor design overlay zoning district (EC). 
(1)  Description and purpose. This district is intended to implement the urban design recommendations of the comprehensive master plan, by preserving and enhancing the quality of the major entry corridors throughout the community. As emphasized by the plan, this district is designed to forward both aesthetic and historic preservation objectives of the city by controlling the site design and appearance of development within the district in a manner consistent with sound land use, urban design, and economic revitalization principles. The application of these standards will ensure long-term progress and broad participation toward these principles. 
(2)  Regulations. Reserved for future use. 
(3)  Procedures. Reserved for future use. 
(f)  Park overlay zoning district (POZ). 
(1)  Description and purpose. This district is intended to apply to lands owned by the public primarily for the purpose of providing public recreation opportunities or open space conservation. The district is intended to implement the recreation and open space objectives of the comprehensive master plan by permitting recreation or open space land uses. 
(2)  List of land uses permitted by right. 
a.  Passive outdoor public recreational (per section 114-123(a)). 
b.  Lawn care (per section 114-128(20)). 
(3)  List of land uses permitted as a conditional use. 
a.  Active outdoor public recreational (per section 114-123(b)). 
b.  Campgrounds (per section 114-124(n)). 
c.  Indoor institutional (per section 114-123(c)). 
d.  Outdoor institutional (per section 114-123(d)). 
e.  Public service and utilities (per section 114-123(e)). 
f.  Drainage structure (per section 114-128(o)). 
g.  Filling (per section 114-128(p)). 
h.  Road, bridge and/or appurtenances thereto (per section 114-128(v)). 
i.  Utility lines and related facilities, provided all such lines are underground. 
j.  Piers and wharfs (per section 114-128(u)). 
(4)  Regulations. Park overlay districts shall remain in an undisturbed state except for the land uses allowed herein. 
(5)  Procedures. Refer to section 114-291, for the procedures applicable to proposal review in this overlay district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-87. - Airport overlay zoning. 
    Regulations. See chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 114-88-114-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LAND USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 114-114. - General information. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to describe and define the principal and accessory land uses which are authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  Land use categories. The land uses are divided into the following general categories: 
(1)  Residential land uses. 
(2)  Agricultural land uses. 
(3)  Institutional land uses. 
(4)  Commercial land uses. 
(5)  Storage/disposal land uses. 
(6)  Transportation land uses. 
(7)  Industrial land uses. 
(8)  Accessory land uses. 
(9)  Temporary land uses. 
(c)  Group developments. A group development is any development containing: 
(1)  Two or more structures containing principal land uses on the same lot; 
(2)  Any single structure on a single lot which contains five or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential uses; and/or 
(3)  Any single structure devoted to institutional, office or commercial land uses containing more than 5,000 gross square feet of floor area. Group developments are allowed as conditional uses in all zoning districts, provided that the proposed uses within the group development are either permitted uses or conditional uses within the zoning district in question. Group developments require special consideration because of the unique issues which arise when several principal structures, and/or several land uses, and/or numerous dwelling units, and/or large land uses are proposed on a single lot. Hence, additional regulations are imposed on group developments in section 114-130. 
(d)  Omitted uses. Land uses which are not specifically described in this chapter are not necessarily excluded from locating within any given zoning district. Article VIII of this chapter empowers the zoning administrator to make interpretations on matters regarding specific land use proposals which are not addressed by this chapter. 
(e)  Illustrations. The illustrations contained herein demonstrate how to measure the various setback requirements labeled in capital letters. 
(f)  Discrimination against condominium forms of ownership. It is not the intent of this section, nor any other provision of this chapter, to discriminate against condominium forms of ownership in any manner which conflicts with Wis. Stats. § 703.27. As such, the provisions of this section are designed to ensure that condominium forms of ownership are subject to the same standards and procedures of review and development as other physically similar forms of development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-115. - Regulations applicable to all land uses. 
(a)  The regulations set forth in this chapter apply to all structures and all land uses, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Number of buildings per lot. In the AG, ER-1, SR-3, and SR-4 districts, only one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot. In the TR-6, MR-8, MR-10, NB, PB, GB, CB, GI, and HI districts, more than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot upon the granting of a conditional use permit (section 114-288) for a group development (section 114-130). 
(c)  Number of land uses per building. 
(1)  No more than one nonresidential land use shall be permitted in any building unless a conditional use permit (section 114-288) for a group development (section 114-130) is granted. 
(2)  With the exception of a commercial apartment or a home occupation, no building containing a nonresidential land use shall contain a residential land use. 
(d)  Division or combining of a lot. No recorded lot shall be divided into two or more lots, and no two or more recorded lots shall be combined into one or more lots, unless such division or combination results in the creation of lots, each of which conforms to all of the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which said lot is located, as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-116. - Nonconforming use. 
(a)  Existing nonconforming uses. An active and actual use of land or structures, or both, legally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or subsequent applicable amendment thereto which has continued the same use to the present, and which would not be permitted under the current terms of the chapter. 
(b)  Continuance of a nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use lawfully existing upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing upon such date, except as specified in this section. Any legal use under the previous zoning ordinance which is made nonconforming by this chapter may apply for a conditional use permit (per section 114-288) to be granted legal conforming status. Any legal use under the previous zoning map which is made nonconforming by a change to the official zoning map may apply for a zoning map amendment, per section 114-286, to an appropriate zoning district to be granted legal conforming use status. 
(c)  Modification of a nonconforming use. 
(1)  Except as permitted in subsection (c)(2) below of this section, a nonconforming use shall not be expanded or changed to another nonconforming use unless such modification would make the nonconforming use have a more desirable effect in terms of implementing the purpose of this chapter, as determined by the zoning administrator. If such a modification occurs, said use shall not be modified back to the original nonconforming use or to any other nonconforming use which does not better accomplish the purpose of this chapter. 
(2)  A nonconforming nonresidential use which is not served by public sanitary sewer and/or public water may be permitted to expand without being served by public sanitary sewer and/or public water if said facilities are not available within 1,000 feet of the subject property and upon the granting of a conditional use permit per the requirements of section 114-288. 
(d)  Discontinuance of a nonconforming use. When any nonconforming use of any structure or land is discontinued for a period of 12 months, or is changed into a conforming use, any future use of said structure or land shall be in complete conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Maintenance of a nonconforming use. The normal maintenance of a structure or land containing or related to a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary repairs and incidental alterations which do not exacerbate the adverse impacts of the nonconforming use in relation to the purpose of this chapter. 
(f)  Destruction of nonconforming uses. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use which is accidentally damaged by fire, tornado or other disaster may be repaired so that the nonconforming use may be continued thereafter, provided that the total cost of all the repairs, both structural and non-structural, does not exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the building or structure. However, if the cost to repair the building or structure exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of the building or structure, then the building or structure shall not be allowed to be repaired and then used for a nonconforming use, except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The following nonconforming uses may be allowed, by conditional use, to rebuild as a nonconforming use regardless of the cost of repairs, provided that neither the floor area nor the footprint of the structure shall be expanded: 
a.  Single-family detached (section 114-121(a)); 
b.  Duplex (section 114-121(b)); 
c.  Twin-house (section 114-121(c)); 
d.  Two-flat house (section 114-121(d)); 
e.  Townhouse (section 114-121(e)). 
(2)  A nonconforming use which owns and occupies two or more principal buildings or structures in close proximity to one another (e.g., an industry which has two or more buildings located next to each other on separate tax parcels), may be allowed, by conditional use, to rebuilt as a nonconforming use, provided that the total cost of the rebuilding does not exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of all the adjacent buildings and structures owned and occupied by that nonconforming use. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the repair or rebuilding of a building or structure which will contain a legal conforming use after the repairs are completed, provided the building or structure itself conforms with the other provisions of this chapter. For regulations dealing with destruction of nonconforming structures, see section 114-78. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-117. - Substandard lot regulations. 
(a)  Prohibition. Upon and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no lot shall be created which does not meet the minimum zoning district area (MZA), or the minimum lot area (MLA) requirements, or the lot dimension requirements of each applicable zoning district. 
(b)  Preexisting lots. A lot of record existing upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in a residential district, which does not meet the minimum zoning district area (MZA) or the minimum lot area (MLA) requirements of article II, or which does not meet the lot dimension requirements of article II of this chapter may be utilized for a detached single-family dwelling unit, provided the measurements of such area and dimensions are equal to or greater than 70 percent of the requirements of this chapter. Said lot shall not be more intensively developed with multifamily or nonresidential uses unless combined with one or more abutting lots, or portions thereof, so as to create a lot which meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Division or combining of a lot. No recorded lot shall be divided into two or more lots, and no two or more recorded lots shall be combined into one or more lots, unless such division or combination results in the creation of lots, each of which conforms to all of the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which said lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-118. - Nonconforming structures and buildings. 
(a)  Any lawful nonconforming structure existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued although its size and/or location does not conform to the lot width, area, yard, height, parking, loading, and access provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Existing nonconforming structures shall not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except when required to do so by law or so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above, an existing nonconforming principal structure in the residential districts which is used for any specified or conditional use, may be extended, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, but only if such change does not result in an increase to the nonconforming nature of the structure. No such change may increase the parking requirements for the use unless on-site parking spaces can be provided in accordance with section 114-161. 
(d)  When a nonconforming structure is damaged by fire, explosion, flood, violent wind, vandalism, ice, snow, mold, or infestation it may be reconstructed if such change does not result in an increase to the nonconforming nature of the structure. 
(e)  A nonconforming garage may be enlarged or replaced provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  That the proposed garage replacement or addition does not encroach farther into required setback than the current legal, nonconforming structure; 
(2)  That the proposed garage replacement or addition does not locate closer to an existing residence on an adjacent parcel than the sum of the required garage setback on the subject property and the required house setback on said adjacent parcel; and 
(3)  That precautions, determined the zoning administrator, are taken to reduce the possibility of fire damage to nearby structures. 
a.  Issued building permits. Any structure or building for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which will become nonconforming under the provisions of this chapter or amendments thereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is started within 365 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and provided that construction is completed within 730 calendar days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendments thereto. Said structure or building shall thereafter be a nonconforming structure or building. Extensions to these time limits may be granted by the plan commission for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-119. - Density and intensity standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to indicate the maximum permitted density for residential projects and maximum permitted intensity for nonresidential projects of development. The development potential of any site is determined by a variety of factors, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The area of the site; 
(2)  The proportion of the site not containing sensitive natural resources; 
(3)  The zoning district in which the site is located; 
(4)  The development option the site is developed under; and 
(5)  The use considered for development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-120. - Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to indicate the requirements for building height, size and location in both residential and nonresidential developments. The provisions of this section interact closely with the provisions of the previous section regarding density and intensity regulations. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Yard setback adjustments. 
(1)  Front yard setback adjustments. 
a.  Wide roads. For lots located adjacent to a street with an officially mapped or existing right-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 feet, 40 feet of setback is required to address anticipated future conditions of noise and air quality. 
b.  Reductions. The required front yard setback for any use may be reduced through the conditional use process for a principal structure on any lot where more than 50 percent of the same type of principal structures on the same block face or street face do not meet the required front yard setback. In such instances, the required front yard setback for the proposed structure shall be the average of all the adjoining same type principal structures on said block face or street face. 
c.  Averaging. In order to preserve and maintain the character of established neighborhoods within the city with front yard setbacks substantially less than the minimum required front yard setback, the following regulations shall apply, unless altered through the conditional use process: 
1.  On block faces with an average front yard setback more than five feet less than the minimum required front yard, the setback shall be decreased to the average of the adjoining same type principal structures on said block face or street face. 
d.  Corner lots. Lots which abut on more than one street and, therefore, have more than one front yard (e.g., corner lots) shall comply with the setback requirements for front yards along each street, except that the required front yard setback may be reduced through the conditional use process, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  The required front yard setback must be maintained along at least one street abutting the lot; and 
2.  No front yard setback may be reduced below the minimum set back required for side yards. Intrusions into required yards: 
(i)  General standards. The minimum setback requirements found in each zoning district shall establish the minimum required yards for all uses, except those exempted by the provisions of this section. 
A.  Reductions. No yard shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard less than the minimum required by this chapter. If an existing yard is less than the minimum required, it shall not be reduced further, except where exempted by the provisions of this section. 
B.  Lots separate. No required yard or lot area allocated to satisfy the minimum yard or lot area requirements for one building or structure shall be used to satisfy the minimum yard or lot area requirement for another building or structure. 
C.  Bufferyards. In instances where the required bufferyard width exceeds the minimum required setback width, the minimum required bufferyard width shall prevail. Absolutely no intrusions of a building or structure are permitted within the required bufferyard. 
D.  Front yards. With the exception of fences, no accessory structures shall be permitted within any portion of a front yard or street yard. 
(d)  Permitted intrusions into required front or street yards. The following intrusions are permitted into front or street yards: 
(1)  Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, and gutters for residential buildings; provided they do not extend more than two and one-half feet into the required yard. 
(2)  Yard lights, ornamental lights, and nameplate signs for residential lots, provided that they comply with the illumination requirements of section 114-59 and provided they do not locate closer than five feet from the front or street property line. 
(3)  Terraces, steps, stoops, or similar appurtenances to residential buildings which do not extend above the floor level of the adjacent building entrance, provided they do not locate closer than 20 feet from any street right-of-way. 
(4)  Fences on residential or nonresidential lots which do not exceed four feet in height; provided they do not locate closer than two feet to any street right-of-way. Permitted fence types shall comply with the provisions of section 114-177. 
(5)  Landscape areas. 
(e)  Permitted intrusions into required side or rear yards. The following intrusions are permitted into rear or side yards: 
(1)  Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, and gutters for residential buildings, provided they do not extend more than two and one-half feet into the required yard. 
(2)  Fences may locate on the property line. Permitted fence types shall comply with the provisions of section 114-172. 
(3)  Fire escapes on residential buildings which do not extend more than four feet into the required yard. 
(4)  Landscape areas. 
(5)  Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, decks, stoops, or similar appurtenances to residential buildings which do not extend more than one foot above grade, provided they do not locate closer than 20 feet to the rear lot line. 
(6)  In neighborhoods that were platted before adoption of this Code (October 31, 2001), driveways may be located within the side yard setback and/or may extend across side yard property lines (e.g., shared driveways), provided that a written agreement: 
a.  Executed by the adjacent property owners; 
b.  In a form recordable with the register of deeds; 
c.  Addressing the issues of stormwater run-off, snow removal, parking, outside storage, and driveway maintenance; and 
d.  Addressing any additional issues which, in the discretion of the zoning administrator, are created by the unusual characteristics of the property, is approved by the zoning administrator pursuant to the process for the issuance of zoning permits for permitted uses under section 114-287. Upon approval of any such agreement, it shall be recorded with the register of deeds. 
(f)  Exceptions to maximum height regulations. 
(1)  Permitted exceptions. The following are permitted to exceed the maximum height regulations by ten feet, within any district where permitted: church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes which do not contain useable space, public monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, flag poles, chimneys, smokestacks, cooling towers, and elevator penthouses. Such uses may exceed said maximum by more than ten feet with the approval of a conditional use permit. 
(2)  Conditional use exceptions. Any building or structure not otherwise accounted for by subsection (f)(1) of this section may exceed said maximum height regulations with the granting of a conditional use permit which specifically states the maximum permitted height of the proposed building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-121. - Residential land uses. 
(a)  Single-family detached. 
(1)  Description. A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit. This dwelling unit type consists of a single-family residence which is located on an individual lot or within a group development and which is fully detached from another dwelling unit or building. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The dwelling unit must be one of the following: 
1.  A site-built structure, built in compliance with the UDC; 
2.  A manufactured dwelling (modular home) as permitted by the UDC; or 
3.  A manufactured home as permitted by the HUD code. 
b.  For all dwelling units, the use of a permanent, continuous UDC foundation is required. 
c.  This dwelling unit type may not be split into two or more residences. 
d.  All below-grade portions of these dwellings (e.g., footings, crawl spaces, basements, etc.) shall be of masonry construction. 
e.  Refer to the illustration below and to article II of this chapter for lot requirements labeled in capital letters. 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling Unit 

(b)  Duplex. 
(1)  Description. This dwelling unit type consists of a single, two-family dwelling unit which is in complete compliance with the state one- and two-family dwelling code (§ 101.60.66), and which has two individual dwelling units located side-by-side upon a single lot, compared with two-flat houses which are the same as duplexes except the units are above and below each other. Each dwelling unit is typically occupied by the same family for periods of one month or longer. (See commercial indoor lodging, for rental periods of less than one month.) 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Individual entrances, sanitary sewer laterals and public water laterals are required for each dwelling unit. 
b.  The two residences must be located on the same lot. (The twin-house is distinguished from the duplex merely by having each unit located on an individual lot or within a group development.) 
c.  A duplex may not be expanded into additional (i.e., more than two) dwelling units. 
d.  All below-grade portions of these dwellings (e.g., footings, crawl spaces, basements, etc.) shall be of masonry construction. 
e.  Refer to the illustration below and to article II of this chapter for lot requirements labeled in capital letters. 
Duplex 

(c)  Twin-house. 
(1)  Description. The twin-house is identical to a duplex except each dwelling unit must be located on a separate individual lot or within a group development. Separate lots permit, but do not require, ownership of each unit by a different person. Each dwelling unit is typically occupied by the same family for periods of one month or longer. (See commercial indoor lodging for rental periods of less than one month.) 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The regulations for duplexes apply to all twin-houses wherever located in the city. 
b.  Individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals are required for each dwelling unit. 
c.  Refer to the illustration below and to article II of this chapter for lot requirements labeled in capital letters. 
Twin-house 

(d)  Two-flat house. 
(1)  Description. This dwelling unit type consists of a single, two-family dwelling unit which is in complete compliance with the state one- and two-family dwelling code (§ 101.60.66), which has individual dwelling units on multiple levels, rather than side-by-side as for a duplex or twin-house, and which is located on a single lot. This dwelling unit type also includes any single-family residence that has been converted into a two-family residence. Each dwelling unit is typically occupied by the same family for periods of one month or longer. (See commercial indoor lodging, for rental periods of less than one month.) 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The two residences must be located on the same lot or within the same group development. 
b.  This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional dwelling units. 
c.  Refer to the illustration below and to article II of this chapter for lot requirements labeled in capital letters. 
Two-Flat House 

(e)  Townhouse. 
(1)  Description. This residential dwelling unit type consists of attached two-story, single-family residences, each having a private, individual access, and each located on a separate lot. Each dwelling unit is typically occupied by the same family for periods of one month or longer. (See commercial indoor lodging, for rental periods of less than one month.) 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals are required for each dwelling unit. 
b.  No more than eight and no less than three townhouse dwelling units may be attached per group. (Two-unit townhouses are referred to herein as twin-houses.) 
c.  All townhouse units within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development. 
d.  Refer to the illustration below and to article II of this chapter for lot requirements labeled in capital letters. 
Townhouse 

(f)  Multiplex. 
(1)  Description. This residential dwelling unit type consists of several attached dwelling units, each of which has a private, individual exterior entrance. Each dwelling unit is typically occupied by the same family for periods of one month or longer. (See commercial indoor lodging, for rental periods of less than one month). 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  No more than 16 and no less than three multiplex dwelling units may be attached in a single building. 
b.  As part of the conditional use requirements for group developments, any development comprised of one or more buildings which contain four or more dwelling units shall provide additional site design features, such as underground parking, architectural elements, landscaping, and/or onsite recreational facilities. 
c.  All multiplex units within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development. 
d.  Refer to the illustration below and to article II of this chapter for lot requirements labeled in capital letters. 
Multiplex 

(g)  Apartment. 
(1)  Description. This dwelling unit type consists of several attached family dwelling units which provide access to the dwelling units from a shared entrance or hallway. Each dwelling unit is typically occupied by the same family for periods of one month or longer. (See commercial indoor lodging, for rental periods of less than one month.) 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  No more than 16 and no less than three dwelling units may be located in a single building. (Two-unit buildings are either duplexes or two-flat houses.) 
b.  As part of the conditional use requirements for group developments, any development comprised of one or more buildings which contain four or more dwelling units shall provide additional site design features, such as underground parking, architectural elements, landscaping, and/or onsite recreational facilities. 
c.  All apartment units within a development shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the boundary of the development. 
d.  Refer to the illustration below and to article II of this chapter for lot requirements labeled in capital letters. 
Apartment 

(h)  Commercial apartment. 
(1)  Description. Commercial apartments are dwelling units which are located above the ground floor of a building used for a commercial land use as designated in section 114-124, most typically an office or retail establishment. The primary advantage of commercial apartments is that they are able to share required parking spaces with nonresidential uses. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The gross floor area devoted to commercial apartments shall be counted toward the floor area of a nonresidential development. 
(i)  Mobile home. 
(1)  Description. This dwelling unit type consists of a structure manufactured or assembled before June 15, 1976, designed to be towed as a single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle, and equipped and used, or intended to be used, primarily for human habitation, with walls of rigid uncollapsible construction, which has an overall length in excess of 45 feet. Each dwelling unit is typically occupied by the same family for periods of one month or longer. (See commercial indoor lodging, for rental periods of less than one month.) 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  No mobile home may be placed, parked, stored or occupied within the city unless: 
1.  It is located in a mobile home park (subsection (j) of this section) land use; 
2.  It is exclusively used as a contractor's project office temporary land use; or 
3.  It is exclusively offered for sale at an outdoor sales or service (section 114-124(d)) commercial land use, provided the business conducting the outdoor sales or service is engaged in the business of selling new mobile homes. 
b.  Except for contractor's project offices and outdoor sales or service land uses, the following regulations shall apply to all mobile homes in the city: 
1.  Within 30 days of occupancy the owner shall remove the wheels and install around the entire mobile home skirting made of durable material (e.g., fiberglass, aluminum, metal, vinyl) and shall be of a color matching the mobile home. 
2.  The minimum width of each mobile home shall be 14 feet. 
3.  Underground utilities shall be provided to each mobile home. Overhead wires and propane tanks shall not be permitted. 
4.  This dwelling unit type may not be split into two or more residences. 
(j)  Mobile home/manufactured home parks. 
(1)  Description. This land use is a form of residential development which is exclusively reserved for; 
a.  Conventional mobile home parks, in which lots are owned by a single entity and rented (with or without mobile homes) to individuals; and 
b.  Mobile home condo parks, in which all lots are part of the same condominium association and are owned individually by unit owners. 
(2)  Regulations. The following regulations apply to all mobile home/manufactured home parks, wherever located in the city: 
a.  Each dwelling unit shall be occupied by not more than one family. 
b.  Developments shall be located so as to blend with adjacent residentially zoned areas to the greatest extent possible. 
c.  No access shall be permitted to local residential streets. 
d.  Each of the lots and mobile home units must meet the requirements for mobile homes listed in section 114-121(i). 
e.  Under this development option, approximately ten percent of a development's gross site area (GSA) can contain natural resource areas which must be protected, or other permanently protected green space areas, without a reduction in maximum gross density (MGD). This estimate is provided as a general rule of thumb for the convenience of the users of this chapter. Such a yield is not to be considered as ensured by the provisions of this chapter. 
f.  A blanket variance is hereby granted to all existing mobile home/manufactured home parks located in the city upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. This blanket variance will permit such parks to continue operation, and will permit the removal and replacement of mobile homes on existing lots within the park. However, such parks may not be expanded or altered except in compliance with this article. Nothing herein shall limit or waive the obligation of each park to obtain a license therefore from the city. 
Rationale. The purpose of this blanket variance is to make sure that the continued operation of existing mobile home parks are not affected by this article, but any expansion or modification of existing parks shall comply with this chapter. It is expected that park expansions or modifications shall be pursued either as a conditional use within the TR-6 district (section 114-45(b)), or as a planned development (section 114-48). This blanket variance ensures that existing parks do not encounter difficulty when transferring ownership, because they would otherwise be considered nonconforming uses, and it ensures that mobile homes within the parks can be removed and replaced without triggering the need for a zoning permit. 
(k)  Adult family home (AFH). 
(1)  Description. Adult family home land uses include all facilities provided for under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 50.01(1). 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The proposed site shall be located so as to avoid disruption of an established or developing area. 
b.  No individual lots are required, although the development shall contain a minimum of 900 square feet of gross site area for each occupant of the development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-122. - Agricultural land uses. 
(a)  Cultivation. 
(1)  Description. Cultivation land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site, outdoor raising of plants. This land use includes trees which are raised as a crop to be replaced with more trees after harvesting, such as in nursery or Christmas tree operations. The raising of plants for consumption by farm animals is considered cultivation if said plants are consumed by animals which are located off site. 
(2)  Principal and accessory land use regulations. 
a.  Unless permitted through a conditional use permit on lots of record, cultivation areas shall not exceed 20 percent of the lot's area. 
b.  Cultivation areas shall not be located within the required front yard or street yard of any lot of record or developed lot. 
c.  In all natural resource protection overlay districts, cultivation is allowed only as a conditional use, provided the area proposed for cultivation is designated on the submitted site plan and/or recorded plat or CSM as an area which may be used for cultivation. 
d.  All cultivation uses shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from all property lines when cultivation uses are located along streets that contain curb and gutter and/or storm sewer systems. 
(b)  Husbandry. 
(1)  Description. Husbandry land uses include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals at an intensity of less than one animal unit (as defined in section 114-16) per acre. Apiaries are considered husbandry land uses. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Any building housing animals shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from any residentially zoned property, and 100 feet from all other lot lines. 
b.  All outdoor animal containments (pastures, pens, and similar areas) shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-123. - Institutional land uses. 
(a)  Indoor institutional. 
(1)  Description. Indoor institutional land uses include all indoor public and not for profit recreational facilities such as gyms, swimming pools, libraries, museums, and community centers, schools, churches, nonprofit clubs, nonprofit fraternal organizations, convention centers, hospitals, jails, prisons, and similar land uses. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial street. 
b.  Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the users will be children as in the case of a school, church, library, or similar land use. 
c.  All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
(b)  Outdoor institutional. 
(1)  Description. Outdoor institutional land uses include public and private cemeteries, privately held permanently protected green space areas, country clubs, non-public golf courses, campgrounds, fairgrounds, and similar land uses. 
(2)  Principal and accessory land use regulations. 
a.  Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial street. 
b.  Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if a significant proportion of the users will be children. 
c.  All structures and actively used outdoor recreational areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
d.  Facilities using night lighting and adjoining a residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of six-tenths of one percent. Said bufferyard shall be located at the property line adjacent to said residentially zoned property. 
e.  Shall comply with section 114-288, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
f.  In all natural resource protection overlay districts, non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into native vegetation areas. 
(c)  Institutional residential. 
(1)  Description. Institutional residential land uses include group homes, convents, monasteries, nursing homes, convalescent homes, retirement homes, limited care facilities, rehabilitation centers, and similar land uses not considered to be community living arrangements under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The proposed site shall be located so as to avoid disruption of an established or developing office area. 
b.  Within the neighborhood business (NB) and planned business (PB) districts, institutional residential developments shall be designed so as to maintain the character of the adjacent properties. 
c.  No individual lots are required, although the development shall contain a minimum of 800 square feet of gross site area for each occupant of the development. 
d.  A minimum of 30 percent of the development's gross site area (GSA) shall be held as permanently protected green space. This estimate is provided as a general rule of thumb for the convenience of the users of this chapter. Such a yield is not to be considered as ensured by the provisions of this chapter. 
e.  The development shall provide off-street passenger loading area at a minimum of one location. 
f.  All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property which does not contain an institutional residential land use. 
(d)  Community living arrangement (CLA). 
(1)  Description. Community living arrangement (CLA) land uses include all facilities provided for in Wis. Stats. § 46.03(22). CLAs do not include day care centers nursing homes general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons, or jails. CLA facilities are regulated depending upon their capacity as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The distance between CLAs is controlled by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i)1. Exceptions thereto may be granted by conditional use. 
b.  The number of CLAs in the city is controlled by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i)2. Exceptions thereto may be granted by conditional use. 
c.  The city may determine whether a CLA poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, and may order the CLA to cease operation, pursuant to the statutory procedures of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i). 
d.  Capacity/location pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i): 
1.  CLAs with capacity for eight or fewer persons and which meet the criteria of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i) shall be permitted to locate in any residential zoning district. 
2.  CLAs with capacity for nine to 15 persons and which meet the criteria of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i) shall be permitted to locate in any residential zoning district except in single-family and two-family zoning districts (e.g., ER-1, SR-3, SR-4, TR-6 districts). 
3.  CLAs with capacity for 16 or more persons and which meet the criteria of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i) shall be allowed, by conditional use, to locate in the MR-8 and the MR-10 districts. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-124. - Commercial land uses. 
(a)  Office. 
(1)  Description. Includes all exclusively indoor land uses whose primary functions are the handling of information or administrative services such as accounting firms. Such land uses do not typically provide services directly to customers on a walk-in or on an appointment basis (see subsection (b) of this section). 
(b)  Personal or professional service. 
(1)  Description. Includes all exclusively indoor land uses whose primary function is the provision of services directly to an individual on a walk-in or on-appointment basis. Examples of such uses include professional services, insurance or financial services, realty offices, medical offices and clinics, veterinary clinics, barbershops, beauty shops, and related land uses, but do not include sexually oriented land uses. 
(c)  Indoor sales or service. 
(1)  Description. The sale and/or display of merchandise or equipment or non-personal or non-professional services, entirely within an enclosed building. Includes general merchandise stores, grocery stores, butcher, sporting goods stores, antique stores, gift shops, laundromats, bakeries, pawn shops, payday lenders, and a number of other uses meeting this definition. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Depending on the zoning district, such land uses may or may not display products outside of an enclosed building. Such activities are listed as outdoor sales or service incidental to indoor sales under accessory uses in the table of land uses, section 114-128(6). 
b.  A land use which contains both indoor sales and outdoor sales exceeding 15 percent of the total sales area of the building on the property shall be considered as an outdoor sales land use. (See subsection (d) of this section.) 
c.  Artisan craft production such as consumer ceramics, custom woodworking, or other production activities directly associated with retail sales are regulated as light industrial uses incidental to indoor sales. 
(d)  Outdoor sales or service. 
(1)  Description. Includes all land uses which conduct sales, display sales or rental merchandise or equipment outside of an enclosed building such as vehicle sales, vehicle rental, manufactured and mobile housing sales and monument sales. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The area of outdoor sales shall be calculated as the area which would be enclosed by a fence installed and continually maintained in the most efficient manner which completely encloses all materials displayed outdoors. 
b.  The display of items shall not be permitted in permanently protected green space areas, required landscaped areas, or required bufferyards. 
c.  The display of items shall not be permitted within required setback areas for the principal structure. 
d.  In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or number of parking stalls provided on the property below the requirement established by the provisions of section 114-56. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the requirement, such display area shall not further reduce the number of parking stalls already present. 
e.  Display areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or circulation area by a minimum of ten feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters, or by a clearly marked paved area. 
f.  Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either onsite or off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian conflicts. 
g.  Outdoor sales or service shall be permitted during the entire calendar year, however, if goods are removed from the display area all support fixtures used to display the goods shall be removed within ten calendar days of the goods' removal. 
h.  Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored or displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be displayed for this land use. 
(e)  Indoor maintenance service. 
(1)  Description. Includes all land uses which perform maintenance services such as repair and contain all operations, except loading, entirely within an enclosed building. Because of outdoor vehicle storage requirements, vehicle repair and maintenance is considered a vehicle repair and maintenance land use. 
(f)  In-vehicle sales or service. 
(1)  Description. Includes all land uses which perform sales and/or services to persons in vehicles such as drive-ins, drive-ups, and drive-through facilities, vehicular fuel stations, and all forms of car washes. If performed in conjunction with a principal land use, for example, a convenience store, restaurant or bank, in-vehicle sales and service land uses shall be considered an accessory use. 
(2)  Principal and accessory land use regulations. 
a.  Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for each walk-in customer access to the facility adjacent to the drive-through lane. 
b.  The drive-through facility shall be designed so as to not impede or impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement, or exacerbate the potential for pedestrian/vehicular conflicts. 
c.  In no instance shall a drive-through facility be permitted to operate which endangers the public safety, even if such land use has been permitted under the provisions of this section. 
d.  The setback of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall be a minimum of ten feet from all street right-of-way lines, a minimum of 20 feet from all residentially zoned property lines, and shall be a minimum of five feet from all other property lines. The total height of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall not exceed 20 feet as measured to highest part of structure. 
e.  All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a surface paved with concrete or bituminous material which is designed to meet the requirements of a minimum four-ton axle load. 
f.  Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving areas from exterior fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums, menu boards, canopy supports and landscaped islands. Said curbs shall be a minimum of six inches high and be of a non-mountable design. No curb protecting an exterior fixture shall be located closer than 25 feet to all property lines. 
g.  Each drive-up lane shall have a minimum stacking length of 100 feet behind the pass through window and 40 feet beyond the pass-through window. 
(g)  Indoor commercial entertainment. 
(1)  Description. Includes all land uses which provide entertainment services entirely within an enclosed building. Such activities often have operating hours which extend significantly later than most other commercial land uses such as restaurants, taverns, theaters, health or fitness centers, all forms of training studios (dance, art, martial arts, etc.), bowling alleys, arcades, roller rinks, and pool halls. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  If located on the same side of the building as abutting residentially zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be permitted within 150 feet, or as far as possible, of a residentially zoned property. 
(h)  Outdoor commercial entertainment. 
(1)  Description. Includes all land uses which provide entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building such as outdoor commercial swimming pools, driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, amusement parks, drive-in theaters, go-cart tracks, and racetracks. If the proposed outdoor commercial entertainment is a freestanding operation which charges a separate fee from the principal land use, then the entertainment is probably not an accessory use, and should be treated as a separate principal use. 
(2)  Principal and accessory land use regulations. 
a.  Activity areas shall not be located closer than 300 feet to a residentially zoned property. 
b.  Activity areas, including drive-in movie screens, shall not be visible from any residentially zoned property. 
(i)  Commercial animal boarding. 
(1)  Description. Includes short-term and/or long-term boarding for animals such as commercial kennels and commercial stables. Exercise yards, fields, training areas, and trails associated with such land uses are considered accessory to such land uses and do not require separate consideration. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All activities, except vehicle parking, exercise yards, fields, training areas, and trails, shall be completely and continuously contained indoors. 
b.  The minimum permitted size of horse or similar animal stall shall be 100 square feet. 
c.  Special events such as shows, exhibitions, and contests shall only be permitted when a temporary use permit has been secured. 
d.  Animal waste disposal shall be handled in a manner that minimizes odor and potential spread of disease. 
(j)  Commercial indoor lodging. 
(1)  Description. Includes land uses which provide overnight housing in individual rooms, suites of rooms, or apartments, with each room, suite or apartment having a private bathroom. Such facilities may provide kitchens, laundry facilities, multiple bedrooms, living rooms, and may also provide indoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers. Restaurants, arcades, fitness centers, and other on-site facilities available to non-lodgers are not considered accessory uses and therefore require review as a separate land use. Commercial indoor lodging facilities include motels, hotels, time-share condos and short-term rental apartments, which provide housing for one month or less. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  If located on the same side of a building as abutting residentially zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be permitted within 100 feet of a residentially zoned property. 
b.  Within the PB district, each and every room must take primary access via an individual interior door, and may not be accessed via an external balcony, porch or deck, except for emergency purposes. 
(k)  Bed and breakfast establishment. 
(1)  Description. Bed and breakfast establishments are exclusively indoor lodging facilities which provide meals only to paying lodgers. Such land uses may provide indoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All such establishments shall be required to obtain a permit to serve liquor pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 125, if they intend to serve liquor. 
b.  They shall be inspected annually at a fee established by a separate fee ordinance, to verify that the land use continues to meet all applicable regulations. 
c.  The size, number and location of all signs shall be established by conditional use. 
d.  No premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast operation unless there are at least two exits to the outdoors from such premises. Rooms utilized for sleeping shall have a minimum size of 100 square feet for two occupants with an additional 30 square feet for each additional occupant to a maximum of four occupants per room. Each sleeping room used for the bed and breakfast operation shall have a separate operational smoke detector alarm, as required in the building code. One lavatory and bathing facility shall be required for every ten occupants, in addition to the owner's/operator's personal facilities. 
e.  The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast is operated shall be the principal residence of the operator/owner and said operator/owner shall live on the premises when the bed and breakfast operation is active. 
f.  Only the meal of breakfast may be served and only to overnight guests. 
g.  Each operator shall keep a list, for a period of one year, of the names and addresses of all persons staying at the bed and breakfast. Such list shall be available for inspection by city officials at reasonable times. 
h.  The maximum stay for any occupant of a bed and breakfast shall be 14 days. 
i.  In addition to the application requirements for all conditional uses, applicants shall submit an interior floor plan of the dwelling illustrating that the proposed operation will comply with this article as amended, and other applicable city codes and ordinances. 
j.  In addition to the standards of review for all conditional uses, the commission shall also determine whether a permit shall be issued based upon the public convenience and necessity. In determining the number of bed and breakfast operations required to provide for such public convenience and necessity, the commission shall consider the effect upon residential neighborhoods, the condition of existing holders of permits, if any, and the necessity of issuance of additional permits for public service. 
k.  Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the commission for good cause shown after investigation and after granting the permit holder the opportunity to be heard in opposition thereto. 
l.  Each conditional use permit shall be valid only while said property is owned by the permit holder at time of conditional use approval. Unless specifically stated otherwise in the conditional use, the conditional use permit shall automatically terminate upon conveyance of the property to a new owner. 
(l)  Group day care center (nine or more children). 
(1)  Description. Group day care centers are land uses in which qualified persons provide child care services for nine or more children. Examples of such land uses include day care centers and nursery schools. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Property owner's permission is required as part of the conditional use permit application. 
b.  Such land uses shall not be located within a residential building. 
c.  Such land uses may be operated in conjunction with another principal land use on the same environs, such as a church, school, business, or civic organization. In such instances, group day care centers are not considered as accessory uses and therefore require review as a separate land use. 
d.  Such land uses may be operated on a for-profit or a not-for-profit basis. 
(m)  Boardinghouse. 
(1)  Description. Boardinghouses include any residential use renting rooms which do not contain private bathroom facilities, with the exception of approved bed and breakfast facilities. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Shall be located in an area of transition from residential land uses to nonresidential land uses. 
b.  Shall comply with section 114-288, applicable to all conditional uses. 
(n)  Sexually oriented land uses. 
(1)  Description. Sexually oriented land uses include any facility which rents, sells or displays sexually oriented materials, such as X-rated videos, movies, slides, photos, books, or magazines. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "sexually specified areas" includes any one or more of the following: genitals, anal area, female areola or nipple; and the term "sexually oriented material" includes any media which displays sexually specified areas. Establishments which sell or rent sexually oriented materials shall not be considered sexually oriented land uses if: 
a.  The store area devoted to the sale or rent of said materials is less than five percent of the sales area devoted to non-sexually oriented materials; 
b.  Such materials are placed in generic covers or are placed in an area which is separate from and not visible from the areas devoted to non-sexually oriented materials; and 
c.  Such materials are not advertised by any advertising located or visible outside of the store. 
(2)  Rationale. The incorporation of this subsection (p) into this chapter is designed to reflect the common council's official finding that sexually oriented commercial uses have a predominant tendency to produce certain undesirable secondary effects on the surrounding community, as has been demonstrated in other, similar jurisdictions. Specifically, the common council is concerned with the potential for such uses to limit the attractiveness of nearby locations for new development; the ability to attract and/or retain customers; and the ability to market and sell nearby properties at a level consistent with similar properties not located near such facilities. It is explicitly not the intent of this subsection (p) to suppress free expression by unreasonably limiting alternative avenues of communication, but rather to balance the need to protect free expression opportunities with the need to implement the city's comprehensive master plan and protect the character and integrity of its commercial and residential neighborhoods. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  The facility shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any agriculturally zoned property or residentially zoned property; and shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any school, church, or outdoor recreational facility. 
b.  Exterior building appearance and signage shall be designed to ensure that the use does not detract from the ability of businesses in the vicinity to attract customers, nor affect the marketability of properties in the vicinity for sale at their assessed values. 
(o)  Vehicle repair and maintenance service. 
(1)  Description. Vehicle repair and maintenance services include all land uses which perform maintenance services, including repair, to motorized vehicles and contain all operations except vehicle storage entirely within an enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-125. - Storage or disposal land uses. 
(a)  Indoor storage or wholesaling. 
(1)  Description. Indoor storage and wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of businesses. With the exception of loading and parking facilities, such land uses are contained entirely within an enclosed building. Examples of this land use include conventional warehouse facilities, long-term indoor storage facilities, and joint warehouse and storage facilities. Retail outlets associated with this use shall be considered accessory uses per subsection 114-128(d). 
(b)  Outdoor storage or wholesaling. 
(1)  Description. Outdoor storage and wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of businesses. Such a land use, in which any activity beyond loading and parking is located outdoors, is considered an outdoor storage and wholesaling land use. Examples of this land use include contractors' storage yards, equipment yards, lumber yards, coal yards, landscaping materials yard, construction materials yards, and shipping materials yards. Such land uses do not include the storage of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other materials typically associated with a junkyard or salvage yard. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls and fencing. Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and shall be designed to completely screen all stored materials from view from non-industrialized areas at an elevation of five feet above the grade of all adjacent properties and rights-of-way. 
b.  The storage of items shall not be permitted in natural resource protection areas. 
c.  The storage of items shall not be permitted in required frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas. 
d.  In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use or number of parking stalls provided on the property below the requirement established by the provisions of section 114-56. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the requirement, such storage area shall not further reduce the number of parking stalls already present. 
e.  Storage areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or circulation area by a minimum of ten feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters, or by a clearly marked paved area. 
f.  Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian conflicts. 
g.  Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be stored under the provisions of this land use. 
h.  All outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer to a residentially zoned property than the required minimum setback for buildings on the subject property. 
(c)  Personal storage facility. 
(1)  Description. Personal storage facilities are land uses oriented to the indoor storage of items entirely within partitioned buildings having an individual access to each partitioned area. Such storage areas may be available on either a condominium or rental basis. Also known as "mini-warehouses." 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Facility shall be designed so as to minimize adverse visual impacts on nearby developments. The color, exterior materials, and orientation of proposed buildings and structures shall complement surrounding development. 
b.  Facility shall comply with section 114-288, standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses. 
c.  No electrical power shall be run to the storage facilities, except for exterior lighting. 
(d)  Junkyard or salvage yard. 
(1)  Description. Junkyard or salvage yard facilities are any land or structure used for a salvaging operation, including, but not limited to, the aboveground, outdoor storage and/or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, and any other discarded materials intended for sale or recycling; and/or the collection, dismantlement, storage, or salvage of two or more unlicensed and/or inoperative vehicles. Recycling facilities involving on-site outdoor storage of salvage materials are included in this land use. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines. 
b.  In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas. 
c.  Facility shall not involve the storage, handling or collection of hazardous materials, including any of the materials listed in section 114-71. 
(e)  Waste disposal facility. 
(1)  Description. Waste disposal facilities are any areas used for the disposal of solid wastes including those defined by Wis. Stats. § 289.01(33), but not including composting operations (see subsection (f) of this section). 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Facility shall comply with all county, state and federal regulations. 
b.  All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines. 
c.  Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, as defined by section 114-71, in any manner. 
d.  Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans, which shall include, at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable for such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount equivalent to 110 percent of the costs determined to be associated with said restoration, as determined by a third party selected by the city, shall be filed with the city by the petitioner, subject to approval by the city administrator, and shall be held by the city for the purpose of ensuring that the site is restored to the condition required by the approved site plan. The requirement for said surety is waived for waste disposal facilities owned by public agencies. 
(f)  Composting operation. 
(1)  Description. Composting operations are any land uses devoted to the collection, storage, processing and or disposal of vegetation. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Facility shall comply with all county, state and federal regulations. 
b.  All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines. 
c.  No food scraps or other vermin-attracting materials shall be processed, stored or disposed of on site. 
d.  Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or disposal of hazardous wastes, as defined by section 114-71, in any manner. 
(g)  Solid waste transfer station and material recovery facility (MRF). 
(1)  Description. Solid waste transfer stations and MRFs are any land or facility which accepts waste for temporary storage, or consolidation and further transfer of solid waste to a landfill and which is permitted by the state department of natural resources. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Facility shall comply with all county, state and federal regulations. 
b.  All equipment and activities associated with this use shall be contained within an enclosed building with only sufficient openings for ingress/egress of vehicles. 
c.  All materials stored outside shall be kept within storage bins or bales screened from view from adjacent properties and streets. 
d.  Facility shall not involve the storage, handling or collection of hazardous materials, including any of the materials listed in section 114-71. 
e.  The receiving or processing of scrap steel and junked cars shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-126. - Transportation land uses. 
(a)  Off-site parking lot. 
(1)  Description. Off-site parking lots are any areas used for the temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed and operative. See also section 114-56 for additional parking regulations. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted to a collector or arterial street. 
b.  Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to discourage cut-through traffic. 
(b)  Airport/heliport. 
(1)  Description. Airports and heliports are transportation facilities providing takeoff, landing, servicing, storage and other services to any type of air transportation. The operation of any type of air vehicle, including ultralight aircraft, hang gliders, parasails, and related equipment, but excepting model aircraft, within the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall occur only in conjunction with an approved airport or heliport. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All buildings, structures, outdoor airplane or helicopter storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines. 
(c)  Trucking facility. 
(1)  Description. Trucking facilities include: 
a.  Motor freight terminals used at any end of one or more truck carrier line or route. 
b.  Truck service facilities such as facilities for the sale of petroleum products primarily to the trucking industry, and facilities for repair and maintenance service. 
c.  Motor freight relay stations, refueling and service facilities for motor freight carriers privately owned by trucking companies, truck stops with separate or integrated facilities providing eating and/or sleeping accommodations, refueling facilities, and minor repair or service facilities, and other related facilities whose basic function is to serve the trucking and motor freight industry. Trucking facilities may have some or all of the following facilities: yards, docks, management offices, storage sheds, buildings and/or outdoor storage areas, freight stations, fueling stations with canopies, and truck maintenance and repair facilities, principally serving several or many businesses. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting residentially zoned property. 
b.  In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required frontage landscaping or bufferyard areas. 
c.  In no instance shall a drive-through facility be permitted to operate which endangers the public safety, even if such land use has been permitted under the provisions of this section. 
d.  The setback of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall be a minimum of ten feet from all street rights-of-way lines, a minimum of 20 feet from all residentially zoned property lines, and shall be a minimum of five feet from all other property lines. The total height of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall not exceed 20 feet as measured to highest part of structure. 
(d)  Indoor vehicle storage. 
(1)  Description. Indoor vehicle storage facilities are detached vehicle storage buildings for nonresidential purposes and shall be considered as a principal use building. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All activities shall be conducted entirely within the confines of the building. 
b.  This facility will require consideration of a group development (section 114-130) if located on the same lot as another principal use building. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-127. - Industrial land uses. 
(a)  Light industrial land use. 
(1)  Description. Light industrial land uses are industrial facilities at which all operations, with the exception of loading operations: 
a.  Are conducted entirely within an enclosed building; 
b.  Are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation which are detectable at the property line; 
c.  Do not pose a significant safety hazard such as danger of explosion; and 
d.  Comply with all of the performance standards listed for potential nuisances in article V of this chapter. 
Examples of light industrial land uses include commercial greenhouse operations, aquaponics, animal feed storage facilities, canning and other packaging facilities, and distribution centers. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All activities, except loading and unloading, shall be conducted entirely within the confines of a building. 
b.  Light industrial land uses may conduct retail sales activity as an accessory use, provided that the requirements of section 114-128(d) are complied with. 
(b)  Heavy industrial land use. 
(1)  Description. Heavy industrial land uses are industrial facilities which do not comply with one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Are conducted entirely within an enclosed building; 
b.  Are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation which are detectable at the property line; and 
c.  Do not pose a significant safety hazard such as danger of explosion. 
More specifically, heavy industrial land uses are industrial land uses which may be wholly or partially located outside of an enclosed building, may have the potential to create certain nuisances which are detectable at the property line, and may involve materials which pose a significant safety hazard. Examples of heavy industrial land uses include meat product producers, alcoholic beverage producers, paper, pulp or paperboard producers, chemical and allied product producers, except drug producers, including poison or fertilizer producers, petroleum and coal product producers, asphalt, concrete or cement producers, tanneries, stone, clay or glass product producers, primary metal producers, heavy machinery producers, electrical distribution equipment producers, electrical industrial apparatus producers, transportation vehicle producers, commercial sanitary sewage treatment plants, railroad switching yards, food processing facilities, and recycling facilities not involving the onsite storage of salvage materials. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from residentially zoned property. No materials shall be stacked or otherwise stored so as to be visible over bufferyard screening elements. 
b.  Heavy industrial land uses shall not exceed the performance standards listed in article V of this chapter. 
(c)  Towers. 
(1)  Description. Towers include all freestanding broadcasting, receiving, or relay structures, wind energy conversion towers, smokestacks, and similar principal land uses, and any office, studio or other land uses directly related to the function of the tower. 
(2)  Requirements. See section 114-131 for communication towers, also section 114-178 regarding standards for signal receiving antennas and section 114-179 regarding standards for wind energy conversion systems. 
(d)  Extraction use. 
(1)  Description. Extraction uses include land uses involving the removal of soil, clay, sand, gravel, rock, minerals, peat, or other material in excess of that required for approved on-site development or agricultural activities. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Shall receive approval from the county prior to action by the city, and shall comply with all county, state and federal regulations. 
b.  All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines. 
c.  Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans, which shall include at minimum, detailed grading and re-vegetation plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable for such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount equivalent to 110 percent of the costs determined to be associated with said restoration, as determined by a third party selected by the city, shall be filed with the city by the petitioner, subject to approval by the zoning administrator, and shall be held by the city for the purpose of ensuring that the site is restored to its proposed condition. The requirement for said surety is waived for publically-owned extraction or waste disposal facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-128. - Accessory land uses. 
    Accessory uses are land uses which are incidental to the principal use conducted on the subject property. As such, accessory uses cannot be conducted or built until the principal use is conducted and built (e.g., in a single-family residential zoning district, an accessory use, such as a garage, cannot be built and used before the principal use, the single-family dwelling, is built). Moreover, only those accessory uses listed herein shall be permitted within the jurisdiction of this chapter. With the exception of a commercial apartment, or a farm residence, in no instance shall an accessory use, cellar, basement, tent or recreational trailer be used as a residence. 
(a)  Commercial apartment. 
(1)  Description. Commercial apartments are dwelling units which are located above the ground floor of a building used for a commercial land use as designated in section 114-124, most typically an office or retail establishment. The primary advantage of commercial apartments is that they are able to share required parking spaces with nonresidential uses. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The gross floor area devoted to commercial apartments shall be counted toward the floor area of a nonresidential development. 
(b)  Minor accessory structures. 
(1)  Description. A garage, carport or utility shed is a structure which primarily accommodates the sheltered parking of vehicles and/or maintenance equipment of the subject property. For the purposes of this section, children's play structures, including play houses or elevated play structures and climbing gyms, shall be considered accessory structures and shall comply with the requirements of this section whether such play structures are placed on a foundation or not. Swing sets, slides, and sand boxes are not considered children's play structures for purposes of this section and are not regulated by this article. This section may be used, in the discretion of the zoning administrator, to handle other similar accessory structures, not otherwise specifically covered by this article IV. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  In zoning districts where this accessory use is permitted by right, no more than one attached or detached garage, and no more than two accessory structures, shall be permitted by right. More accessory structures may be allowed by conditional use. 
b.  In zoning districts where this accessory use is permitted by right, all accessory structures shall not exceed a total of 1,000 square feet. Accessory structures exceeding a total of 1,000 square feet may be allowed by conditional use. Under no circumstances shall this accessory use exceed 30 percent coverage of the rear yard area, or exceed the coverage of the principal structure. 
c.  Walks, drives, paved terraces and purely decorative garden accessories such as pools, fountains, statuary, sun dials, flag poles, etc., shall be permitted in setback areas but not closer than three feet to an abutting property line other than a street line. 
d.  Play structures shall not be used for storage or be constructed out of materials that would constitute a nuisance. 
e.  These detached structures may be located on the same lot as the principal land use, or on a separate adjacent lot used in conjunction with the principal land use. 
f.  See section 114-118 for requirements applicable to legal, nonconforming garages. 
(c)  Company provided on-site recreation. 
(1)  Description. A company provided on-site recreational facility is any active or passive recreational facility located on the same site as a principal land use, and which is reserved solely for the use of company employees and their guests. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  All structures and actively used outdoor areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
b.  Facilities using night lighting shall require a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Indoor sales incidental to storage or light industrial land use. 
(1)  Description. These land uses include any retail sales activity conducted exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as warehousing, wholesaling or any light industrial land use, on the same site. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The total area devoted to sales activity shall not exceed 25 percent of the total area of the buildings on the property. 
b.  Shall provide restroom facilities directly accessible from retail sales area. 
c.  Retail sales area shall by physically separated by a wall from other activity areas. 
(e)  Light industrial activities incidental to indoor sales or service land use. 
(1)  Description. These land uses include any light industrial activity conducted exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as indoor sales or service, on the same site. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  The total area devoted to light industrial activity shall not exceed 15 percent of the total area of the buildings on the property, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  Production area shall be physically separated by a wall from other activity areas and shall be soundproofed to the level required by section 114-61 for all adjacent properties. 
(f)  Home occupation. 
(1)  Description. Home occupations are small home-based family or professional businesses performed within any single-family detached residence which comply with the following requirements. Examples include personal and professional services, and handicrafts, which comply with all of the following requirements. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  It is the intent of this section to provide a means to accommodate a small home-based family or professional business without the necessity of a rezoning from a residential to a commercial district. Approval of a physical expansion of a home to accommodate a growing occupation is beyond the limitations of this section and is not to be anticipated. Hence, once a home occupation outgrows the residence, relocation of the business to an area that is appropriately zoned may be necessary. 
b.  The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit or an attached garage. 
c.  There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character thereof as a dwelling and/or exterior evidence of the home occupation other than those signs permitted in the district. 
d.  No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment related to the operation of the home occupation shall be visible outside any structures located on the premises. 
e.  No home occupation use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire hazard, small electrical interference or any other nuisance not normally associated with the average residential use in the district. 
f.  Only one sign may be used to indicate the type of occupation or business. Such sign shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed three feet square. 
g.  The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for more than occasional delivery of materials to or from the premises. 
h.  A permitted home occupation is restricted to a service-oriented business prohibiting the manufacturing of items or products or the sale of items or products on the premises. Examples of service-oriented businesses are, but are not limited to, computer programming, accounting, insurance agency and computer-based consulting and clerical services. 
i.  A permitted home occupation shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the floor area of the dwelling. 
j.  Persons employed by a permitted home occupation shall be limited to the resident family members and no more than one non-resident employee. 
k.  Under no circumstances shall a vehicle repair or body work business qualify as a home occupation. 
l.  The plan commission may approve home occupations in residential districts which do not meet standards included in subsections (10)b.1 through (10)b.11 of this section, as conditional uses subject to the following: 
(i)  The types and number of equipment or machinery used on the conditional use site may be restricted by the plan commission. 
(ii)  Sale or transfer of the property or expansion of the home occupation shall cause the conditional use permit to be null and void. 
(g)  Family day care home (four to eight children). 
(1)  Description. Family day care homes are occupied residences in which a qualified person or persons provide child care for four to eight children. The care of less than four children is not subject to the regulations of this chapter. 
(2)  Regulations. See state statutes and regulations. 
(h)  Intermediate day care home (nine to 15 children). 
(1)  Description. Intermediate day care homes are occupied residences in which a qualified person or persons provide child care for nine to 15 children. 
(2)  Regulations. See state statutes and regulations. 
(i)  On-site parking lot. 
(1)  Description. On-site parking lots are any areas located on the same site as the principal land use which are used for the temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed, and operative. Refer also to sections 114-159 and 114-161. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted to a collector or arterial street. 
b.  Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to discourage cut-through traffic. 
(j)  Private residential recreational facility. 
(1)  Description. This land use includes all active outdoor recreational facilities located on a private residential lot which are not otherwise listed. Common examples of these accessory uses include swing sets, tree houses, basketball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools, and recreation-type equipment. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Swimming pools shall be regulated by the performance standards provided in section 114-75. 
b.  Tree houses and similar platforms shall not exceed a platform height of eight feet and shall be setback twice their elevation from any property line. 
c.  Lighting shall be controlled so that light levels at said property line are limited to 0.5 footcandles or less. 
d.  All private residential recreation facilities and their attendant structures shall comply with the bulk requirements for accessory structures. 
(k)  Private residential kennel. 
(1)  Description. A maximum of any combination of three dogs and/or cats over six months of age are permitted by right for any one residential unit. Any residence housing a number of dogs and/or cats exceeding this number shall be considered a private residential kennel, and such a kennel shall require licensing by the city. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  For any number over three animals, a maximum of one additional animal per five acres shall be permitted. 
b.  Outdoor containments or enclosures for animals shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any residentially zoned property and shall be screened from adjacent properties. 
(l)  Private residential stable. 
(1)  Description. A private residential stable is a structure facilitating the keeping of horses or similar animals on the same site as a residential dwelling. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  A minimum lot area of 175,000 square feet (four acres) is required for a private residential stable. 
b.  A maximum of one horse per acre. 
c.  Outdoor containments for animals shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
d.  The requirements of section 114-124(i) shall also apply to private residential stables. 
(m)  Individual septic disposal system. 
(1)  Description. This land use includes any state-enabled, county-approved septic disposal system. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Minimum lot size of one-half acre. 
b.  System shall not be located closer than 30 feet to any natural resource protection overlay district. 
(n)  Exterior communication devices. 
(1)  Description. This land use includes any antennas used for communication reception (e.g., satellite dishes, ham radio towers, TV antennas). 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Except for television antennas and satellite dishes 18 inches or smaller, exterior communication devices shall not be visible from a public street. 
b.  Devices must be sited an equal or greater number of feet from any property lines as their maximum height and may not be located in a required street yard. 
c.  The applicant must demonstrate that all reasonable mechanisms have been used to mitigate safety hazards and the visual inputs of the device. 
(o)  Caretaker's residence. 
(1)  Description. This land use includes any residential unit which provides permanent housing for a caretaker of the subject property in either an attached or detached configuration. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Residence shall provide housing only for on-site caretaker and family. 
(p)  Piers and wharfs. 
(1)  Description. Public and private piers, docks, boat ramps, and wharfs. This does not include boat houses or storage facilities for piers, boats, etc. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  A site plan shall be required per section 114-291 for construction, erection, placement or extension of a pier or wharf, with specific information provided regarding its location in relation to the shoreline and abutting riparian property lines and regarding dimensions and building materials. 
b.  Nothing herein shall be construed to waive the requirements of the DNR or any state laws or regulations applicable to piers and wharfs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-129. - Temporary land uses. 
    These land uses are allowed pursuant to the procedures of section 114-289. 
(a)  General temporary outdoor sales. 
(1)  Description. Includes the display of any items outside the confines of a building which is not otherwise permitted as a permitted or conditional use, or a special event otherwise regulated by this Code. Examples of this land use include, but are not limited to, seasonal garden shops, tent sales, bratwurst stands, and garage sales, however, up to two garage sales per lot per calendar year are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Display shall be limited to a maximum of 12 days in any calendar year. 
b.  Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances. 
c.  Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in section 114-259(g). 
d.  Adequate parking shall be provided. 
e.  If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours. 
f.  Shall comply with section 114-289, standards and procedures applicable to all temporary uses. 
(b)  Outdoor assembly. 
(1)  Description. Includes any organized outdoor assembly of more than 100 persons. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Activities shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances. 
b.  Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in section 114-259(g). 
c.  Adequate parking, drinking water, and toilet facilities shall be provided, and shall be described in the application. 
d.  If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, activities shall be limited to the extent practicable to daylight hours. 
e.  Adequate provisions for crowd control shall be made, and shall be described within the application. 
f.  Activities shall comply with section 114-289, standards and procedures applicable to all temporary uses. 
(c)  Relocatable building. 
(1)  Description. Includes any manufactured building which serves as a temporary building for less than six months. Facilities serving for more than six months shall be considered conditional uses and subject to the general standards and procedures presented in section 114-288. 
(2)  Regulations. The building shall: 
a.  Conform to all setback regulations. 
b.  Conform to all state and local building code regulations. 
c.  Comply with section 114-289, standards and procedures applicable to all temporary uses. 
(d)  On-site real estate sales office. 
(1)  Description. Includes any building which serves as an on-site sales office for a development project. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Structure shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
b.  Facility shall be removed or converted to a permitted land use within ten days of the completion of sales activity. 
c.  Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in section 114-259(g). 
d.  Projects requiring land use to be in place for more than 365 days shall require a conditional use permit 
(e)  Seasonal outdoor sales of farm products. 
(1)  Description. Includes any outdoor display of farm products not otherwise regulated by this Code. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances. 
b.  Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in section 114-259(g). 
c.  Adequate parking shall be provided. 
d.  If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours. 
e.  Display shall comply with section 114-289, standards and procedures applicable to all temporary uses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-130. - Group developments. 
(a)  Definition. A group development is any development containing: 
(1)  Two or more structures containing principal land uses on the same lot; 
(2)  Any single structure on a single lot which contains five or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential uses; and/or 
(3)  Any single structure devoted to institutional, office or commercial land uses containing more than 5,000 gross square feet of floor area. 
(b)  [Examples.] Common examples of group developments include six-unit apartment buildings, apartment complexes, condominium complexes, strip centers, shopping centers, and office centers. One-tenant office or commercial buildings containing less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, four-unit apartment buildings, and other land uses in which each nonresidential building contains only one tenant, or where the lot contains only one structure, or where each residential building contains four or fewer dwelling units, are not group developments even though such developments may contain parcels under common ownership. 
(c)  Regulation of group developments. Group developments are permitted as conditional uses in all nonresidential zoning districts and in the TR-6, MR-8 and MR-10 residential districts. Any land use which is allowed either as a permitted use or as a conditional use within the zoning district applicable to the group development is allowed as a conditional use within a group development. Land uses which are not allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses shall not be allowed in a group development. The land use regulations of this section, as well as article IV of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this chapter, shall apply to group developments. The conditional use review and approval procedures of section 114-288 shall apply to the review of proposals for group developments. 
(d)  Specific development standards for group developments. 
(1)  Trash. The development shall contain a sufficient number of waste bins to accommodate all trash and waste generated by the land uses in a convenient manner. 
(2)  Access. No group development shall take access to a local residential street. 
(3)  Setbacks. All development located within a group development shall be located so as to comply with the intent of this chapter regarding setbacks of structures and buildings from lot lines. As such, individual principal and accessory structures and buildings located within group developments shall be so situated as to facilitate the subdivision of group developments into separate lots in the future (if such subdivision is desired). 
(4)  Five thousand plus-square-foot developments: The following standards shall apply to all new institutional, commercial, and office buildings in excess of 5,000 gross square feet and to all multi-building group developments in which the combined total of all structures on a site, regardless of diverse ownership, use or tenancy, combine to exceed 5,000 square feet. These conditions shall also be applied to the entire building and site in instances where building additions bring the total building size to over 5,000 gross square feet. Such conditions shall apply to both the building additions and to older portions of the building and the site which were constructed prior to the adoption of this chapter. This 5,000-square-foot limit shall apply to individual freestanding buildings and to group developments in which the combined total of all structures on a site, regardless of diverse use or tenancy, combine to more than 5,000 gross square feet. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Building exterior materials shall be of high quality on all sides of the structure including glass, brick, decorative concrete block, or stucco. Decorative architectural metal with concealed fasteners may be approved with special permission from the city. 
(7)  Building exterior design shall be unified in design and materials throughout the structure, and shall be complementary to other structures in the vicinity. However, the development shall employ varying building setbacks, height, roof, treatments, door and window openings, and other structural and decorative elements to reduce the apparent size and scale of the structure. A minimum of 20 percent of the combined facades of the structure shall employ actual facade protrusions or recesses. A minimum of 20 percent of the combined linear roof eave or parapet lines of the structure shall employ differences in height of eight feet or more. Roofs with particular slopes may be required by the city to complement existing buildings or otherwise establish a particular aesthetic objective. 
(8)  Mechanical equipment, refuse containers and any permitted outdoor storage shall be fully concealed from on-site and off-site ground level views, with materials identical to those used on the building exterior. 
(9)  Standard corporate trademark building designs, materials, architectural elements, and colors all shall be acceptable, as determined by the city, only as subtlety integrated into the more generic design of the building as a whole. Color schemes of all architectural elements shall be muted, neutral, non-reflective and non-use nor tenant specific. 
(10)  Public entryways shall be prominently indicated from the building's exterior design, and shall be emphasized by on-site traffic flow patterns. All sides of the building that directly face or abut a public street shall have public entrances. 
(11)  Loading areas shall be completely screened from surrounding roads, residential, office, and commercial properties. Said screening may be through internal loading areas, screen wall which will match the building exterior in materials and design, fully opaque landscaping at time of planting, or combinations of the above. Gates and fencing may be used for security purposes, but not for screening, and shall be of high aesthetic quality. 
(12)  Vehicle access from public streets shall be designed to accommodate peak annual 20th hour traffic volumes without disrupting traffic on public streets from inadequate throat length access drive width or design or inadequate driveway location. The impact of traffic generated by the proposed development shall be demonstrated by a traffic impact analysis performed by the applicant's traffic engineer to not adversely impact off-site public roads, intersections, interchanges during the peak annual 20th hour. Where the project shall adversely impact off-site traffic, the city may deny the application, may require a size reduction in the proposed development, or may require off-site improvements. 
(13)  A minimum of one 200-square-foot cart return area shall be provided for every parking area pod. There shall be no exterior cart return nor cart storage areas located within 25 feet of the building in areas located between the building and a public street. 
(14)  The applicant shall demonstrate full compliance with city standards for stormwater management, sanitary sewerage, public water, erosion control and public safety. 
(15)  On site landscaping shall be provided per the landscaping requirements of the zoning ordinance except that building foundation landscaping and paved area landscaping shall be provided at one and one-half times the required landscape points for development in the planned business zoning district. 
(16)  A conceptual plan for exterior signage shall be provided at time of GDP that provides for coordinated and complimentary exterior sign location, configurations, and colors throughout the planned development. All freestanding signage within the development shall compliment the on-building signage. Freestanding sign materials and design shall compliment building exterior, and may not exceed the maximum height requirement of the zoning ordinance. 
(17)  The entire development shall provide for full and safe pedestrian and bicycle access within the development, and shall provide appropriate connections to the existing and planned pedestrian and bicycle facilities in the community and in surrounding neighborhoods, including sidewalk connections to all building entrances from all public streets. The development shall provide secure bicycle parking and pedestrian furniture in appropriate quantities and location. 
(18)  Where group developments are proposed to provide a new location for a business already located within the community, a required condition of approval for the new development shall be a prohibition on conditions of sale, lease, or use of the previously occupied building or site which impose limits beyond the range of applicable local, state or federal regulations. If such limits are required, the applicant may seek city approval to demolish the previously occupied structure and prepare the site for some future development. 
(19)  Where group developments are proposed to provide a new location for a business already located within the community, the applicant shall provide adequate evidence that the proposed development shall not have the likely result of creating long-term vacancies for the applicant's current location, or long-term vacancies in specialized buildings related to the potential closure of competing local businesses. 
(20)  The applicant shall provide adequate evidence that the proposed development and uses cannot be adequately sited within or on existing developed properties or buildings within the community. 
(21)  The applicant shall provide adequate evidence that the proposed development and uses shall not hinder or undermine the city's community character objectives as stated and elaborated in the city's comprehensive master plan. 
(22)  The applicant shall provide adequate evidence that the proposed development shall not have the likely result of hindering the preservation or attainment of the community's desired small city community character as exemplified by certain off-site impacts, including increase in traffic congestion, new lane additions, new traffic signals, stormwater management problems, sudden declines in road conditions or substantial impacts on city facilities or services. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-131. - Communication towers. 
(a)  This section provides the procedures and standards for issuance of conditional use permits for the placement, construction or modification of communication towers as defined in section 114-16. 
(b)  It is intended that conditional use permits shall be issued under this section to accommodate the expansion of wireless communication technology while minimizing the number of tower sites through the requirement that permitted towers be placed or constructed so that they may be utilized for the collocation of antenna arrays to the extent technologically and economically feasible. 
(c)  No conditional use permit for the placement or construction of a tower shall be issued unless the applicant presents to the city staff credible evidence establishing to a reasonable degree of certainty the following: 
(1)  No existing communication tower is located within the area in which the applicant's equipment must be located; or 
(2)  No existing communication tower within the area in which the applicant's equipment must be located is of sufficient height to meet applicant's requirements and the deficiency in height cannot be remedied at a reasonable cost; or 
(3)  No existing communication tower within the area in which the applicant's equipment must be located has sufficient structural strength to support applicant's equipment and the deficiency in structural strength cannot be remedied at a reasonable cost; or 
(4)  The applicant's equipment would cause electromagnetic interference with equipment on the existing communication tower(s) within the area in which the applicant's equipment must be located, or the equipment on the existing communication tower(s) would cause interference with the applicant's equipment and the interference, from whatever source, cannot be eliminated at a reasonable cost; or 
(5)  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to collocate on an existing communication tower are unreasonable relative to industry norms; or 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other factors that render existing communication towers unsuitable or unavailable and establishes that the public interest is best served by the placement or construction of a new communication tower. 
(7)  The cost of eliminating impediments to collocation shall be deemed reasonable if it does not exceed by 25 percent the cost of constructing a new tower on which to mount applicant's equipment. 
(8)  In the event the city staff determines that it is necessary to consult with a third party in considering the factors listed in subsection (2) above, all reasonable costs and expenses associated with such consultation shall be borne by the applicant. Failure to pay such costs and expenses or provide information requested by the committee shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a conditional use permit. The applicant may provide to the committee the names of consultants which the applicant believes are qualified to assist in resolving the issues before the committee. 
(9)  In applying the standards and criteria set forth in section 114-16 to applications for conditional use permits for the placement or construction of a communication tower the city staff shall, unless it is shown to be unreasonable, condition the grant of the permit upon the applicant placing or constructing the communication tower so as to accommodate, at a minimum height of 150 feet, the collocation of two additional antenna arrays similar in size and function to that placed on the tower by the applicant. Collocation sites need not be available on the tower as initially placed or constructed, provided that the tower will support at the specified minimum height the later addition of the required number of collocation sites. Notwithstanding the height and number of collocation sites on the tower as initially placed or constructed, the communication tower design approved and permitted under this chapter shall be for a tower of 150 feet in height and shall include the required collocation sites. The holder of a permit under this section shall make the collocation sites required hereunder available for the placement of technologically compatible antenna arrays and equipment upon contractual provisions which are standard in the industry and at prevailing market rates allowing the permit holder to recoup the cost of providing the collocation sites and a fair return on investment. 
(10)  Unless otherwise provided herein, a conditional use permit is required for any modification of a communication tower which significantly alters the appearance or structural integrity of the tower or which involves the installation of antenna or equipment differing in size and function from that previously installed on the tower. The committee shall apply the standards under section 114-16 when considering an application for a conditional use permit to allow the modification of an existing communication tower. In addition, the city staff shall consider the reasonableness, based on economic and technological feasibility, of conditioning the grant of the conditional use permit upon modifying the tower in a manner which would accommodate the collocation of one or more additional antenna arrays. 
(11)  Upon written inquiry by the committee the recipient of a conditional use permit under this section shall have the burden of presenting credible evidence establishing to a reasonable certainty the continued compliance with all conditions placed upon the conditional use permit. Failure to establish compliance with all conditions placed upon the conditional use permit shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. In the event the city staff determines that it is necessary to consult with a third party to ascertain compliance with conditions on a conditional use permit, all reasonable costs and expenses associated with such consultation shall be borne by the holder of the subject conditional use permit. Failure to pay such costs and expenses or provide information requested by the committee shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit. The holder of the subject conditional use permit may provide to the committee the names of consultants which the permit holder believes are qualified to assist in resolving the issues before the committee. In any event, where a dispute arises under this chapter involving an applicant for a conditional use permit and the holder of a conditional use permit hereunder, the committee may allocate consulting costs and expenses between the applicant and permit holder. 
(12)  A conditional use permit shall not be required for collocation on an existing tower permitted under this section, provided the collocated antenna array or equipment is similar in size and function to that installed by the holder of the conditional use permit for the tower, does not significantly alter the appearance or structural integrity of the tower approved and permitted under this section, and is fully in compliance with all conditions contained in the original conditional use permit. The holder of the conditional use permit for any tower on which collocation occurs shall within 30 days of such collocation provide the plan commission with written notification of the identity of the collocator and the nature of the equipment installed. Within 30 days of the date on which any collocated use ceases, the permit holder shall provide the city staff with written notice of the cessation of such use. 
(13)  The holder of a conditional use permit for a tower and any user collocating under this chapter shall each be permitted to construct a building of no more than 14 feet in height and 314 square feet in floor area for use directly incidental and necessary to the use of the tower. Two or more users of the tower may build a single building with a floor area of no more than 314 square feet per user sharing the building. Buildings constructed or used by tower collocators shall be subject to conditions established for the conditional use permit for the tower. 
(14)  Conditional use permits issued hereunder shall identify the primary type or types of transmission equipment which is to be placed on the subject communication tower. Any communication tower on which the transmission equipment so identified is no longer placed or used for a continuous period of 12 months shall, upon notification by the city staff, be removed by the holder of the conditional use permit issued under this section. If the tower is not removed within 60 days of such notification, the county may remove the tower at the expense of the holder of the conditional use permit. 
(15)  The city staff may require that an applicant for a conditional use permit under this section provide information regarding the applicant's then current plans for future placement or construction of communication towers in the city in addition to the tower which is the subject of the application. 
(d)  Applicant shall provide a CUP application along with additional items that are peculiar to communication towers. The required application items are: 
(1)  Legal description. 
(2)  Tax parcel numbers. 
(3)  Completed zoning application form. 
(4)  Completed communication tower information form. 
(5)  Written statement. 
a.  Project description. 
b.  Collocation. 
c.  Existing and proposed network. 
(6)  Site plan, design elevations, site photos, and photo simulations. 
(7)  CUP applications fee. 
(8)  Radio frequency engineering analysis. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 114-132-114-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 114-159. - Access standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate and/or prevent congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of access from private property onto to public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Permit required. Each access drive onto a public street or right-of-way shall have a permit issued by the DPW per Wis. Stats. § 86.07(2). 
(c)  Number of access points. 
(1)  Each lot in a residential district shall have not more than one access drive onto any adjacent street. Each lot in a nonresidential district shall have not more than two access drives onto any adjacent street. More access drives may be approved by conditional use. Each permitted drive shall require approval and permitting by the DPW. 
(2)  In no instance shall any lot be permitted more than one access drive onto any one street if its frontage on said street is less than 100 linear feet. 
(3)  On arterial streets and in certain areas experiencing, or expected to experience, congestion and/or safety problems, access drives may be required to be located on adjacent property or another street frontage. 
(d)  Types of streets. Residential uses shall not have access drives onto nonresidential collector or arterial streets unless such streets provide the only available frontage for access. Nonresidential uses shall not have access drives onto residential streets unless such streets provides the only available frontage for access. 
(e)  Access near street intersections. On all arterial or nonresidential collector streets, no access drive shall be located closer than 150 feet from the intersection of any two street rights-of-way. In all other cases, no access drive shall be located closer than 75 feet from the intersection of any two street rights-of-way. Access drives closer to intersections may be approved by conditional use. In all cases, access drives shall be located as far from an intersection as the lot size permits. 
(f)  Distance between access drives. The minimum distance between access drives serving separate lots is established by the setback regulations in each zoning district. The minimum distance between two or more access drives serving the same property shall be 25 feet, as measured at the property line. A distance in excess of 25 feet may be required if, in the opinion of the zoning administrator and the DPW, existing or projected traffic factors warrant a greater distance. Access drives closer to intersections may be approved by conditional use. 
(g)  Angle of intersection with public right-of-way. All access drives shall intersect with any public right-of-way at an angle of not less than 75 degrees, and shall intersect at an angle of 90 degrees wherever possible. 
(h)  Distance from property line. Setbacks for driveways are established by the regulations for each zoning district. 
(i)  Width of driveways. All access drives shall have a minimum width of ten feet for one- and two-family dwellings, and 18 feet for all other land uses, as measured at the lot line/right-of-way line. Access drives shall have a maximum width of 25 feet for all residential uses, and 36 feet for all nonresidential uses, as measured at the lot line/right-of-way line. Through the conditional use process, access drives for nonresidential units may be authorized to have a maximum width up to, but not exceeding, 50 feet. Access drives may be flared between the right-of-way line and the roadway up to a maximum of two additional feet on each side. 
(j)  Traffic control. The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner which avoids congestion on public streets and other safety hazards. All off-street parking, loading and traffic circulation areas serving six or more parking spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all traffic moving into and out of such areas shall be forward moving only, with no backing into streets or pedestrian ways. Traffic control devices, pursuant to the manual on uniform traffic control devices and traffic engineering standards, shall be required subject to approval of the DPW. 
(k)  Depiction on required site plan. Any and all proposed access drives on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. 
(l)  Paving of access. All access approach areas located within a street right-of-way shall be paved to the satisfaction of the DPW with a hard, all-weather surface, and shall be maintained so as to prevent the transport of gravel, dirt, or other eroded material from the subject property into the right-of-way. This requirement must be fulfilled before building occupancy, unless granted a time-specific extension in writing by the DPW. 
(m)  Drainage. Driveways shall be designed and constructed to minimize the flow of stormwater onto the street and to maximize the flow of stormwater into the gutters, catchbasins and other stormwater drainage facilities. All driveway entrances shall be constructed as not to interfere with the drainage of streets, ditches and other stormwater drainage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-160. - Visibility standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent accidents and to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of vehicular visibility. 
(b)  Vision clearance triangle. In order to provide a clear view of intersecting streets to motorists, there shall be a triangular area of clear vision formed by the two intersecting street rights-of-way and a chord connecting said rights-of-way, as determined by the DPW with the exception of the central business district. Generally, the following standards shall apply: 
Table 114-160(b)-Vision Clearance Triangle Standards 
Right-of-Way Width Distance from Right-of-Way
Intersection Less than 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 51-60 feet 40 feet 61-66 feet 34 feet 67-82.5 feet 15 feet Greater than 82.5 feet 15 feet  
(c)  Restrictions in triangle. Within said vision clearance triangular area: 
(1)  No signs, parking spaces, or structures shall be permitted. 
(2)  No earthwork in excess of 30 inches in height shall be permitted. 
(3)  No vegetation, fencing, nor other such obstructions, which exceed opacity of 0.2 and which exceed 30 inches in height above either of the centerline elevations of said two streets, shall be permitted. 
(d)  Depiction on required site plan. Except in the central business district where no requirement is imposed, any and all visibility triangles located on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-161. - Off-street parking and traffic circulation standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of off-street parking and circulation in accordance with the utilization of various sites. 
(b)  Depiction on required site plan. Any and all parking and traffic circulation areas proposed to be located on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. Except as permitted by a conditional use permit, each and every on-site parking space designed to serve as required parking shall not be located farther than 300 feet from the access point to the primary area it is designated to serve, as measured along the shortest walking distance between the access point and the parking space. A garage stall meeting the access requirements of subsection (f)(4) of this section shall be considered a parking space. 
(c)  Use of off-street parking areas. The use of all required off-street parking areas shall be limited to the parking of operable vehicles not for lease, rent, or sale. Within residential districts, required off-street parking spaces shall only be used by operable cars and trucks. 
(d)  Traffic circulation and traffic control. Site circulation shall be designed to provide for the safe and efficient movement of all traffic entering, exiting, and on the site. Circulation shall be provided to meet the individual needs of the site with specific mixing of access and through movements, and where required, shall be depicted on the required site plan. Circulation patterns shall conform with the general rules of the road and all traffic control measures shall meet the requirements of the manual of uniform traffic control devices. 
(e)  Installation and maintenance. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall be completed, including surfacing, prior to building occupancy. Extensions within which to complete surfacing may be granted by the DPW or the plan commission, when weather or other special circumstances warrant an extension. All off-street parking, driveways, and vehicular access up to 50 feet from road edge shall be maintained in a dust-free condition at all times. In no instance or manner shall any off-street parking or traffic circulation area be used as a storage area, except as provided for by section 114-166. 
(f)  Design standards. 
(1)  Surfacing and marking. All off-street parking, driveways, and vehicular access up to 50 feet from road edge shall be paved with a hard, all-weather surface, i.e., concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, to the satisfaction of the DPW. All other circulation areas may be exempt from being paved with a hard, all-weather surface if the area meets the following criteria: 
a.  Aesthetic. The traffic parking area is screened from street view. 
b.  Public impact. Traffic use will be minimal, and not result in being a public nuisance with significant dust and rutting. Said surfaces intended for six or more parking stalls shall be marked in a manner which clearly indicates required parking spaces. 
(2)  Curbing. All off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking within six and one-half feet of any lot line shall provide a tire bumper or curb of adequate height and location to ensure that no part of any vehicle will project beyond the required setbacks of this chapter. 
(3)  Lighting. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas serving six or more cars shall be lit so as to ensure the safe and efficient use of said areas during the hours of use. An illumination level of between 0.4 and 1.0 footcandles is recommended for said areas, and said illumination level shall not exceed the standards of section 114-164. 
(4)  Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway that is wide enough and designed to provide a safe and efficient means of vehicular access to the parking space without directly backing or maneuvering a vehicle into a public right-of-way exceeding 82.5 feet in width. All off-street parking and traffic circulation facilities shall be designed with an appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley, in a manner which least interferes with traffic movements. 
(5)  Stacking. Off-street parking spaces for residential uses may be stacked or in front of one another for the same building unit. Parking spaces located behind an enclosed garage and located directly off a through aisle shall be a minimum of 30 feet deep. 
(6)  Minimum permitted throat length. Table 114-161(f)(6) shall be used to determine the minimum permitted throat length of access drives serving parking lots, as measured from the right-of-way line along the centerline of the access drive: 
Table 114-161(f)(6)-Minimum Permitted Throat Length 
Land Use Type Scale of Development Type of Access Street Collector Arterial Residential Any residential 0-100 dwelling units 25 feet - 101-200 dwelling units 50 feet 75 feet 201+ dwelling units 75 feet 125 feet Commercial Office and other commercial uses 0-50,000 gross square feet 25 feet 50 feet 50,000-100,000 gross square feet 25 feet 75 feet 100,000-200,000 gross square feet 50 feet 100 feet 200,000+ gross square feet 100 feet 150 feet In-vehicle sales 0-2,000 gross square feet 25 feet 75 feet 2,000+ gross square feet 50 feet 100 feet Indoor entertainment 0-15,000 gross square feet 25 feet 50 feet 15,000+ gross square feet 25 feet 75 feet Commercial lodging 0-150 rooms 25 feet 50 feet 150+ rooms 25 feet 75 feet Industrial All industrial uses 0-100,000 gross square feet 25 feet 50 feet 100,000-500,000 gross square feet 50 feet 100 feet 500,000+ gross square feet 50 feet 200 feet All other uses 6+ parking 
spaces - 25 feet 50 feet  
(7)  Handicapped parking spaces. Parking for the handicapped shall be provided at a size, number, location, and with signage as specified by state and federal regulations. 
(8)  Parking space design standards. Other than parking required to serve persons with disabilities, every and all provided off-street parking space shall comply with the minimum requirements of Table 114-56(f)(6). The minimum required length of parking spaces shall be 17.0 feet, plus an additional one and one-half foot vehicle overhang area at the end of the stall. All parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of at least seven feet. 
(9)  Snow storage. Required off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall not be used for snow storage. 
(10)  Landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall comply with the requirements of the paved area landscaping requirements in section 114-216(c). 
(11)  Parking lot design standards. Horizontal widths for parking rows, aisles, and modules shall be provided at widths no less than listed in Table 114-161(f)(11) shown below. 
Table 114-161(f)(11)-Parking Layout Dimensions 
Minimum
Permitted
Dimensions Parking Angle in Degrees 0 (parallel) 45 60 75 90 Stall width at parking angle (SW) 9.0' 9.0' 9.0' 9.0' 9.0' Stall width parallel to aisle (WP) 17.90' 12.7' 10.4' 9.3' 9.0' Stall depth to wall (D) 9.0' 1 17.5' 1 19.0' 1 19.5' 1 18.5' 1 Stall length (including 1.5' curb overhang) (SL) 18.5' 18.5' 18.5' 18.5' 18.5' Aisle width (AW) 12.0' 2 12.0' 2 16.0' 2 17.20' 2 26.0' 2 Parking module width (PMW) Wall to wall (single-loaded) (W1) 21.0' 29.5' 35.0' 42.5' 44.5' Wall to wall (double-loaded) (W2) 30.0' 47.0' 54.0' 62.0' 63.0'  
1 Parking spaces located behind an enclosed garage and located directly off a through aisle shall be at least 30 feet deep. 
2 This dimension represents AW for one-way traffic. For two-way traffic, add 8.0 feet to a maximum (AW) of 26.0 feet. 
Typical Parking Layout Dimensions 

(12)  Locational prohibitions for off-street parking areas. 
a.  Off-street parking shall not be located between the principal structure on a residential lot and a street right-of-way, except within residential driveways and parking lots designated on the approved site plan. 
b.  No private parking shall occur on street terraces, driveways, or any other areas located within a public right-of-way not explicitly designated by the director of public works. 
(g)  Calculation of minimum required parking spaces. 
(1)  General guidelines for calculating required parking spaces. The requirements of subsection (g)(3) of this section, shall be used to determine the minimum required number of off-site parking spaces which must be provided on the subject property. 
(2)  Joint and off-site parking facilities. 
a.  Parking facilities which have been approved by the director of public works to provide required parking for one or more uses, shall provide a total number of parking spaces which shall not be less than the sum total of the separate parking needs for each use during any peak hour parking period when said joint parking facility is utilized at the same time by said uses. 
b.  Each parking space designed to serve as joint parking shall not be located farther than 300 feet, except as permitted by a conditional use permit, from the access to all of the various areas it is designated to serve. 
c.  The applicant for approval of a joint parking facility shall demonstrate to the director of public works' satisfaction that there is no substantial conflict in the demand for parking during the principal operating hours of the two of more uses for which the joint parking facility is proposed to serve. 
d.  A legally binding instrument, approved by the city administrator, shall be executed by any and all parties to be served by said joint parking facility. This instrument shall be recorded with the register of deeds office, and filed with the city clerk. A fee shall be required to file this instrument. 
(3)  Minimum off-street parking requirements for land uses. 
Table 114-161(g)(3) 
Number of Parking Spaces Required Per Unit of Measurement Agricultural Land Use Number Unit Agricultural service, cultivation, husbandry, intensive agriculture, on-site agricultural retail 1.0 Per employee on the largest work shift. Plus four spaces for customer (on-site agricultural retail). Residential Land Uses Number Unit Adult family home 1.0 Per four residents, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. Commercial apartment 1.0 For the first bedroom, and .05 for each additional bedroom. Parking spaces provided by nonresidential land uses on the site may be counted for this requirement with the approval of the zoning administrator. Manufactured or mobile housing sale land uses 1.0 One off-street parking space per 300 square feet of indoor floor space, excluding the indoor floor space of the display models, plus one off-street parking space per four display models. Mobile home 2.0 Per each mobile home Storage or disposal land uses Number Unit Composting operation, personal storage facility, solid waste transfer station and material recovery facility, waste disposal facility 1.0 Per each employee on the largest work shift. Junkyard or salvage yard 1.0 For every 20,000 square feet of gross storage area, plus one for each employee on the largest work shift. Outdoor storage or wholesaling 1.0 For every 10,000 square feet of gross storage area, plus one for each employee on the largest work shift. Transportation Land Uses Number Unit Airport/heliport 1.0 Per each employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per every five passengers based on average daily ridership. Distribution center, trucking facility 1.0 Per each employee on the largest work shift, plus one per 50 square feet of gross floor area for a trucking facility. Commercial Land Use Number Unit Bed and breakfast 1.0 Per each bedroom. Boardinghouse, Commercial Indoor lodging 1.0 Per room for rent or bedroom, plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift. Commercial animal boarding 1.0 Per employee on the largest work shift. Plus one space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Group day care center 1.0 Per five students, plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift. Indoor sales or service 1.0 Per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Parking spaces in service bays, loading bays, drive-through lanes, at gas pump, in car washes, or in similar locations do not county toward this parking requirement. Indoor/outdoor commercial entertainment 1.0 Per three persons at the maximum capacity of the establishment. In-vehicle sales or service 1.0 Per 50 square feet of gross floor area. If performed as an accessory land use, for example, gas pumps at a convenience store, drive-up window at bank, minimum parking shall be established by the principal land use, subject to any modifications required by the conditional use process. Office, indoor/outdoor maintenance service, personal or professional service, indoor sales or service * 1.0 Per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Outdoor sales or services: all other uses 1.0 Per 300 square feet of indoor floor space, plus one off-street parking space per 600 square feet of outdoor sales or service area. Sexually oriented land uses 1.0 Per 300 square feet of gross floor area, or one space per person at the maximum capacity of the establishment, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. Vehicle repair and maintenance service 1.0 Per 300 square feet of gross floor area for on-site parking for all customer vehicles. Plus 1.0 per employee on the largest work shift. For cars being repaired: Adequate space to keep all cars and other motorized vehicles being repaired off the public streets and out of the areas designated for employee and customer parking. Vehicle sale or vehicle rental land uses 1.0 Per 300 square feet of indoor floor space, plus one off-street parking space per four displays models. Industrial Land Use Number Unit Extraction, heavy industrial, light industrial 1.0 Per each employee on the largest work shift. Institutional Land Use Number Unit Active/passive outdoor public recreational 1.0 Per four patrons at maximum capacity for any use requiring over five spaces. Community living arrangement 1.0 Per owner and employee on the largest work shift, plus one per three tenants. Funeral home 1.0 Per four seats Hospital 2.0 Per three patient beds, plus one space per staff doctor and per employee on the largest work shift. Indoor institutional: Church 1.0 Per five seats at the maximum capacity. Indoor institutional: College or trade school 1.0 Per staff member on the largest work shift, plus one space per two students of the largest class attendance period. Indoor institutional: Community or recreation center 1.0 Per 250 square feet of gross floor area or one space per four seats to the maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. Indoor institutional: Elementary school and junior high school 1.0 Per teacher and per staff member, plus one space per two classrooms. Indoor institutional: Senior high school 1.0 Per teacher and staff member, plus one space per five students. Indoor/outdoor institutional 1.0 Per three patrons at maximum capacity. Institutional residential 1.0 Per six residents or per six patient beds, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per five chapel seats if the public may attend, plus one space per regularly-scheduled visiting doctor or other health care provider. Library or museum 1.0 Per 250 square feet of gross floor area or one space per four seats to the maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. Outdoor institutional: Campground 1.5 Per campsite. Outdoor institutional: Cemetery 1.0 Per employee, plus one space per three patrons to the maximum capacity of all indoor assembly areas. Outdoor institutional: Golf course 36 Per nine holes, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift, plus 50 percent of spaces otherwise required for any accessory uses, (e.g., bars, restaurants). Public service and utilities 1.0 Per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per company vehicle normally stored or parked on the premises, plus one space per 500 square feet of gross square feet of office area.  
(4)  Provision of fee-in-lieu of parking spaces development. Within the central business (CB) district, the parking requirements of this chapter may be waived or modified by the plan commission, which may impose a fee-in-lieu of parking spaces. 
Sec. 114-162. - Off-street loading standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent congestion of public rights-of-way and private lots so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of loading facilities on various sites. Any use which has a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or more, and which requires deliveries or makes shipments, shall provide off-street loading facilities in accordance with the regulations of this section. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Location. All loading berths shall be located 25 feet or more from the intersection of two street right-of-way lines. Loading berths shall not be located within any required front yard or street yard setback area. All loading areas shall be located on the private lot and shall not be located within, or so as to interfere with, any public right-of-way. 
(d)  Size of loading area. The first required loading berth shall be designed in accordance with Table 114-162. All remaining required loading berths shall be a minimum of 25 feet in length. All required loading berths shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. The following standards shall be the minimum used to design loading areas: 
Table 114-162(d)-Loading Standards 
Design
Vehicle Length
in Feet Dock Angle (a) Clearance
in Feet (D) Berth Width
in Feet (W) Apron
Space in
Feet (A) Total
Offset in
Feet (F) WB-40 50 90 50 10 63 113 12 56 106 14 52 102 60 44 10 46 90 12 40 84 14 35 79 45 36 10 37 73 12 32 68 14 29 65 WB-50 55 90 55 10 77 132 12 72 127 14 67 122 60 48 10 55 103 12 51 99 14 46 94 45 39 10 45 84 12 40 79 14 37 76  
  

(e)  Access to loading area. Each loading berth shall be located so as to facilitate access to a public street or alley, and shall not interfere with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic or the function of parking areas. In no instance shall loading areas rely on backing movements into public rights-of-way. 
(f)  Surfacing and marking. All required loading areas shall be paved and maintained in a dust-free condition at all times. Said surface shall be marked in a manner which clearly indicates required loading areas. 
(g)  Use of required loading areas. The use of all required loading areas shall be limited to the loading and unloading of vehicles. Said area shall not be used to provide minimum required parking spaces. 
(h)  Lighting. All loading areas shall be lit so as to not exceed the standards of section 114-166. 
(i)  Depiction on required site plan. Loading areas proposed to be located on the subject property shall be depicted as to their location and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. 
(j)  Calculation of required loading spaces. 
(1)  Indoor institutional land uses. One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet to 29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, two loading berths shall be required. 
(2)  Commercial, except offices, storage/disposal, transportation, and industrial land uses. One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet to 29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be required for any portion of each 50,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the original 29,999 square feet. 
(3)  Office land uses. One loading berth shall be required for each building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 99,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 100,000 square feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be required for any portion of each 100,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the original 99,999 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-163. - Exterior storage standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control the use of residential, office and commercial property for exterior storage so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Exterior storage of RVs, ATVs, boats, snowmobiles, and trailers in residential zoning districts. No person shall park or store recreational vehicles, ATV's, boats, snowmobiles, or trailers on a lot in a residential district, except within a fully enclosed structure or except as provided herein. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    All-terrain vehicle (ATV). The definition of an ATV provided in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(2g) is adopted by reference. 
    Boat means motor boats (whether or not a motor is actually on the boat), house boats, row boats, canoes and kayaks. 
    Recreational vehicle (RV) means motor homes, motor coaches, pickup campers when not positioned on top of a pickup, camping trailers, travel trailers, tent campers, folding campers, carnival equipment and their trailers, and cases or boxes used to transport recreational vehicles or their equipment, and similar equipment and vehicles. 
    Trailer means fifth-wheel trailers, utility trailers, boat trailers, snowmobile trailers, race car trailers, and ATV trailers. 
(2)  Number. The following sets forth the maximum number of RVs, ATVs, boats snowmobiles and trailers that can be stored or placed outside on a single residential lot: 
a.  One RV; 
b.  Two boats, with or without motors or trailers; 
c.  One snowmobile not on a trailer, or two snowmobiles provided they are on the same trailer; 
d.  One ATV not on a trailer, or two ATVs provided they are on the same trailer; or 
e.  Any two of the items in subsection (b)(2)a. through d. of this section. 
(3)  Location. No RV, ATV, boat, snowmobile or trailer shall be parked or stored in a front yard or side yard, except on a hard-surfaced approved driveway. Items stored in a back yard shall be tightly covered with an earth-toned, neutral-colored tarp. Items stored in a driveway need not be covered. 
(4)  Setback. No RV, ATV, boat, snowmobile or trailer shall be parked or stored closer than three feet to a side or rear lot line. 
(5)  Maintenance. Each RV, ATV, boat, snowmobile and trailer parked or stored in the city shall be maintained in working condition, reasonably ready for the effective performance of the function for which it was intended. RVs and trailers shall be roadworthy. Items which need repair before they are operable may not be stored in any yard. 
(6)  Licenses. Items that require a license shall be properly licensed. 
(7)  Ownership. No RV, ATV, boat, snowmobile or trailer shall be parked or stored outside unless such item is wholly owned by the property owner who shall be in residence at the property in question. If the property is rented, such storage shall be permitted to the tenant provided that such item is owned by the tenant. 
(8)  Hidden and neat. Each RV, ATV, boat, snowmobile or trailer shall be parked or stored as inconspicuously as possible on the property. The area around the RV, ATV, boat, snowmobile or trailer must be kept weed free and free of accumulation of other storage material and debris. 
(c)  Exterior storage in office and business districts. In all office and business zoning districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building except for the following which shall not be located within any front yard or required street yard and shall be stored a minimum of five feet from any and all property lines: screened refuse containers; construction materials, landscape materials and related equipment connected within on-site construction. 
(d)  Exterior parking/storage of automobiles and trucks in residential zoning districts. No person shall park or store an automobile or truck in a residential zoning district: 
(1)  Except within a fully enclosed structure; or 
(2)  Except as provided below: 
a.  Number. Three automobiles and/or trucks may be parked or stored on a residential lot. 
b.  Location. Each automobile or truck shall be parked or stored on an approved, hard-surfaced driveway, so that each vehicle does not extend over the city right-of-way or public sidewalk. 
c.  Setback. No automobile or truck shall be located closer than three feet to a side or rear lot line. 
d.  Ownership. No automobile or truck shall be stored outside unless it is owned by the property owner who shall be a resident of the property in question, and unless it was last titled in the name of the property owner. If the property is rented, such storage shall be permitted to the tenant provided that the automobile or truck is owned by the tenant and was last titled in the name of the tenant. 
e.  Hidden and neat. The area around the automobile or truck shall be kept weed free and free of accumulation of other storage material and debris. 
f.  Covers. If the item is covered, the tarp or other covering material shall be an earth-toned neutral color. 
(e)  Outdoor storage of firewood. 
(1)  Front yard prohibited. No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned property, except that firewood may be temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of 30 days from the date of its delivery. 
(2)  Stacking. Firewood should be neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than two feet to any lot line and not higher than six feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. 
(3)  Debris removal. All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly and properly disposed of and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises. 
(4)  Diseased wood. Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances. 
(5)  Volume limitation. Not more than either three cords of wood may be stored at any one time, and not more than 20 percent of the side and rear yard may be used for storage of firewood at any one time. 
(6)  Covers. If the wood is covered, the tarp or other covering material shall be an earth-toned neutral color. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-164. - Exterior lighting standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the spill-over of light and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety and to prevent the creation of nuisances. 
(b)  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all exterior lighting in the city, except for lighting installed by the city within the rights-of-way of city streets and one- and two-unit residential. 
(c)  Depiction on required site plan. Any and all exterior lighting shall be depicted as to its location, orientation and configuration on the site plan required for the development of the subject property. 
(d)  Requirements. 
(1)  Orientation of fixture. In no instance shall an exterior lighting fixture be oriented so that the lighting element or a transparent shield is visible from a property located within a residential zoning district. The use of shielded luminaries and careful fixture placement is encouraged so as to facilitate compliance with this requirement. 
(2)  Intensity of illumination. In no instance shall the amount of illumination attributable to exterior lighting, as measured at the property line, exceed 0.50 footcandles above ambient lighting conditions on a cloudless night. 
(3)  Location. Light fixtures shall not be located within required bufferyards. 
(4)  Flashing, flickering and other distracting lighting. Flashing, flickering and/or other lighting which may distract motorists is prohibited. 
(5)  Minimum lighting standards. All areas designated on required site plans for vehicular parking, loading, or circulation and used for any such purpose after sunset shall provide artificial illumination in such areas at a minimum intensity of 0.4 footcandles. 
(6)  Nonconforming lighting. All lighting fixtures existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be considered as nonconforming uses. 
(7)  Special events lighting. Any temporary use using exterior lighting which is not in complete compliance with the requirements of this section shall secure a temporary use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-165. - Vibration standards. 
(a)  In general. No use or structure shall be operated or occupied as to vibrate in such an amount or to such a degree or intensity as to constitute a hazardous condition or as to unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment or property by any person of normal sensitivities or otherwise as to create a public nuisance. 
(b)  Specific standards. Uses creating vibration shall comply with the performance standards identified in Table 114-165(b)(1), Maximum Permitted Vibration, and shall be conducted in such a manner as to make such vibration completely imperceptible from any point from along a non-industrial zoning district boundary line. Vibration shall be measured at any point along a property line with a three-point component measuring system recognized as a standard for such purpose and shall be expressed as displacement in inches. 
Table 114-165(b)-Maximum Permitted Vibration 
Frequency in Cycles per Second Maximum Vibration Displacement
in Inches Under 10 0.008 10-19 0.0005 20-29 0.0002 30-39 0.0002 40 and over 0.0001  
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-166. - Noise standards. 
(a)  Noise. At no point on the district boundary nor beyond property lines of individual lots within nonresidential districts shall the sound level of any individual operation or level exceed the limits shown in the following table: 
Table 114-166(a)-Noise Standards 
Cycles per Second 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 0-75 70 67 75-150 67 62 150-300 59 54 300-600 52 47 600-1200 46 41 1,200-2,400 40 35 2,400-4,800 34 29 Over 4,800 32 27  
(b)  Frequencies and sound levels shall be measured with an octave ban analyzer and sound level meter which comply with the U.S.A. Standards prescribed by the United States of America Standards Institute. 
(c)  All noise shall be so muffled or otherwise controlled as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, duration, heat frequency, impulse character, periodic character or shrillness. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-167. - Air pollution standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of air pollution which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply to air pollution created during the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  The emission, from all sources within any lot, of particulate matter containing a particle diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited. 
(2)  Emission of smoke or particulate matter of density equal to, or greater than Number 2 on the Ringelmann chart (U.S. Bureau of Mines) is prohibited at all times. 
(3)  Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, and roads within the boundaries of any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other acceptable means. 
(4)  All applicable state and federal standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-168. - Odor standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of odor which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply to odors created during the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations. Public landfills and public sanitary sewage treatment plants shall be exempted from the requirements of this section as essential public services. 
(b)  Standards. Except for food preparation and cooking odors emanating from residential land uses, and odors associated with property development and maintenance no odor shall be created for periods exceeding a total of 15 minutes per any day, which are detectable by the zoning administrator or a designee who is unaffected by background odors such as tobacco or food, at the boundary of the subject property, where said lot abuts property within any residential, office, commercial zoning district, or the general industrial (GI) district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-169. - Electromagnetic radiation standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of electromagnetic radiation which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(b)  Standards. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any planned or intentional source of electromagnetic radiation for such purposes as communication, experimentation, entertainment, broadcasting, heating, navigation, therapy, vehicle velocity measurement, weather survey, aircraft detection, topographical survey, personal pleasure, or any other use directly or indirectly associated with these purposes which does not comply with the then current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation. Further, said operation in compliance with the Federal Communications Commission shall be unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation in performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design because of proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious radiation, harmonic content, modulation or energy conducted by power or telephone lines. The determination of the terms "abnormal degradation in performance" and "of quality and proper design" shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the Electronic Industries Association. In case of any conflict between the latest standards and principles of the above groups, the following precedence in the interpretation of the standards and principles shall apply: 
(1)  American Institute of Electrical Engineers; 
(2)  Institute of Radio Engineers; and 
(3)  Electronic Industries Association. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-170. - Glare and heat standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of glare or heat which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and activities, except that these standards shall not apply to glare or heat created during the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations. 
(b)  Standards. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the lot line of the subject property shall be permitted. Furthermore, there shall be no transmission of heat or heated air so as to be discernible by the zoning administrator or a designee, at the lot line. Solar systems regulated by Wis. Stats. § 66.0401 shall be entitled to the protection of its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-171. - Fire and explosion standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of fire and/or explosion hazards which adversely affect adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(b)  Standards. Any use involving materials which could decompose by detonation shall locate such materials not less than 400 feet from any residential or office zoning district, except that this standard shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum or natural gas for normal residential or business purposes. All activities and storage of flammable and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate safety and firefighting devices in accordance with all state fire prevention codes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-172. - Toxic or noxious material standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the handling of toxic or noxious material which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious material in such concentration as to be detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to the property or business. 
(2)  No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-173. - Waste material standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the handling of waste material which adversely effects adjoining properties in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and activities. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious waste material in such concentration as to be detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to the property or business. 
(2)  No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-174. - Exterior construction material standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the use of certain exterior construction materials so as to attain a degree of uniformity in exterior appearance, and thus maintain and enhance the attractiveness and the property value of certain zoning districts. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and activities, except for permitted land uses within the AG district, and except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Standards for all residential, office, commercial, and Industrial zoning districts. Except for exposed foundations not to exceed three feet in height from the adjacent grade, all non-single-family development located within the residential districts, non-residential districts, and industrial districts shall employ only high-quality, decorative exterior construction materials on the visible exterior of the following portions of all structures and buildings: 
(1)  Any portion of the building or structure visible from adjacent residentially zoned property; 
(2)  Any portion of the building or structure located within 50 feet of a public right-of-way; or 
(3)  Any other portion of the building or structure visible from a public street. 
    The following exterior construction material shall not be considered high quality, decorative: non-decorative block or cinder block, non-decorative concrete foundation walls or panels, corrugated or other metal with exposed fasteners, except in industrial zoned districts, non-decorative plywood, asphaltic siding, or other materials using exposed fastener systems or other non-decorative surfaces as determined by the plan commission. 
(c)  Trademark architecture. Trademark architecture shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Matching buildings. With the exception of farm buildings located in the agriculture (AG) district, and with the exception of accessory buildings located in the rear yard of single-family residential districts, accessory buildings shall be constructed and finished in a complimentary architectural style and with complimentary materials to the principal structure so that the exterior (e.g., walls, roofs, windows and doors) of all buildings on a single lot shall be of similar architecture, material, color, quality and texture. 
(e)  Exceptions. The conditional use process may be used to propose the use of a material otherwise prohibited by subsection (c) or (e) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-175. - Roof and eave standards. 
(a)  Roofs. The roof on all principal residential buildings shall have a minimum roof pitch of 5:12, except the roofs over the following parts of residential structures may have a lesser pitch: porches, decks, dormers, and breezeways. 
(b)  Eaves. All residential structures shall have a minimum eave width of 16 inches, not including the width of any gutter or other apparatus affixed to the eave or roof edge. 
(c)  Exceptions. The rules of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall not apply to buildings located in mobile home parks. In all other zoning districts, the rules of subsections (a) and/or (b) of this section may be modified by the plan commission through the granting of a conditional use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-176. - Hazardous materials standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide information to the city regarding the nature of land uses which involve research, production, storage, disposal, handling, and/or shipment of hazardous materials. 
(b)  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and activities involving any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Micro-organism cultures subject to Wis. Stats. § 94.65; 
(2)  Pesticides subject to Wis. Stats. § 94.67(25); 
(3)  Biological products subject to Wis. Stats. § 95.39; 
(4)  Hazardous substances subject to Wis. Stats. § 100.37(1)(c); 
(5)  Toxic substances subject to Wis. Stats. § 101.58(2)(j); 
(6)  Infectious agents subject to Wis. Stats. § 101.58(2)(f); 
(7)  Any material for which the state requires notification of a local fire department; or 
(8)  Any other uses, activities, or materials which are subject to county, state, or federal hazardous, or related materials regulations. 
(c)  Standards. All land uses involving such hazardous materials shall submit a written description of such materials and the operations involving such materials conducted on their property as part of the required site plan submittal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-177. - Fencing standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the materials, location, height, and maintenance of fencing, landscaping walls and decorative posts in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. The requirements of this section apply to all fencing, landscape walls and decorative posts equal to, or exceeding, 30 inches in height, for all land uses and activities. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  Materials. 
a.  Residential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing fencing, landscape walls, and decorative posts include wood, stone, brick, wrought iron, chain link, wire mesh, polyethylene and similar materials approved by the zoning administrator, except that wire mesh and chain link fencing is not permitted within required front yard or street yard areas. Barbed wire fencing shall not be permitted. Any fence within a street yard, including along property lines which intersect a right-of-way, shall not exceed a maximum of 60 percent opaque. 
b.  Nonresidential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing fencing, landscape walls, and decorative posts include wood, stone, brick, wrought iron, chain link, wire mesh, polyethylene and similar materials approved by the zoning administrator, except that wire mesh and chain link fencing is not permitted within required front yard or street yard areas. Barbed wire fencing shall not be permitted, except that security fences may include up to four strands of barbed wire on top of fences provided that: 
1.  The lowest strand of barbed wire is at least eight feet above grade; 
2.  The entire structure, including any outward projecting barbed wire supports, shall stay within the property lines; and 
3.  The total height of the barbed wire portion of the fence shall not exceed two feet. Any fence within a street yard, including along property lines which intersect a right-of-way, shall be maximum of 60 percent opaque. 
c.  Temporary fencing. Temporary fencing, including the use of wood or plastic snow fences for the purposes of limiting snow drifting between November 1 and April 1, protection of excavation and construction sites, and the protection of plants during grading and construction is permitted for up to 180 consecutive days and no more than 180 consecutive days per calendar year. Snow fences constructed of wood and wire, and/or plastic shall be permitted only as temporary fences. 
(2)  Location. On all properties, no fence, landscape wall, or decorative post shall be located closer than two feet to the front yard or street yard property line. Fences may be located on any property line abutting a side or rear yard. 
(3)  Maximum height. The maximum height of any fence, landscape wall, or decorative post shall be the following: 
a.  Three feet within a front yard setback; 
b.  Six feet when located on any residentially zoned property, but not within a required front yard setback or a required street yard setback; and 
c.  Eight feet when located on any nonresidential zoned property, but not within a required front yard or a required street yard, except that security fences may exceed this height. 
(4)  Orientation. Any and all fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts shall be erected so as to locate visible supports and other structural components toward the subject property. 
(5)  Maintenance. Any and all fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts shall be maintained in a structurally sound and attractive manner. 
(6)  Swimming pools. Fencing for swimming pools shall be provided per the model swimming pool enclosure code established by the National Spa and Pool Institute (NSPI). 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-178. - Signal receiving antennas (satellite dishes) standards. 
(a)  Purpose. This section, regulating the placement of all signal receiving antennas, is adopted to: 
(1)  Secure placement of such antennas in an aesthetically sensitive manner while allowing users reasonable reception of signals; 
(2)  Protect the public from injury from antennas that are inadequately mounted, unduly susceptible to wind pressure, improperly installed and wired, or are placed on structures insufficiently designed or constructed to safely support the antenna; and 
(3)  Provide for placement of such antennas in locations that preserve access to rear property areas by firefighting apparatus and emergency personnel. 
(b)  Permit required. No owner shall, within the city, build, construct, use or place a signal receiving antenna, or satellite dish with diameter greater than 36 inches, until a permit shall have first been obtained from the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner means the holder of fee title, or of a life estate, in real property, or a vendee of record under a land contract, but not including the vendor under a land contract. A tenant in common or joint tenant shall be considered such owner to the extent of his interest. The personal representative of at least one owner shall be considered an owner. 
    Signal receiving antenna means any apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter on earth or a transmitter relay located in a planetary orbit, including the tower and associated structure and apparatus employed to secure, hold, elevate or mount the antenna. This definition includes all types of signal receiving antennas, including, without limitation, parabolic antennas, home earth stations, satellite television disks, UHF and VHF television antennas, and AM, FM, ham and short-wave radio antennas, regardless of the method of mounting. 
(d)  Application. Application for a signal receiving antenna permit shall be made in writing to the zoning administrator. With such application, there shall be submitted a fee and a sufficient set of mounting plans and specifications, including a general plan showing the location of the proposed signal receiving antenna with respect to streets, lot lines and buildings. If such application meets all requirements of this section, the application shall be approved. 
(e)  Installation standards. Signal receiving antennas installed in any zoning district within the city shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Site location. 
a.  Any signal receiving antenna and its mounting post shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any property line. 
b.  Subject to the provisions herein, signal receiving antennas shall be located in the rear or side yard of the lot, as close to the principal structure as is reasonably possible. In the event that reasonable reception of signals is not possible by locating the signal receiving antenna on the rear or side yard of the property, such antenna shall be placed in as hidden a place as possible, as viewed from the standpoint of a non-owner, to be determined by the zoning administrator. For corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not face a street. 
c.  If front yard or roof mounting is requested, the zoning administrator shall inspect the property before installation to determine the appropriate location. In making such determination, the zoning administrator shall consider the locations on the property where reasonable reception is possible, based on evidence provided by the person seeking to erect or construct the antenna. 
(2)  Mounting. Signal receiving antennas attached to the wall or roof of any principal or accessory structure shall be permitted only if the structure is properly constructed to carry all imposed loading and complies with applicable state and local building code requirements. The zoning administrator may require engineering calculations. 
(3)  Diameter. The diameter of an antenna shall not exceed 36 inches in diameter, provided that larger antennas may be allowed by conditional use. 
(4)  Height. 
a.  Ground-mounted. A ground-mounted signal receiving antenna, including any platform or structure upon which said antenna is mounted or affixed, may not exceed: 
1.  Eighteen feet in height; or 
2.  Five feet above the highest point of the principal structure, whichever is higher, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the antenna. 
b.  Roof-mounted. A roof-mounted antenna may not exceed five feet in height above the surrounding roofline as measured from the highest point of the existing roofline. 
(5)  Wind pressure. All signal receiving antennas shall be permanently mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for installation. All such installations shall meet a minimum wind load design velocity of 80 miles per hour. 
(6)  Electrical installations. Electrical installations in connection with signal receiving antennas, including grounding of the system, shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code, state electrical code and the instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern. All cable used to conduct current or signals from the signal receiving antenna to the receivers shall be installed underground unless installation site conditions preclude underground. The location of all such underground lines, cables and conduits shall be shown on the application for a permit. All signal receiving antennas shall be grounded against direct lightning strikes. 
(7)  Temporary placement. No portable or trailer-mounted signal receiving antenna shall be allowed, except for temporary installation for on-site testing and demonstration purposes for periods not exceeding five days. Any person making such temporary placement shall first give written notice to the zoning administrator of the date when such placement shall begin and end. 
(8)  Advertising. No form of advertising, picture, or identification, sign or mural is allowed on the signal receiving antenna other than the customary manufacturer's identification plates. 
(9)  Interference with broadcasting. Signal receiving antennas shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission or reflection of an electromagnetic radiation that would cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or television broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful interference is caused subsequent to its installation, the owner of the signal receiving antenna shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(10)  Compliance with federal regulations. The installation and use of every signal receiving antenna shall be in conformity with the federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and regulations adopted thereunder. To the extent that any of the provisions herein conflict with such regulations, then these provisions shall not apply but only to the extent needed to conform with such state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Satellite antennas, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(he). 
Sec. 114-179. - Wind energy conversion systems (WECS) standards. 
(a)  Construction of wind energy conversion systems. No person shall construct or operate a wind energy conversion system (WECS) without having fully complied with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Permits required. 
(1)  A WECS permit shall be obtained from the city zoning administrator for the construction of all WECS. 
(c)  Application requirements. An application for a permit to build a wind energy system shall include the following: 
(1)  The property lines of the proposed site of construction. 
(2)  Proposed location of the WECS. 
(3)  Location and description of all structures located on the property where the WECS site is proposed. 
(4)  Location of all above-ground utility lines within a radius equal to two times the height of the proposed WECS. 
(5)  Location of all underground utility lines on the property where a WECS site is proposed. 
(6)  Dimensional representation of the structural components of the tower construction including the base and footings. 
(7)  Schematic of electrical systems associated with the WECS including all existing and proposed electrical connections. 
(8)  Manufacturer's specifications and installation and operation instructions or specific WECS design information. 
(9)  Certification by a registered professional engineer that the tower design is sufficient to withstand wind load requirements for structure as defined by the Uniform Building Code. 
(d)  Blade clearance. The minimum distance between the ground and any protruding blade utilized on a WECS shall be 15 feet, as measured at the lowest point of the arc of the blades. The minimum distance shall be increased as necessary to provide for vehicle clearance in locations where over-sized vehicles might travel. 
(e)  Climbing towers, tower access. Access to towers shall be controlled by fences six feet in height around the tower and anti-climbing devices. A sign indicating shock hazard shall be placed on the tower. Cables, ropes or wires used to secure the WECS shall be appropriately marked to prevent accidental bodily harm. 
(f)  Tower construction. Tower construction shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the state building code. 
(g)  Utility interconnection. The WECS, if interconnected to a utility system, shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operate as set forth in the electrical utility's then-current service regulations applicable to WECS; these standards are subject to review by the public service commission. 
(h)  Setback requirements. 
(1)  No WECS shall be constructed in any setback, dedicated easement, or dedicated roadway. 
(2)  Installation of any WECS may not be nearer to any property lines or right-of-way for overhead electrical transmission or distribution lines than three times the height of the WECS structure. 
(i)  Noise. During all operations, from commencement through abandonment, all noise and vibrations shall conform with the requirements of sections 114-165 and 114-166. 
(j)  Interference with navigational systems. No WECS shall be installed or operated in such a manner that is not in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
(k)  Electrical distribution lines. All WECS electrical distribution lines shall be located underground. 
(l)  Required safety features. 
(1)  All WECS shall be designed with an automatic overspeed control to render the system inoperable when winds are blowing in excess of the speeds for which the machine is designed. 
(2)  All WECS shall have a manually operable method to render the system inoperable in the event of a structural or mechanical failure of any part of the system, including the automatic overspeed control. 
(3)  All WECS shall be designed with an automatic control to render the system inoperable in case of loss of utility power to prevent the WECS from supplying power to a de-energized electrical distribution system. 
(4)  Any WECS thereof declared to be unsafe by the zoning administrator by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Code. 
(m)  Maintenance. The zoning administrator or his representative shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to enter, in the company of the owner or his agent, the premises on which a WECS has been constructed to inspect all parts of said WECS installation and require that repairs or alterations be made within 30 days if, in his judgment, there exists a deficiency in the structural stability of the system. 
(n)  Inspections. A yearly inspection, at a fee to be determined from time to time by the city, shall be made by the zoning administrator to certify the safety and maintenance of the WECS and accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-180. - Swimming pool standards. 
(a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Swimming pool means a body of water or an outdoor structure containing a body of water in a receptacle or other container having a depth for water at any point greater than one and one-half feet, located above or below the surface of ground elevation, installed in such a manner that the pool will remain in place as a fixture throughout the full year and will be considered as a permanent or semi-permanent structure on the land, designed or intended for swimming. The term "swimming pool" includes all structural facilities, appliances and appurtenances, equipment and other items used and intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of a private or residential swimming pool. 
(b)  Exempt pools. Storable children's swimming or wading pools, with a maximum diameter of 15 feet and a maximum wall height of 18 inches and which are so constructed that it may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its original integrity, are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Permit required. Pools are a type of land use covered by article IV of this chapter which are allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses under the different standard zoning districts of article II, pursuant to the procedures of article VIII of this chapter. 
(d)  [Construction requirements.] A permit for a swimming pool shall not be issued unless the following construction requirements are observed: 
(1)  Approved materials. All materials and methods of construction in the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvements and pool installation shall be in accord with all state regulations and codes and with any and all ordinances of the city now in effect or hereafter enacted. 
(2)  Plumbing. All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the city and all state codes. Every private or residential swimming pool shall be provided with a suitable draining method, and in no case shall waters from any pool be drained into the sanitary sewer system, onto lands of other property owners adjacent to that on which the pool is located or in the general vicinity. 
(3)  Electrical installations. All electrical installations, including lighting and heating but not limited thereto, which are provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a private swimming pool shall be in conformance with the state laws and city ordinances regulating electrical installations. 
(e)  Setbacks and other requirements. 
(1)  Private swimming pools shall be erected or constructed on rear or side lots only and only on a lot occupied by a principal building. No swimming pool shall be erected or constructed on an otherwise vacant lot. A lot shall not be considered vacant if the owner owns the contiguous lot and said lot is occupied by a principal building. 
(2)  All swimming pools shall be at least ten feet from any lot line or building unless designed and approved as an addition to a building. 
(f)  Enclosures. 
(1)  Fence; in-ground pools. All outdoor, in-ground swimming pools shall have a fence or other solid structure not less than four feet in height completely enclosing the pool with no opening therein, other than doors or gates, larger than three inches square. All gates or doors opening through the enclosure shall be kept securely closed and locked at all times when not in actual use and shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep and be capable of keeping such door or gate securely locked at all times when not in actual use. 
(2)  Above-ground pools; pool wall barrier. 
a.  An approved barrier shall consist of a solid wall of durable material of which the pool itself is constructed and shall extend directly above the vertical water enclosing wall of the pool. Such walls shall extend more than three feet above the level of the ground immediately adjacent to the pool. Such a solid pool wall barrier shall not be located within six feet of any other wall or fence or other structure which can be readily climbed by children. Every entrance to a pool, such as a ladder, must be secured or adequately safeguarded to prevent unauthorized entry into the pool. 
b.  The pool enclosure may be omitted where portable pools are installed above ground and have a raised deck around the entire pool perimeter with an attached enclosed railing a minimum of 36 inches high on the top. 
(g)  Compliance. All swimming pools existing at the time of passage of this chapter not satisfactorily fenced shall comply with the fencing requirements of this section or when water is placed in the pool. Enclosures on existing pools shall be inspected by the zoning administrator or designee for compliance. Variations in enclosure requirements that do not adversely affect the safety of the public may be approved. 
(h)  Draining and approval thereof. No private swimming pool shall be constructed so as to allow water to drain into any sanitary sewer nor to overflow upon or cause damage to any adjoining property. Provisions may be made for draining the contents of any swimming pool into a storm sewer, but such installation shall be subject to prior approval by the DPW. 
(i)  Filter system required. All private swimming pools within the meaning of this chapter must have, in connection therewith, some filtration system to assure proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-181. - Outdoor storage and screening. 
    The preferred location for the outdoor storage of products, materials or equipment is within the side or rear building yards. If these functions are provided in the street yard, then additional landscaping is required between the outdoor storage area and the street following the standards of section 114-182. This restriction does not apply to short-term display items or items that are available for purchase by the consumer. All outdoor refuse collection areas shall be visually screened from public streets and adjacent property by a complete opaque screen, fence or wall. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-182. - Landscaping and greenspace. 
(a)  All ground, with the exception of walks, drives, parking facilities and service areas, will be landscaped with permanent lawn and ground covers, shrubs and trees, in a manner that is complimentary to the architecture and provides the required screening. 
(b)  Where the development adjoins a residential property, at a minimum, a ten-foot landscape buffer is required between any parking area, loading area, refuse collection area, or outside storage area and the residential lot line. The landscape buffer area shall include plantings to meet the point as required by this section, and a berm, solid fence, or wall at least five feet tall. Temporary outdoor storage consisting of semi-trailers does not require a solid fence or wall, but it shall meet the landscape requirements. The placement of semi-trailers and other storage containers shall be transitory in nature and they shall not be used for permanent or long-term storage. 
(c)  All required landscaping shall be completed within 12 months of the issuance of an occupancy permit or final inspection, in accordance with the approved landscaping plan. 
(d)  Minimum requirements. All developments are required to have a minimum quantity of landscaping based on the size of the parcel, structure, and parking lot according to Table 114-182(d)(3): 
(1)  One canopy tree is required for each 100 feet of lot frontage, and should be located along the street frontage of the property, or between the building and the street. 
(2)  A combination of landscaping in addition to the required canopy trees to equal ten points for each 1,000 square feet of enclosed ground floor building area. Buildings over 25,000 square feet in area shall be required to accumulate ten points for each 1,000 square feet for the first 25,000 square feet, and five points for each 1,000 square feet of additional building area. The required landscaping should be located between the building and the street, or between the building and any residential properties, unless another location is agreed to by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  A combination of landscaping to equal five points per parking space for parking areas that contain up to 50 parking spaces, and two and one-half points per space for additional spaces over 50. 
Table 114-182(a)-Landscaping Points and Minimum Installation Sizes 
Plant Category Landscaping Points
Per Plant Minimum Permitted
Installation Size Climax tree 75 2-inch caliper Tall deciduous tree 30 1.5-inch caliper Medium deciduous tree 15 6 feet tall Low deciduous tree 10 4 feet tall Tall evergreen tree 40 5 Feet tall Medium evergreen tree 20 4 feet tall Low evergreen tree 12 3 feet tall Tall deciduous shrub 5 36 inches tall Medium deciduous shrub 3 24 inches tall Low deciduous shrub 1 18 inches tall Medium evergreen shrub 5 18 inches tall/wide Low evergreen shrub 3 12 inches tall/wide Non-contributory plants 0 n/a Bio-retention swales/rain gardens/green roofs (when deliberately planted with appropriate, non-turf species per industry standards) Landscaping points per 100 square feet in area (no to exceed 300 total points) 20 points Maximum spacing between plantings 12" Source: A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin, E.R. Hasselkus, UW-Extension Publication: A2865.  
(e)  Additional requirements. Additional landscaping may be required for developments that do not meet the preferred goals for building design, building materials and site layout, or as required as part of a conditional use permit. The extra landscaping shall be calculated based on schedule 1 and the following requirements: 
(1)  A combination of landscaping to equal five points for each ten feet of building frontage, for buildings that do not utilize the preferred materials on the street facade, which should be located between the building and the street. 
(2)  A combination of landscaping to equal 200 points for each loading dock located on the front of the building, visible from the street, or facing a residential property. The landscaping shall be located between the loading dock and the street, or the loading dock and the residential property. 
(3)  A combination of landscaping to equal 20 points for each ten feet of perimeter around an outside storage area, including parking areas for semi-trailers, and refuse enclosures. 
(4)  A combination of landscaping to equal two and one-half points per space for parking located within the street yard, or within 20 feet of residential parcels. The required landscaping should be located between the parking area and the street, or between the parking area and the residential parcel. 
(f)  The applicant may request points for decorative fences, earth berms, ground covers and existing vegetation. The applicant must demonstrate that these landscape elements will contribute to the overall landscape objectives, and these items must be shown on the landscape plan that is submitted for approval. Shrubs and small evergreen trees shall be counted on a one for one basis. Existing deciduous trees shall be calculated as follows: 
Table 114-182(f) 
Existing Trees Number of Trees Credited
(2 1/2" caliper) 36" or greater 8 trees 18-35" 6 trees 12-17" 4 trees 6-11" 2 trees Less than 6" 1 tree  
(g)  The landscaping point requirements do not apply to parking spaces that utilize "turf-based" surface materials, such as Geoblock or Grasspave. 
(h)  A landscape plan must be submitted which includes details of all proposed landscaping, buffering, and screening. The plans shall show the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, parking, drives, rights-of- way, and any other permanent features, and all other information required by the zoning administrator, plan commission, or the common council, including but not limited to the following. 
(1)  A plant list and coverage chart showing the location, quantity, size (at time of planting and at maturity), spacing, and the scientific and common names of all landscape materials used. 
(2)  The size of existing trees shall be provided. 
(3)  The location and percent of slope of all proposed berms using one foot contours. 
(4)  Detailed sections showing elevations of all proposed architectural features, such as walls, lighting or water features. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-183. - Natural resources protection. 
    Each project shall meet the erosion control and storm water management standards of the city and the state department of natural resources. Maintenance of any storm water detention or conveyance features are solely borne by the developer and/or owner unless dedicated to, and accepted by, the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-184. - Sidewalk and bike paths. 
(a)  Each project shall include the installation of sidewalks within the public right-of-way along the frontage of the property, which shall be installed by and at the expense of the developer/property owner. The council may waive this requirement if it is determined the sidewalks are not necessary to serve pedestrian traffic, or connecting sidewalks are not present or planned for on the adjacent properties. If sidewalks are not required to be installed as part of the project, the city maintains the right to construct sidewalks at a future date and assess the owner(s) of the adjacent land for the costs thereof. 
(b)  Bike paths may be required to be installed on the property as part of a conditional use permit approval. If installation of bike paths is required, the developer shall grant to the city such easements as would be reasonably necessary to allow construction and use of the bike path, and pay for the costs of installation according to specifications required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-185. - Vacation and maintenance of buildings. 
    As part of the conditional use permit approval for a large commercial development, the developer may be required to enter into an agreement with the city that would require action to minimize the negative impacts that may come from vacating an existing building located in the city, or vacating the proposed development at a future date. Such agreement may include, but not be limited to the following requirements: 
(a)  Marketing the existing or new building. If a developer chooses to vacate an existing building and property located in the city and/or a new building, the developer agrees to cooperate with the city, and other designated economic development agencies in the region in marketing the building, as appropriate, including but not limited to preparing and distributing marketing material for the same and marketing to local and national retailers and commercial developers. 
(1)  The developer agrees to provide periodic written reports to the city regarding the status of the marketing of the property upon written request by the city. 
(2)  The developer may divide or reconfigure the property, as appropriate, to accommodate an adaptive re-use, in order to meet the needs of future tenants; however, other arrangements may be negotiated with tenants, depending upon the nature of the tenants lease requirements. 
(3)  The developer agrees that if it chooses to sell or otherwise lease the property to an unaffiliated entity, that it will install at least one professionally designed sign, consistent with local sign ordinances, not to exceed 32 square feet in area, which shall be installed at the front of the property, as appropriate, which provides the contact information of the person or agency handling the sale and/or lease of the property, and includes a statement that the property is available for sale and/or lease. 
(4)  Should a tenant of the developer vacate the property, the developer agrees that it will undertake the same measures referenced above to secure additional tenants and/or purchasers for the property, as appropriate and the developer shall continue these activities during the primary term of a lease, or any renewals by the any tenants thereof. 
(b)  Property maintenance. The developer, through its employees, contractors or agents, agrees to maintain and keep the existing building and/or the new building exterior, landscaping, parking lots and other site improvements in a safe, well-kept manner. 
(1)  The developer shall exercise reasonable care to prevent trash, garbage, litter or other refuse from accumulating on the existing parcel and/or the new building. "Reasonable care" as this term is defined in this subsection shall include but not be limited to inspecting the existing parcel and/or the new building at least weekly, and at such time removing trash, garbage, litter or other refuse that may have accumulated. 
(2)  The developer shall exercise reasonable care to maintain the vegetation, trees, shrubs, sod and other landscaping as may exist on the existing parcel and/or the new building at the time such store building is vacated. "Reasonable care" in this subsection shall include watering, fertilizing, trimming, mowing and replacing dead vegetation, trees, shrubs, sod and other landscaping. 
(3)  The developer shall exercise reasonable care to keep the existing parcel building and/or the new building, parking lot and other related improvements and fixtures in a condition substantially similar to the condition as existed on the date such store building was vacated. "Reasonable care" shall include but not be limited to, painting the exterior of such building, replacing damaged or worn exterior facade building materials, and sealing and resurfacing the parking lot, all as may be necessary from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-186. - Administration and enforcement of performance standards. 
(a)  Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of performance standards set forth herein range from those which can be made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal senses and no mechanical equipment, to those requiring great technical competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the intent of this chapter that: 
(1)  Where determinations can be made by the zoning administrator using equipment normally available to the city or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made before notice of violations is issued. 
(2)  Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable for the city to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be available for causing corrections or apparent violations of performance standards, for protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious, and unreasonable administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations, and for protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement. 
a.  The zoning administrator shall give written notice, by certified mail or other means, ensuring a signed receipt for such notice to the person or persons responsible for the alleged violations. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons why the zoning administrator believes there is a violation in fact, and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator. 
b.  The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the administrative official within the time limit set constitutes admission of violation of the terms of this chapter. The notice shall further state that, upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical determination as described in this chapter will be made, and that if violations as alleged are found, costs of such determinations shall be charged against those responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is determined that no violation exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the city. 
(b)  Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be per section 114-300. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 114-187-114-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED 

Secs. 114-221-114-252. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 114-253. - Permit required. 
    No sign shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered except so as to comply with the provisions of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, erect, construct, enlarge or structurally modify a sign or cause the same to be done within the city without first obtaining a sign permit for each sign from the zoning administrator, unless specifically exempted by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-254. - General regulations. 
(a)  Address numbers. Address numbers are required for each principal residential, commercial and industrial building located on each lot in the city. Such address numbers shall be in a location and of a minimum size to be clearly visible from the street. 
(b)  Conflicts. In the case of conflicting sign requirements and limitations, the more stringent shall apply. 
(c)  Advertising. Other than political signs and temporary signs as permitted by this Section, signs shall advertise only those locations, products, goods, or services available upon the same premises as the sign. 
(d)  Installation. All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced. Signs shall not be fastened to window frames. Every sign and its framework, braces, anchors and other supports shall be constructed of such material and with such workmanship as to be safe and satisfactory to the zoning administrator or building inspector. 
(e)  Maintenance. All signs, including supports and attachments, shall be kept in reasonable structural condition and shall be kept clean and well painted at all times. 
(f)  Blanketing. Blanketing of signs shall not be allowed. 
(g)  Illumination. When permitted, both indirect and directly illuminated signs shall concentrate light only upon the area of the sign. Light sources shall be shielded as necessary to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent properties. 
(h)  Pylon signs. All supporting columns shall be enclosed in a decorative material which shall be integrated into the sign as a whole. Bare wooden posts or poles shall not be permitted. 
(i)  Downtown design overlay district. Development within the downtown design overlay must conform to the requirements of both the standard zoning district and the downtown design district, and if the two zones are inconsistent, then the development shall comply with the requirements of the more restrictive of the two zones. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-255. - Definitions and requirements. 
    The following definitions and sign requirements shall apply to all signs. Refer to section 114-259 for regulations specific to each zoning district. 
    Advertising displays means any temporary sign or device, e.g., festoons, pennants, banners, pinwheels, inflatable devices and similar devices, erected by a commercial or industrial use, intended to advertise a particular business, product, service or event, at a special price, rate, size or quantity, for a limited time. 
    Area of sign means the entire area within a single perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign, not including any structural elements. The area of a multiple-faced or irregular-shaped sign shall be computed on the basis of the smallest area of the sign that can be enclosed by two contiguous rectangles. Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be used in computing the area of a sign, provided that the information on both sides is the same. 
    Awning means a hood or cover that projects from the wall of a building, which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting structure. 
    Billboard (off-premises advertising signs) means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed. Off-premises signs include signs commonly referred to as billboards. Off-premises signs do not include temporary business signs. 
    Blanketing means the unreasonable obstruction of view of a sign caused by the placement of another sign. 
    Building sign means a sign attached to, painted on or made a part of a wall or a projection of a wall on a building, or erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any building. For the purposes of this section, there are four types of building signs. 
(1)  Awning/canopy/marquee sign. Any sign attached to or made part of an awning, canopy or marquee, including any sign hanging from underneath the awning, canopy or marquee. Hanging signs may not be lower than eight feet above a walkway or public sidewalk. 
(2)  Wall sign. Any sign attached to, erected on or painted on the wall of a building or structure and projecting not more than 12 inches from such wall. 
(3)  Projecting sign. Any sign extending more than 12 inches, but no more than five feet from the face of a wall or building. Projecting signs may not be lower than eight feet above a walkway or public sidewalk. 
(4)  Roof sign. Any sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any building. The highest point of the sign may not be more than 15 feet above the roof surface or the coping of the building. The combined height of the building and the sign shall not exceed the height requirement for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Building frontage means the horizontal width of a building where it is oriented towards the right-of-way. On a corner lot, each face of the building facing a right-of-way is considered a separate building frontage. 
    Canopy (or marquee) means a shelter attached to or connected with a building to provide cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. 
    Directly illuminated sign means any sign designed to give artificial light directly through a transparent or translucent material from a source of light originating within or upon such sign. 
    Directional sign means any sign which provides instruction or direction and is located entirely on a property to which it pertains, does not exceed eight square feet in area and does not include any logo or does not otherwise advertise a business in any way. This includes, but is not limited to, such signs as those identifying entrances and exits, drive-through windows, restrooms, telephones, and parking areas. 
    Electronic message unit sign means any sign on which the message may be changed by an electronic process, including such messages as copy, art, graphics, time, date, temperature, weather or information concerning civic and charitable events or the advertising of products or services available on the premises. This also includes traveling or segmented message displays. 
    Flashing elements means portions of any directly or indirectly illuminated sign (except for electronic message unit signs) which contain artificial light which is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and/or color at all times when in use. Where signs with flashing elements are permitted, the intensity of any single bulb or other light-emitting source cannot exceed 25 watts. Bare reflecting-type bulbs of any kind are not allowed as flashing elements unless they are properly shaded so as not to interfere with surrounding properties. No more than 25 percent of the area of any sign may contain flashing elements. 
    Freestanding sign means free-standing signs: a self-supporting sign resting on or supported by means of poles, standards, or any other type of base on the ground, the sole purpose of which is to support the sign. There are two types of free-standing signs: monument signs and pylon signs. 
(1)  Monument sign means a type of freestanding sign whose bottom edge is located within one foot of a ground-mounted pedestal and whose top edge is located no more than six feet high. 
(2)  Pylon sign means a type of freestanding sign whose bottom edge is located more than one foot above a ground-mounted pedestal or whose top edge is located more than six feet high. Considerations for pylon sign height include: impact on neighboring properties, proximity to principal structure versus street, and height of surrounding structures. 
    Height of sign. 
(1)  The distance measured from the established grade at the ground level of the sign to the top-most element of the sign structure. 
(2)  The height of all free-standing signs shall be determined by calculating the height of the sign above a point on the centerline of the street or highway closest to the sign. The point on the centerline shall be located by drawing an imaginary line from the base of the sign to the centerline so that the line intersects the centerline at a 90 degree angle. The intersection of this imaginary line and the centerline of the nearest street or highway shall be the point from which the height of the sign shall be calculated, except when a sign is located on the corner of two intersecting streets or highways, the height of the sign shall be measured from the point where the centerlines of the two streets or highways intersect. 
    Indirectly illuminated sign means a sign that is illuminated from a source outside of the actual sign, which is directed at the sign and is installed for the purpose of sign illumination. 
    Interstate signs means a type of on-premises freestanding pylon sign intended to identify the location of a business in the city to motorists traveling on Interstate 90/94. Such signs shall be established by conditional use. 
    Interstate unified business center signs means a type of freestanding pylon sign displaying the collective name of a group of uses defined as a unified business center, and/or the names and/or logos of individual occupants of the unified business center. 
    Movable board sign means a two-sided sign designed to be temporarily placed on the sidewalk outside of a business that advertises goods or services available therein. A movable board sign may not be fixed in a permanent position and may not be illuminated. The city accepts no liability for any movable board sign placed on a public right-of-way. Also known as poster board signs or sandwich board signs. 
    Multi-family complex sign means a freestanding sign that displays the name of a multi-family apartment complex and related information (such as the phone number, vacancy status, etc.). 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the regulations of this section. 
    Occupant frontage means in a multi-tenant building, the horizontal width of the business occupancy parallel to the front of the building or to its main entrance. In the case of an end unit with a wall face that faces a street right-of-way, each wall face may be considered a separate occupancy frontage. 
    Portable sign means any sign mounted to a rigid structure which is not permanently affixed to the ground and which can be moved from one location to another, not including a moveable board sign. 
    Real estate sign means any sign that are used to offer for sale lease or rent the property upon which the sign is placed. 
    Sign means a sign shall include anything that promotes, calls attention or invites patronage (or anything similar to the aforementioned) to a business, location, individual, or product. 
    Sign setback means the distance from any property line to the plane formed by the nearest edge or element of the sign structure, extended to the ground. 
    Street frontage means the distance measured along the lot line adjacent to a public right-of-way. Each separate street adjacent to a lot is considered a separate street frontage. When multiple signs are allowed, each sign shall use the frontage along which it is intended to be viewed as its street frontage for the purposes of determining sign area. 
    Temporary sign means any sign intended to be displayed for a short period of time, including banners publicizing a special event, decorative-type displays or anything similar to the aforementioned. Temporary signs shall be erected so as not be loosened as a result of wind or weather. 
    Window sign means any sign that is visible to the public located completely within a window, or attached to or painted upon the surface of a window of a building. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-256. - Excluded items. 
(a)  The term "sign" does not include the following: 
(1)  Flags or emblems of any nation, organization of nations, state, city, religious, fraternal, or civic organization; 
(2)  Merchandise and pictures or models of products or services incorporated into a window display; 
(3)  Works of art which do not identify a product; 
(4)  Scoreboards located on athletic fields, provided the advertising thereon does not exceed 50 percent of the size of the scoreboard area; and 
(5)  Signage located within an outdoor athletic facility's walls or fences, provided: 
a.  The sign is mounted upon the walls or fences; 
b.  The sign does not extend above or beyond the height or width of the wall or fences to which it is affixed; and 
c.  The sign is designed to be viewed by persons sitting in the area designed for spectators. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-257. - Permit exempt signs. 
    The following signs are exempt from the requirement that a permit be obtained and, unless otherwise stated, are permitted in all zoning districts: 
(a)  Address numbers and name plates not exceeding two square feet in area for each residential, institutional, business or industrial building. 
(b)  Construction signs. Two per site, not exceeding 32 square feet in area each, confined to the site of construction, and removable 30 days after completion of construction or prior to occupancy, whichever is sooner. 
(c)  Directional signs, in the business and industrial districts. 
(d)  Emblems or insignia of any nation or political subdivision, or non-profit organization, provided such signs shall not be illuminated nor exceed two square feet in area. 
(e)  Government or official signs for the control of traffic and other regulatory purposes, danger signs, railroad crossing signs and signs of public utilities indicating danger, wayfinding signs, and aids to service or safety which are erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his duty. Such signs shall be subject to approval by the department of public works and the building inspector. 
(f)  Home-based professional office signs, home occupation identification signs, bed and breakfast establishment signs when located on the same premises as an approved conditional use. Such signs may not be illuminated and are limited to four square feet in area. 
(g)  Interior signs. Signs located within the interior of any building or structure which are not visible from the public right-of-way. This does not, however, exempt such signs from the structural, electrical or material specifications of this or any other applicable code, statute, or ordinance. 
(h)  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, inscriptions or emblems, which are cut into masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of a building or when constructed of bronze or other non combustible material not more than four square feet in area and affixed flat against the structure. 
(i)  Municipal signs. Signs erected by the city upon municipal property, buildings, parks or public recreational facilities. 
(j)  No trespassing and no dumping signs, not to exceed one and one-half square feet in area. 
(k)  Official notices posted by public officers or employees in the performance of their duties. 
(l)  Political and campaign signs on behalf of candidates for public office or measures on election ballots, provided that such signs are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Such signs may be erected not earlier than 45 days prior to the primary election and shall be removed within seven days following the general election. 
(2)  Such signs may not be erected on any public right-of-way or other public property. 
(m)  Real estate signs. 
(n)  Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of recognized historic agencies, or identification emblems of religious orders or historical agencies. 
(o)  Temporary public announcement and public service signs, provided the size, character, quality and message on each sign is specifically approved by the common council and further provided that prior to erection, an individual or group shall indicate to the common council that he/she or it shall be responsible for the maintenance of such sign. Such signs may be of a type, size and character approved by the common council, notwithstanding any regulations or restrictions contained in this chapter. 
(p)  Window signs. Signs attached or affixed to the surface of a window. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-258. - General signage regulations. 
(a)  Prohibited signs. 
(1)  Business closings. Closed businesses must remove their signs within 60 days of closing. 
(2)  Flashing signs. No sign shall be illuminated by or contain any flashing, intermittent, or moving lights. Flashing signs are those which change their appearance more than once every 60 seconds. Electronic message center signs and time/temperature signs are permitted with a conditional use permit. Chasing lights shall not be allowed. 
(3)  Inflatable signs. No inflatable signs shall be permitted, except as temporary signs. 
(4)  Mobile signs. No mobile signs shall be permitted. 
(5)  Moving signs. Except for sequin-like eye catcher devices and temporary signs, no fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, animated or otherwise moving signs or other moving decorations shall be permitted. 
(6)  Off-premises advertising signs. Off-premises advertising signs are not permitted in the city. Existing off-premises advertising signs made nonconforming by this article shall be permitted to continue as legal, nonconforming structures. However, such signs may not be relocated, structurally modified, or replaced if damaged over 50 percent. 
(7)  Portable signs. Portable signs are prohibited. 
(8)  Roof signs. Roof signs are prohibited. 
(9)  Signs on natural objects. No sign shall be attached to or painted on natural objects, such as trees or rocks. 
(10)  Signs containing any obscene, indecent, or immoral matter. 
(11)  Traffic interference. No sign shall use any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form, lighting or character in such manner as to interfere with or create confusion for moving traffic, including signs which incorporate typical street-type and/or traffic control-type signage designs and colors, and signs which are illuminated by lights which shine into drivers' eyes. 
(12)  Traffic visibility. No sign shall be erected or placed so that it obstructs, impedes or confuses visibility for safe pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. 
(13)  Vehicle signs. No persons shall park any vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way or on any private property so as to be seen from a public right-of-way, which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device which advertises products or directs people to a business activity. Licensed business vehicles and trailers which contain typical business signage and which are actively driven or towed on a daily basis for business purposes are exempt from this prohibition. 
(14)  Wall painted signs. Signs painted directly on a wall or other portion of an exterior surface of a building is not permitted. 
(b)  Sign location regulations. 
(1)  Public property. Privately owned signs shall not be placed, grounded, anchored or allowed to project over any public property, easement or road right-of-way, except that projecting signs and awning signs may project over a public sidewalk in the NB, PB, and CB zoning districts, provided that projecting signs are at least ten feet above the sidewalk and awning signs are at least eight feet above the sidewalk, and further provided that both awning and projecting signs do not project more than four feet from the building. Owners must hold harmless the city from any damages. 
(2)  Freestanding signs. Except where another distance is specifically provided in this chapter, freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of eight feet from property lines, except that on-premises directional signs less than 36 inches tall may be located a minimum of one foot from a property line. 
(3)  Awnings made only of cloth or cloth-like materials are permitted. Such awnings may use backlighting and may contain signs. Such awnings, when located over pedestrian ways, shall be a minimum of seven and one-half feet for the fabric, and eight feet for the frame. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-259. - Zoning district regulations. 
(a)  Zoning district regulations table. 
Table 114-259-Zoning District Regulations Table 
Building Signs (Awning, Wall, Projecting) Residential NB GB CB PB AG / GI / HI Maximum cumulative area (sq ft) per linear foot of building frontage - 1 1.5 * 2 * 2.5 * 2.5 Maximum per business or occupancy per wall - 1 - 1 - 1 *** Free Standing Signs (Monument & Pylon) **** Residential NB GB CB PB AG / GI / HI Maximum area (sq ft) per linear foot of street frontage - 1 (25 max) 1.5 (200 max) 2 (100 max) ** 2.5 (200 max) ** 2.5 (200 max) Maximum height (ft) - 8 20 6 (or by cond use) 20 8 Minimum setback from ROW (ft) - 8 8 cond use 8 8 Minimum setback from sidelot line (ft) - 8 5 cond use 5 - Maximum per lot - 1 1 1 1 1 Moveable Board Signs Residential NB GB CB PB AG / GI / HI Maximum area (sq ft) - - 10 10 10 - Maximum height (ft) - - 3.5 3.5 3.5 - Number per lot - - 1 1 1 - Multifamily Complex Signs Residential NB GB CB PB AG / GI / HI Maximum area (sq ft) 35 - 35 - - - Maximum height (ft) 10 - 10 - - - Minimum setback (ft) 5 - 5 - - - Institutional Signs Residential NB GB CB PB AG / GI / HI Building signs cumulative area (sq ft) per linear foot of building frontage 1 1 1 1 1 1 Free standing signs maximum area (sq ft) per linear foot of street frontage 1 (200 max) 1 (200 max) 1 (200 max) 1 (200 max) 1 (200 max) 1 (200 max) Maximum height (ft) (free standing signs) 10 10 10 10 10 10 Minimum setback (ft) (free standing signs) 5 5 5 5 5 5 Temporary Signs Residential NB GB CB PB AG / GI / HI Maximum area (sq ft) - 50 50 50 50 50 Number per lot - 1 1 1 1 1 Time limit (days) - 30 30 30 30 30 Interstate Signs Residential NB GB CB PB AG / GI / HI Maximum area (sq ft) - - - - 400 400 Maximum height (ft) - - - - 90 90 Minimum setback (ft) - - - - 50 50 Maximum per lot - - - - 1 1  
* In the case of a multi-tenant building, one and a half square feet per each linear foot of occupant frontage. Multiple building signs are permitted, but the total area of all signs may not exceed the maximum area stated above. 
** One per street frontage; however, for lots where a street frontage is 200 feet or more, one additional sign is permitted along that frontage; however, the aggregate area of all signs may not exceed the maximum area noted above. 
*** Industrial districts allow for one additional entry sign. 
**** Monument signs have a six foot height limitation. 
(b)  Additional regulations. 
(1)  Interstate or interstate unified business signs. 
a.  Minimum setback. No sign shall be located in the front yard, minimum 50 feet from all side and rear lot lines, but if 50 feet is not practically feasible, the location shall be established by conditional use. 
b.  The location of the sign must be within 1,250 feet of the centerline of any exit or entrance ramp serving Interstate 90/94 or within 1,250 feet of the centerline between the closest pair of Interstate 90/94 traffic lanes, whichever is greatest. 
c.  The location of the sign shall not be within the front yard of the lot, with preference for the rear or side yard closest to the interstate. 
d.  All businesses located on the sign must be located within the interstate sign area. 
e.  All other signs located on the lot must be in conformance with the regulations of this chapter. 
f.  Interstate signs cannot be a changeable copy sign unless a special exception is granted by the city council as part of the conditional use approval. 
(2)  Electronic message unit (EMU) signs. EMU signs are allowed in the CB, PB, GI, and HI districts with the following regulations: 
a.  The maximum area dedicated to an electronic message unit shall be 50 percent of the sign area or 35 square feet (whichever is larger) per sign face and shall be inclusive of the maximum area permitted for the sign structure. 
(3)  Illumination. 
a.  All signs in the GB, PB, GI, and HI districts may be illuminated (except movable board signs and temporary signs). 
b.  All signs in the CB districts may be illuminated (except movable board signs and temporary signs). 
c.  Light box signs are prohibited in the CB district. 
d.  Flashing elements (except for electronic message unit signs) are prohibited. 
e.  Flashing elements are permitted in the PB district; however, flashing elements that may create a hazard as determined by the zoning administrator are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-260. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  All signs that are in existence as of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived and that do not conform to this section shall be considered as non-conforming and are subject to the requirements of section 114-116 (nonconforming use, structures, and lots). 
(b)  Signs that are legal but non-conforming under this section may not be enlarged, heightened, altered in shape, or moved. The copy on such signs may be altered, but only within the existing area of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-261. - Dangerous and abandoned signs; violations. 
(a)  [Removal.] All signs shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when a business which it advertises has not been conducted for a period of 12 months or when, in the judgment of the building inspector, such sign is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous or unsafe, whichever occurs first. If the owner or lessee fails to remove it, the building inspector may remove the sign at the cost of the owner, following adequate written notice. The owner may appeal the zoning administrator or building inspector's decision to the board of appeals. 
(b)  Alterations. Any sign that was erected before the adoption of this sign article shall not be enlarged, rebuilt or relocated without conforming to all of the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Violations. All signs constructed or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this article are hereby declared public nuisances within the meaning of this Code. In addition to the above penalty provisions for violation of this chapter, the building inspector may bring an action to abate the nuisance in the manner set forth in the state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Secs. 114-262-114-283. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 114-284. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish the procedural requirements for zoning text amendments, zoning map amendments, conditional use review and approval, temporary use review and approval, sign permits, site plan review and approval, certificates of occupancy, variances, zoning provision interpretations by the zoning administrator, and appeals of zoning provision interpretations to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-285. - Amendments to the text of these zoning regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. Subject to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d), the purpose of this section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed amendments to the text of this chapter, except amendments to the official zoning map. 
(b)  Who may initiate a request for amendment of this chapter. Proceedings to amend this chapter may be initiated by any of the following methods: 
(1)  By an application by any member of the general public; 
(2)  By a recommendation of the plan commission; or 
(3)  By action of the common council. 
(c)  Application requirements. All applications from the general public for proposed amendments to this chapter shall be submitted to the zoning administrator or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  Applicant information. Name and address of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer and contractor being used on the project, and the address and tax parcel number for the site. 
(2)  Current text. A copy of the portion of the current provisions of this chapter which are proposed to be amended, with said provisions clearly indicated in a manner which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier. 
(3)  Proposed text. A copy of the text which is proposed to replace the current text. 
(4)  Explanation. Written justification for the proposed text amendment, consisting of the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed text amendment is in harmony with the recommendation of the comprehensive master plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards set out in subsection (e)(5) of this section. 
(d)  Review by zoning administrator. 
(1)  The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall return the application to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall so notify the applicant and forward the application to the plan commission for further action. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall review and evaluate the application and shall comment in writing to the plan commission on the proposed text amendment provided in the application, taking into consideration the review standards of subsection (e)(5) of this section. The zoning administrator's written comments shall be submitted to the plan commission on or before the public hearing described below. A copy thereof shall also be provided to the applicant. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall not refer the application to the plan commission and no one shall place the application on the plan commission agenda until the zoning administrator, or designee, has certified that the application is complete. However, an item may be placed on an agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of the chairperson of the plan commission, even though a completed application has not yet been submitted. 
(e)  Review and recommendation by the plan commission. 
(1)  Submission to plan commission required. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d), no amendment shall be made to this chapter without first allowing for a recommendation from the plan commission. 
(2)  Public hearing. Unless the common council specifically provides otherwise, public hearings on proposed amendments shall be held by the plan commission. The plan commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing, within 45 days after the administrator determines that the application is complete. The applicant may appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. 
(3)  Notice. Notice of the proposed amendment and the public hearing shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d). Said notice shall contain a description of the proposed text change. In addition, at least ten days before said public hearing, the city clerk shall mail an identical notice to the applicant, and to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this chapter. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section. 
(4)  Formal decision. Within 60 days after the public hearing, or within an extension of said period requested in writing by the applicant and granted by the plan commission, the plan commission shall: 
a.  Make a written report to the common council; and/or 
b.  State in the formal minutes of its meeting, its findings and its recommendations regarding the application. 
Said report and/or minutes shall include formal findings of facts developed and approved by the plan commission concerning the standards of subsection (e)(5) of this section. 
(5)  Standards of review. The following issues shall be considered by the plan commission in making its decision: 
a.  Whether the proposed text amendment is in harmony with the recommendations of the comprehensive master plan, with specific reference wherever applicable to the text of the comprehensive plan, and/or whether the comprehensive plan needs to be amended either: 
1.  To change the recommendations of the plan; or 
2.  To promulgate a recommendation which was omitted from the plan. 
b.  Whether the proposed text amendment furthers the purposes of this chapter as outlined in section 114-4 and the article and section in which the amendment is proposed to be located. 
c.  Whether any new, different or unusual factors have arisen that are not properly addressed in the current zoning text. The following are examples of such factors: 
1.  The provisions of this chapter should be brought into conformity with the comprehensive plan. 
2.  A change has occurred in the land market, or other factors have arisen which require a new form of development, a new type of land use, or a new procedure to meet said change; 
3.  New methods of development or providing infrastructure make it necessary to alter this article to meet these new factors; 
4.  Changing governmental operations require amending this chapter in order to meet the needs of the government in terms of providing and affording public services. 
d.  Whether the potential public benefits of the proposed amendment outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed amendment. 
(6)  Failure to act. If the plan commission fails to make a report within 60 days after the filing of said complete application, and in the absence of an applicant-approved extension per subsection (e)(4) of this section, then the common council may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the expiration of said 60 day period. Failure to receive said written report from the plan commission shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the common council. If such a public hearing is necessary, the common council shall provide notice per the requirements of subsection (3) of this section. 
(f)  Review and action by the common council. The common council shall consider the plan commission's recommendation regarding the proposed text amendment. The council may request further information and/or additional reports from the plan commission, zoning administrator, and/or the applicant. The council may conduct one or more meetings on the application before taking final action. The common council may approve the amendment as originally proposed, may approve the proposed amendment with modifications, per the recommendations of the zoning administrator, the plan commission, authorized outside experts, or its own members, or may deny approval of the proposed amendment. If the common council wishes to make significant changes in the proposed text amendment, as recommended by the plan commission, then the procedure set forth in subsection (e) of this section shall again be followed prior to council action. The common council's approval of the requested amendment shall be considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed amendment. 
(g)  Effect of denial. No application which has been denied, in whole or in part, shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, unless the administrator, or designee, first determines that either: 
(1)  Substantial and material new evidence has arisen; or 
(2)  A substantial and material change of circumstances has occurred, regarding an issue which was relevant and significant to the prior decision to deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Zoning amendments, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d). 
Sec. 114-286. - Amendments to the official zoning maps. 
(a)  Purpose. Subject to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d), the purpose of this section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed amendments to the official zoning maps. 
(b)  Who may initiate a request for amendment of the zoning maps. Proceedings to amend the official zoning maps may be initiated by any of the following: 
(1)  By an application by any member of the general public; 
(2)  By a recommendation of the plan commission; or 
(3)  By action of the common council. 
(c)  Application requirements. All applications from the general public for proposed amendments to the map shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  Applicant information. Name and address of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer and contractor being used on the project, and the address and tax parcel number for the site. 
(2)  Ownership map. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the zoning is proposed to be amended, and all other lands within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as they appear on the current tax records of the city. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is not larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and which is at a scale that is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided. 
(3)  Overall map. A map, such as the land use plan map, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the city as a whole. 
(4)  Explanation. Written justification for the proposed map amendment, consisting of the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed map amendment is in harmony with recommendations of the master plan, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards set out in subsection (e)(5) of this section. 
(d)  Review by zoning administrator. 
(1)  The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall return the application to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall so notify applicant and forward the application to the plan commission for further action. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall review and evaluate the application and shall comment in writing to the plan commission on the proposed text amendment provided in the application, taking into consideration the review standards of subsection (e)(5) of this section. The zoning administrator's written comments shall be submitted to the plan commission on or before the public hearing described below. A copy thereof shall also be provided to the applicant. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall not refer the application to the plan commission and no one shall place the application on the plan commission agenda until the zoning administrator, or designee, has certified that the application is complete. However, an item may be placed on an agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of the chairperson of the plan commission, even though a completed application has not yet been submitted. 
(e)  Review and recommendation by the plan commission. 
(1)  Submission to plan commission required. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d), no amendment shall be made to the official zoning map without first allowing for a recommendation from the plan commission. 
(2)  Hearing. Unless the common council specifically provides otherwise, public hearings on proposed amendments shall be held by the plan commission. The plan commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing, within 45 days after the administrator determines that the application is complete. The applicant may appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. 
(3)  Notice. Notice of the hearing shall be given by a class 2 legal notice. The city clerk shall also send an identical written notice of such hearing to the owners of record of all lands situated wholly or partly within 200 feet of the perimeter of the subject property, the applicant, and to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this chapter. Such notice shall be sent by regular mail at least ten days before the date of the public hearing. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section. 
(4)  Formal decision. Within 60 days after the public hearing, or within an extension of said period requested in writing by the applicant and granted by the plan commission, the plan commission shall: 
a.  Make a written report to the common council; and/or 
b.  State in the formal minutes of its meeting, its findings and its recommendations regarding the application. 
Said report and/or minutes shall include formal findings of facts developed and approved by the plan commission concerning the standards of subsection (e)(5) of this section. 
(5)  Standards of review. The following issues shall be considered by the plan commission in making its decision: 
a.  Whether the proposed map amendment is in harmony with the recommendations of the comprehensive master plan, with specific reference wherever applicable to the text of the comprehensive plan, and/or whether the comprehensive plan needs to be amended either: 
1.  To change the recommendations of the plan; or 
2.  To promulgate a recommendation which was omitted from the plan. 
b.  Whether the proposed map amendment furthers the purposes of this Chapter as outlined in section 114-4 and the applicable rules and regulations of the DNR and FEMA. 
c.  Whether any new, different or unusual factors have arisen that are not properly addressed on the current zoning maps. The following are examples of such factors: 
1.  The designation of the map should be brought into conformity with the comprehensive plan; 
2.  A change has occurred in the land market, or other factors have arisen which require a new form of development or a new type of land use; 
3.  A mistake was made in mapping on the official zoning map. If this reason is cited, it must be demonstrated that the discussed inconsistency between actual land use and designated zoning is not intended, as the city may intend to stop an undesirable land use pattern from spreading; 
4.  Factors have changed, such as the availability of new data, the presence of new roads or other infrastructure, additional development, annexation, or other zoning changes, making the subject property more appropriate for a different zoning district; 
5.  Growth patterns or rates have changed, thereby creating the need for an amendment to the official zoning map. 
d.  Whether the proposed amendment to the official zoning map maintains the desired consistency of land uses, land use intensities, and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject property. 
e.  Whether the potential public benefits of the proposed amendment outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed amendment. 
(6)  Failure to act. If the plan commission fails to make a report within 60 days after the filing of said complete application, and in the absence of an applicant-approved extension, then the common council may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the expiration of said 60-day period. Failure to receive said written report from the plan commission per subsection (e)(2) of this section shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the common council. If such a public hearing is necessary, the common council shall provide notice per the requirements of subsection (e)(3) of this section. 
(f)  Review and action by the common council. The common council shall consider the plan commission's recommendation regarding the proposed amendment to the official zoning map. The council may request further information and/or additional reports from the plan commission, the zoning administrator, and/or the applicant. The council may conduct one or more meetings on the application before taking final action. The common council may approve the amendment as originally proposed, may approve the proposed amendment with modifications, per the recommendations of the zoning administrator, the plan commission, authorized outside experts, or its own members, or may deny approval of the proposed amendment. If the common council wishes to make significant changes in the proposed text amendment, as recommended by the plan commission, then the procedure set forth in subsection (e)(5) of this section shall again be followed prior to council action. The common council's approval of the requested amendment shall be considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed amendment. 
(g)  Effect of denial. No application which has been denied, in whole or in part, shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, unless the administrator first determines that either: 
(1)  Substantial and material new evidence has arisen; or 
(2)  A substantial and material change of circumstances has occurred, regarding an issue which was relevant and significant to the prior decision to deny the application. 
(h)  Floodland district boundary changes limited. The common council shall not permit changes to the floodland district boundaries that are inconsistent with the purpose and intent of chapter 104 or 110 or in conflict with the applicable rules and regulations of the DNR and FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Zoning amendments, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d). 
Sec. 114-287. - Zoning permits for permitted uses. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of requests for zoning permits. 
(b)  General requirement. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the city before any building or structure is located, relocated, built, erected, enlarged, moved, reconstructed, altered, or extended, or before the use of any building, structure or property is commenced, changed or altered. Permits for uses authorized only by conditional use shall be issued pursuant to the procedures of section 114-288. Permits for temporary uses shall be issued pursuant to the procedures of section 114-289. Permits for signs shall be issued pursuant to the procedures of section 114-290. All other zoning permits shall be issued pursuant to the following procedures. 
(c)  Application requirements. All applications for permits shall be submitted to the zoning administrator or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  Applicant information. Name and address of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer, developer and contractor being used on the project. 
(2)  Property information. Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; tax parcel number for the site; type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies. 
(3)  Survey. Plat of survey, and a reduced map not larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state, or at the zoning administrator's discretion, a scaled drawing, showing the location, boundaries, dimensions, uses and size of the following: subject site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements; streets and other public ways; off-street parking, loading areas, and driveways; existing highway access restrictions; high water, channel floodway, and floodplain boundaries; and existing and proposed street, side, and rear yards. 
(4)  Other. Additional information as may be required by the zoning administrator. 
(d)  Review by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, or if (s)he determines that additional information is needed to determine compliance with this chapter, (s)he shall provide the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall review the application and shall render a written decision. 
(e)  Decision. 
(1)  A zoning permit shall be granted or denied, in writing, by the zoning administrator within 30 days of either: 
a.  The filing of a complete application; or 
b.  The filing of additional information requested by the zoning administrator; whichever is later. 
(2)  In making a decision, the zoning administrator may seek input from other city staff, consultants, and/or the plan commission before rendering a decision. If a decision is not rendered by the city within said 30-day period, the application shall be deemed to have been denied, and the applicant may either re-apply or appeal the denial to the board of appeals. 
(f)  Posting. The applicant shall post such permit in a conspicuous place at the site while performing any work under the permit. 
(g)  Expiration. The permit shall expire within four months after issuance unless work equal to ten percent of the dollar amount of the project has been completed, and the permit shall expire within 18 months after issuance if the structure for which a permit issued is not 75 percent completed as measured by the dollar amount of the project. Once a permit has expired, the applicant shall re-apply for a zoning permit before recommencing work on the structure. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of the chapter shall be null and void. 
(h)  Termination of an approved permit. Any zoning permit found not to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties. A zoning permit may be revoked for such a violation by majority vote of the plan commission, following notice to the landowner and following a hearing before the plan commission. Furthermore, at any time after approval of a zoning permit, upon request by the plan commission, the applicant must appear before the plan commission at a time and date set by the commission, and the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the plan commission that the applicant has met all general and specific requirements of the zoning permit and this chapter for the subject property. 
(i)  Effect on other permits. Once a zoning permit is granted, no other permits, e.g., erosion control permit, site plan approval, certificate of occupancy, driveway permit, sewer/water hook-up permit, building permit, etc., shall be issued for any development which does not comply with all requirements of the granted zoning permit and this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-288. - Zoning permits for conditional uses. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed conditional uses, including limited conditional uses. 
(b)  Limited conditional uses. Limited conditional uses are the same as regular conditional uses except that limited conditional uses are not permanent, but instead, they are limited in time or duration because of: 
(1)  Their particularly specialized nature; 
(2)  Their particular locations within a district; 
(3)  The peculiar unique relationships or needed compatibility of uses to involved individuals; or 
(4)  Any other reason the plan commission deems specially relevant and material to limit the scope thereof. 
(c)  Initiation of request for approval of a conditional use. 
(1)  Who may apply. Proceedings for approval of a site plan shall be initiated by application of the owner of the subject property, or their legally authorized representative. 
(2)  Pre-application meeting. Before submitting an application, the applicant may first meet with the zoning administrator and/or other designated city staff to discuss preliminary concepts and plans for the development. Guidance will be provided to the applicant on technical requirements and procedures, and a timetable for project review may be discussed. 
(3)  Exceptions to procedure. The zoning administrator may waive compliance with some of the following application requirements once the committee learns of the nature and extent of the proposed project. Any such waiver shall be in writing, and may be revoked or amended at any time, for any reason, by the committee or by the plan commission. 
(d)  Application requirements. All applications for proposed conditional uses shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  Applicant information. Name and address of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer, developer and contractor being used on the project, and the address and tax parcel number for the site. 
(2)  Ownership map. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the conditional use is proposed, and all other lands within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the city tax records. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided. 
(3)  Overview map. A map, such as the land use plan map, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the city as a whole. 
(4)  Description of proposed uses. A written description of the proposed conditional use describing the type of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the subject property and their general locations. 
(5)  Site plan. A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development. Said site plan shall conform to any and all the requirements of section 114-291(c). If the proposed conditional use is a group development, per section 114-130, a proposed preliminary plat or conceptual plat may be substituted for the required site plan, provided said plat contains all information required on said site plan per section 114-291(c). 
(6)  Explanation. Written justification for the proposed conditional use consisting of the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed conditional use is appropriate, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standards set forth in subsection (f)(5) of this section. 
(e)  Review and action by the plan commission. 
(1)  The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, as may be amended pursuant to subsection (c)(3) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, he shall return the application to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does fulfill the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, he shall so notify applicant and forward the application for further action. 
(2)  Referral to plan commission. Once the application is referred to the plan commission, the commission may request further information and/or additional reports from the zoning administrator, the applicant, and/or from any other source. The plan commission shall take final action on the application pursuant to the following procedure. 
(3)  Public hearing. The plan commission shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing, within 45 days after the administrator determines that the application is complete. The applicant may appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. 
(4)  Notice. Notice of an application for a conditional use and the public hearing thereon shall be given as follows. A class 1 notice, under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, shall be published containing: 
a.  A description of the subject property; 
b.  A description of the proposed use; 
c.  The identity of the owner of the subject property; 
d.  The identity of the applicant and any intended future owner, if different from the current owner and applicant; and 
e.  The date and location of the public hearing. In addition, at least ten days before said public hearing, the city clerk shall mail an identical notice to the applicant and to all property owners within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject property as identified in subsection (d)(2) of this section. Failure to mail said notice or failure to meet the time requirements herein, provided it is unintentional and provided substantial compliance has occurred, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section. 
(5)  Formal decision. Within 60 days after the public hearing, or within an extension of said period requested in writing by the applicant and granted by the plan commission, the plan commission shall issue a decision either: 
a.  In the form of a written resolution; and/or 
b.  In the formal minutes of its meeting. Its decision shall include formal findings of facts concerning the standards of subsection (f)(5) of this section. 
In making its decision the plan commission may: 
a.  Approve the conditional use as originally proposed; 
b.  Approve the proposed conditional use with such modifications and conditions as it deems necessary and appropriate after consideration of the standards of review set forth below and consideration of the recommendations of the zoning administrator, outside experts, its own members, and any other source; or 
c.  Deny approval of the proposed conditional use. The plan commission's approval of the proposed conditional use shall be considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed conditional use. 
(6)  Standard of review. The following issues shall be considered and addressed by the plan commission in making its decision: 
a.  In making a determination on an application for a conditional use, the commission shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter, including standards for specific requirements for certain land uses and activities. 
b.  The commission shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  Compatibility. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development within 300 feet of the proposed use and within 500 feet along the same street and development anticipated in the foreseeable future within the neighborhood and conditions that would make the use more compatible. 
2.  Consistency with comprehensive plan. The relationship of the proposed use to the objectives of the city comprehensive plan. 
3.  Importance of services to the community. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community, if any, and the requirements of the facility for certain locations, if any, and without undue inconvenience to the developer, and the availability of alternative locations equally suitable. 
4.  Neighborhood protections. The sufficiency of the terms and conditions proposed to protect and maintain the uses in the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.  Conformance with other requirements of this chapter. The conformance of the proposed development with all provisions of this chapter. 
6.  Other factors. Other factors pertinent to the proposed use, site conditions, or surrounding area considerations that the commission feels are necessary for review in order to make an informed and just decision. 
(g)  Effect of denial. No application which has been denied, in whole or in part, shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, unless the zoning administrator first determines that either: 
(1)  Substantial and material new evidence has arisen; or 
(2)  A substantial and material change of circumstances has occurred, regarding an issue which was relevant and significant to the prior decision to deny the application. 
(h)  Effect of approval. Except for conditional use approvals for temporary uses, a certified copy of the authorizing resolution, containing a legal description of the property subject to the conditional use and containing any specific requirements of approval, shall be recorded by the city with the register of deeds office. Also, the zoning administrator shall issue a zoning permit, with a copy of the authorizing resolution attached, to the applicant. 
(i)  Effect on other permits. Once a conditional use is granted, no other permits, e.g., erosion control permit, site plan approval, certificate of occupancy, driveway permit, sewer/water hook-up permit, building permit, etc., shall be issued for any development which does not comply with all requirements of the granted conditional use and this chapter. 
(j)  Time limits on the development of conditional use. The start of construction of any and all conditional uses shall be initiated within 365 days of their approval by the plan commission and shall be operational within 730 days of said approval, unless a different deadline is established by the terms of the conditional use. Failure to initiate development within this period shall automatically constitute a revocation of the conditional use. For the purposes of this section, the term "operational" shall be defined as the granting of a certificate of occupancy for the conditional use. Prior to such a revocation, the applicant may request an extension of this period. Said request shall require formal approval by the plan commission and shall be based upon a showing of acceptable justification, as determined by the plan commission. 
(k)  Discontinuing an approved conditional use. Any and all conditional uses which have been discontinued for a period exceeding 365 days shall have their conditional use invalidated automatically. The burden of proof shall be on the property owner to conclusively demonstrate that the subject conditional use was operational during this period. 
(l)  Change of ownership. All requirements of the approved conditional use shall be continued regardless of ownership of the subject property. Modification, alteration, or expansion of any approved conditional use, without approval by the plan commission, shall be considered a violation of this chapter and shall be grounds for revocation of said conditional use approval. 
(m)  Termination of an approved conditional use. Any conditional use found not to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties. A conditional use may be revoked for such a violation by majority vote of the plan commission, following the procedures outlined in subsections (c) through (g) of this section. Furthermore, at any time after approval of a conditional use, upon request by the plan commission, the applicant must appear before the plan commission at a time and date set by the commission and the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the plan commission that the applicant has met all general and specific conditional use requirements for the subject property. 
(n)  Notice to the DNR. The plan commission shall transmit a copy of each application for a conditional use for conservancy regulations in the shoreland-wetland, floodway, floodplain conservancy, or floodway fringe overlay zoning districts to the state department of natural resources (DNR) for review and comment at least ten days prior to any public hearings. Final action on the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions relating to conditional uses for shoreland-wetland conservancy regulations or to floodland regulations shall be transmitted to the DNR within ten days of the date of such decision. 
(o)  Uses now regulated as conditional uses which were approved as legal land uses permitted by right or as conditional uses prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. A use now regulated as a conditional use which was approved as a legal land use, either permitted by right or as a conditional use prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be considered as a legal, conforming land use so long as the previously approved conditions of use and site plan are followed. Any modification of the previously approved conditions of use or site plan shall require submission of a new application for a conditional use pursuant to the foregoing procedures. 
(p)  Minor changes. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the zoning administrator, with the consent of either the city administrator or the DPW, is authorized to approve minor variations and minor changes to any previously-granted conditional use, without compliance with the notice and public hearing procedures of subsection (f) of this section, provided: 
(1)  The variations do not violate any of the minimum standards of this chapter; and 
(2)  The spirit and intent of the original conditional use is preserved. 
All such variations shall be approved in writing and, whenever the variation changes any term or condition of a written resolution previously recorded with the register of deeds, the variation shall also be recorded. 
(3)  Rationale. The intent of this section is to avoid the expensive and time-consuming process of a public hearing and public notice whenever a minor change is needed on a site plan or a conditional use. During construction, problems often arise which require minor changes to site plans or conditional uses. It is expensive, time-consuming, unnecessary and wasteful for the applicant and the plan commission to go through the whole conditional use process just to approve a minor change. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-289. - Zoning permits for temporary uses. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to provide regulations that govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed temporary uses. 
(2)  Temporary uses are those uses that have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties if allowed to develop simply under the general requirements of this chapter. In addition to such potential, temporary uses also have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties that potentially cannot be determined except on a case-by-case basis. In order to prevent this from occurring, all temporary uses are required to meet certain procedural requirements applicable only to temporary uses, in addition to the general requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
(3)  Land uses which fail to meet one of the requirements for temporary uses of section 114-129 may be reviewed as a conditional use. 
(b)  General requirement. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a temporary use permit shall be obtained from the city before any temporary use is located, relocated, built, erected, enlarged, moved, reconstructed, altered, or commenced. No public hearing is required to develop a temporary use, however, a demonstration that the developer proposes to meet all temporary use requirements of this chapter must be made at the time of application. Furthermore, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development that does not comply with all requirements of this chapter. Any temporary use found not to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this Code and shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties. 
(c)  Application requirements. All applications for proposed temporary uses shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  Applicant information. Name and address of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer and contractor being used on the project, and the address and tax parcel number for the site. 
(2)  Site map. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the temporary use is proposed, and all other lands within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided. 
(3)  Area map. A map, such as the land use plan map, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the city as a whole. 
(4)  Description. A written description of the proposed temporary use describing the type of activities, buildings, and structures proposed for the subject property and their general locations. 
(5)  Site plan. The zoning administrator may require a full or partial site plan of the subject property. If required, said site plan shall conform to any and all the requirements of section 114-291(c) as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(d)  Review by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, or if he determines that additional information is needed to determine compliance with this chapter, he shall return the application to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall review the application and shall render a written decision. 
(e)  Decision. 
(1)  A temporary use permit shall be granted or denied, in writing, by the zoning administrator within 30 days of either: 
a.  The filing of a complete application; or 
b.  The filing of additional information requested by the zoning administrator; whichever is later. 
(2)  In making a decision, the zoning administrator may seek input from other city staff, consultants, the and/or the plan commission before rendering a decision. If a decision is not rendered by the city within said 30-day period, the application shall be deemed to have been denied, and the applicant may either re-apply or appeal the denial to the board of appeals. 
(f)  Posting. The applicant shall post such permit in a conspicuous place at the site while performing any work under the permit. 
(g)  Expiration. The temporary use permit shall expire within four months after issuance unless work equal to ten percent of the dollar amount of the project has been completed, and the permit shall expire within six months after issuance if the use for which a permit issued is not 75 percent completed as measured by the dollar amount of the project. Once a permit has expired, the applicant shall reapply for a zoning permit before recommencing work on the use. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of the chapter shall be null and void. 
(h)  Termination of an approved permit. Any temporary use permit found not to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties. A zoning permit may be revoked for such a violation by the zoning administrator, following notice to the landowner. Furthermore, at any time after approval of a temporary use permit, upon request by the zoning administrator or the plan commission, the applicant must appear before the zoning administrator or plan commission at a time and date set by the administrator or commission, and the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the administrator or plan commission that the applicant has met all general and specific requirements of the permit and this chapter for the subject property. 
(i)  Effect on other permits. Once a temporary use permit is granted, no other permit, e.g., erosion control permit, site plan approval, certificate of occupancy, driveway permit, sewer/water hook-up permit, building permit, etc., shall be issued for any development which is inconsistent with the granted temporary use permit and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-290. - Sign permits. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations that govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of a permit for the erection, alteration or relocation of signs. 
(b)  General requirement. Unless specifically exempted by article VII of this chapter, no sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived until a sign permit has been issued therefore by the city. 
(c)  Application requirements. All applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. The applicant may include all signs on one premise under one application and one permit. A complete application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and the owner of the lot upon which the sign will be located, if different from the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the proposed sign owner, if different from the applicant. 
(3)  The name and address of the architect, professional engineer and contractor being used on the project. 
(4)  A legible, colored, scaled drawing of each proposed sign, listing the height, width, total square footage, method of attachment, and method of illumination of each proposed sign, and also listing the materials to be used in making, erecting and attaching the sign. 
(5)  A legible, scaled drawing of the subject lot showing: 
a.  The location of each proposed sign's proposed location on the building and lot; 
b.  The location of each existing sign's current location on the building and lot; 
c.  The location of all overlay zoning district boundaries, as per article III of this chapter, on the lot; 
d.  The location of all rights-of-way, easements, driveways, parking areas and drainage facilities on the lot. 
(6)  The subject property's standard zoning district designation, as per article II of this chapter. 
(7)  The sign purpose of each proposed sign, as per section 114-257(c). 
(8)  The sign type of each proposed sign, as per section 114-257(d). 
(9)  The total area of all signs on the subject property, both before and after the installation of the proposed sign. 
(10)  Written proof of consent from the property owner upon which the sign is to be erected and maintained. Not required if the applicant is the property owner. 
(11)  Proof of payment of the appropriate sign permit fee, when required. 
(12)  Any other item of information that may be reasonably required by the zoning administrator or plan commission for the purpose of application evaluation, including, but not limited to, a site plan for the subject property, per section 114-291(c). 
(d)  Review by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, or if (s)he determines that additional information is needed to determine compliance with this chapter, (s)he shall return the application to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, (s)he shall review the application and shall render a written decision. 
(e)  Basis for granting. In reviewing a sign permit application, the zoning administrator shall consider the following factors in deciding whether or not to grant the issuance of a sign permit: 
(1)  Whether the sign is compatible with the surroundings, pursuant to the objectives of proper design and zoning criteria. 
(2)  Whether the sign is designed, installed, and maintained to meet the sign users' needs while at the same time promoting the surrounding environment desired by the general public. 
(3)  Whether the sign is designed, constructed, installed, or maintained in such a manner that it does not endanger public safety or traffic safety. 
(4)  Whether the sign is legible, readable, and visible in the circumstances in which it is to be used. 
(5)  Whether the sign, including size, height, illumination and location, is respectful of reasonable rights of other advertisers whose messages are displayed in the area. 
(6)  Whether the sign is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and in compliance with the provisions of the city general ordinances relating to traffic safety, traffic visibility setbacks, and this chapter. 
(f)  Decision. 
(1)  A sign permit shall be granted or denied, in writing, by the zoning administrator within 30 days of either: 
a.  The filing of a complete application; or 
b.  The filing of additional information requested by the zoning administrator; whichever is later. 
(2)  If a decision is not rendered by the city within said 30-day period, the application shall be deemed to have been denied, and the applicant may either re-apply or appeal the denial to the board of appeals. 
(g)  Posting. The applicant shall post such permit in a conspicuous place at the site while performing any work under the permit. 
(h)  Illegal signs and void permits. Any sign found not to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties. No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate an unlawful sign. 
(i)  Revocation of permit. 
(1)  Noncompliance. Upon class I notice and after a public hearing conducted by the plan commission, any permit may be revoked by the plan commission in the event that the applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of these regulations or any conditions that may have accompanied the permit at the time of granting. 
(2)  Installation delay. Any sign permit issued by the zoning administrator shall be null and void and automatically revoked in the event that installation of the sign has not been commenced within 180 days from the date of issuance of the permit, and if the sign has not been completed within 240 days from the date of issuance of the permit. If work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days any time after the work is commenced, the original permit shall become null and void. A new permit shall first be obtained to complete the work, and a new permit fee shall be required. 
(3)  Removal. Upon revocation of a permit, the sign subject to such revoked permit, whether freestanding, overhanging or projecting, shall be removed by the permittee within 45 days of such revocation. 
(4)  Fee refund. Revocation shall not entitle the licensee to a total or partial reimbursement of license fees paid. 
(j)  Effect on other permits. Once a sign permit is granted, no other permit, e.g., erosion control permit, site plan approval, certificate of occupancy, driveway permit, sewer/water hook-up permit, building permit, etc., shall be issued for any development which is inconsistent with the granted sign permit and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-291. - Site plan approvals. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to specify the requirements and procedures for the review and approval of site plan applications. The provisions of this section are designed to ensure that proposed land use and development activities comply with the requirements of this chapter. Specifically, this section requires that the initiation of all development activity for principal structures of nonresidential and multifamily residential developments, including building permits, zoning certificates, occupancy permits for a change of use of an existing lot or structure where there is a site plan revision, clear cutting, grading or filling, require the approval of site, building and operational plans by the plan commission before the building, occupancy, and zoning permits can be issued. However, development activity associated with an approved final plat of subdivision or certified survey map for single-family and/or duplex/twin home dwelling units, and development activity associated with the full and complete implementation of a project approved within the PIP phase of the planned unit development district (PD) is exempt from this requirement. 
(b)  Initiation of request for approval of a site plan. 
(1)  Who may apply. Proceedings for approval of a site plan shall be initiated by application of the owner of the subject property, or their legally authorized representative. 
(2)  Pre-application meeting. Before submitting an application, the applicant may first meet with the zoning administrator and/or other designated city staff to discuss preliminary concepts and plans for the development. Guidance will be provided to the applicant on technical requirements and procedures, and a timetable for project review may be discussed. 
(3)  Exceptions to procedure. The zoning administrator may waive compliance with some of the following application requirements once the committee learns of the nature and extent of the proposed project. Any such waiver shall be in writing, and may be revoked or amended at any time, for any reason, by the committee or by the plan commission. 
(c)  Application requirements. All applications for approval of proposed site plans shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. A complete site plan application shall contain the following: 
(1)  Applicant information. Name and address of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer and contractor being used on the project, and the address and tax parcel number for the site. 
(2)  Written description of the intended use describing in reasonable detail the following. 
a.  Existing zoning district and proposed zoning district if different; 
b.  Land use plan map designation; 
c.  Site evaluation worksheet; 
d.  Projected number of residents, employees, and/or daily customers; 
e.  Proposed amount of dwelling units, floor area, impervious surface area, and landscape surface area, and resulting site density, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio, and landscape surface area ratio; 
f.  Operational considerations relating to hours of operation, projected normal and peak water usage, sanitary sewer or septic loadings, and traffic generation; 
g.  Operational considerations relating to potential nuisance creation pertaining to noncompliance with the performance standards addressed in article V of this chapter including street access, traffic visibility, parking, loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air pollution, odor, electromagnetic radiation, glare and heat, fire and explosion, toxic or noxious materials, waste materials, drainage, and hazardous materials. 
h.  Exterior building and fencing materials; 
i.  Possible future expansion and related implications; and 
j.  Any other information pertinent to adequate understanding by the plan commission of the intended use and its relation to nearby properties. 
(3)  Location map at 11 inches by 17 inches showing the subject property and illustrating its relationship to the nearest street intersection. A photocopy of the pertinent section of the city's land use plan map with the subject property clearly indicated shall suffice to meet this requirement. 
(4)  Property site plan drawing and reduction at 11 inches by 17 inches which includes: 
a.  A title block which indicates the name, address and phone/fax number of the current property owner and/or agent (developer, architect, engineer, planner) for the project; 
b.  The date of the original plan and the latest date of revision to the plan; 
c.  A north arrow and a graphic scale. Said scale shall not be smaller than one inch equals 100 feet; 
d.  A legal description of the subject property; 
e.  All property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines with bearings and dimensions clearly labeled; 
f.  All existing and proposed easement lines and dimensions with a key provided and explained on the margins of the plan as to ownership and purpose; 
g.  All required building setback lines; 
h.  All existing and proposed buildings, structures, and paved areas, including building entrances, walks, drives, decks, patios, fences, utility poles, drainage facilities, and walls; 
i.  The location and dimension (cross section and entry throat) of all access points onto public streets; 
j.  The location and dimension of all on-site parking including a summary of the number of parking stalls provided; 
k.  The location and dimension of all loading and service areas on the subject property and labels indicating the dimension of such areas; 
l.  The location of all outdoor storage areas and screening devices; 
m.  The location, type, height, size and lighting of all signage on the subject property; 
n.  The location, height, design/type, illumination power and orientation of all exterior lighting on the subject property; 
o.  The location and type of any permanently protected green space areas; 
p.  The location of existing and proposed drainage facilities; and 
q.  In the legend, data for the subject property: 
1.  Lot area; 
2.  Floor area; 
3.  Floor area ratio; 
4.  Impervious surface area; 
5.  Building coverage; 
6.  Building height. 
(5)  Detailed landscaping plan of the subject property, at the same scale as the main plan and reduction at 11 inches by 17 inches, showing the location of all required bufferyard and landscaping areas, and existing and proposed landscape point fencing and berm options for meeting said requirements. 
(6)  Grading and erosion control plan at the same scale as the main plan and reduction at 11 inches by 17 inches showing existing and proposed grades, including retention walls and related devices, and erosion control measures per the approval of the city engineer. 
(7)  Elevation drawings of proposed buildings or proposed remodeling of existing buildings showing finished exterior treatment shall also be submitted, with adequate labels provided to clearly depict exterior materials, texture, color and overall appearance. Perspective renderings of the proposed project and/or photos of similar structures may be submitted, but not in lieu of adequate drawings showing the actual intended appearance of the buildings. 
(8)  Certified survey may be required in instances where the administrator or the plan commission determines that compliance with setback requirements may be difficult. The survey shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall depict property lines and proposed buildings, structures, and paved areas. 
(9)  Detailed site analysis map is required if the proposed site has any natural resource protection areas (RPA). If so, the following submission and review process is to be followed: 
a.  Purpose. The detailed site analysis required by this chapter is designed to provide the clear identification of RPAs on a site which is proposed for development. The detailed survey work required to identify these areas accurately on a map is not required prior to the initiation of development concept plans for an area. A detailed site analysis shall be performed in conjunction with required land division documents or development site plans for any and all properties containing RPA's. 
b.  Exceptions to procedure. The zoning administrator may waive compliance with some of the following requirements once the committee learns of the nature and extent of the proposed project. Any such waiver shall be in writing, and may be revoked or amended at any time, for any reason, by the committee or by the plan commission. 
c.  Description. The detailed site analysis shall be shown on a map of the subject property which depicts the location of all protected natural resource areas, as defined by the provisions of this chapter. The detailed site analysis shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Scale. A minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet shall be used. 
2.  Topography. Topographic information is not required for any property which does not contain steep slopes as designated on the official zoning map. For such properties, topographic information with a minimum contour interval of two feet is required. 
3.  Specific natural resource areas. All natural resource areas which require protection under the provisions of this chapter shall be accurately outlined and clearly labeled. Particular care as to clarity shall be taken in areas where different resource types overlap with one another. 
4.  Development pads. All site disruption, including selective cutting, proposed to occur within permanently protected natural resource areas shall be limited to development pads. Development pads shall be depicted on the detailed site analysis map, site plans required for development permits, and the recorded plat of subdivision or certified survey map. 
5.  Mitigation areas. All mitigation areas related to the provisions of this chapter shall be depicted on the detailed site map with notations provided which describe the mitigation techniques employed. 
(d)  Required procedure for submission and review. 
(1)  Required timing of submission. The detailed site analysis map shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for initial review prior to, or concurrently with, the submission of the preliminary plat of subdivision or the certified survey map; or if the proposed development does not involve a land division then submittal is required as an attachment to a required site plan. A concept plan of the proposed development may be submitted prior to the submission of the detailed site analysis map; however, in no way does the acceptance and/or general approval of a concept plan indicate the approval of natural resource feature locations. A detailed site analysis map prepared for the subject property which has been previously approved by city staff may be submitted for any subsequent development activity on the site. However, modifications to such a previously approved map will be required if the analysis is no longer accurate for the subject property. 
(2)  Review by city staff. City staff shall review the submitted detailed site analysis map for compliance. 
(3)  Response from city staff. The zoning administrator shall provide the petitioner with a written evaluation of the submitted detailed site analysis map which shall indicate the acceptance by city staff; or the need for further analysis work, for discussion with the petitioner and/or staff-recognized experts, or for a joint site visit. 
(4)  Modification of detailed site analysis map. If necessary, as determined by city staff, revised detailed site analysis maps shall be prepared and submitted for review by city staff, until a version is deemed acceptable. Staff review of the detailed site analysis may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals as a matter of ordinance interpretation. 
(5)  Acceptance of detailed site analysis map. Upon notification of acceptance by city staff, or, in case of appeal, by determination of the board of zoning appeals, the petitioner may proceed with the submittal of necessary development documents. 
(e)  Integration of detailed site analysis information with required development and/or land division. Information contained on the detailed site analysis map relating to the boundaries of permanently protected green space areas, including natural resource protection areas, other permanently protected green space areas, and required mitigation areas, shall be clearly depicted on any and all site plans required as a precondition for application for any development permit and on any proposed plat of subdivision or certified survey map. 
(f)  Review by zoning administrator. The application shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator, or designee, as follows: 
(1)  The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall return the application to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall so notify applicant. 
(2)  Until the zoning administrator, or designee, has certified that the application is complete, the application shall not be referred to the plan commission. However, an item may be placed on the agenda as a discussion-only item, with the permission of the chairperson of the plan commission, even though a completed application has not yet been submitted and even though the site plan has not yet been reviewed by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  If the zoning administrator determines that the application is complete, the zoning administrator shall review the application, shall evaluate and comment on the site plan, taking into consideration the appropriate review standards, and shall work with the applicant to revise and improve the site plan, where necessary in the discretion of the committee, to obtain the best possible project, consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(g)  Review by the plan commission. 
(1)  The plan commission committee shall review the application, shall evaluate and comment on the site plan, taking into consideration the appropriate review standards, and shall work with the applicant to revise and improve the site plan, where necessary in the discretion of the plan commission, to obtain the best possible project, consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(2)  Referral to plan commission. Once the application is referred to the plan commission, the commission may request further information and/or additional reports from the zoning administrator, the applicant, expert consultants and/or from any other source. The plan commission shall take final action on the application pursuant to the following procedure. 
(3)  Formal decision. Within 60 days after referral to the plan commission, or within an extension of said period requested in writing by the applicant and granted by the plan commission, the plan commission shall issue a decision either: 
a.  In the form of a written resolution; and/or 
b.  In the form of written minutes of its meeting. 
Its decision shall include formal findings of fact concerning the standards of subsection (g)(4) of this section. In making its decision the plan commission may: 
a.  Approve the site plan as originally proposed; 
b.  Approve the site plan with such modifications and/or conditions as it deems necessary and appropriate after consideration of the standards of review set forth below and consideration of the recommendations of the zoning administrator, outside experts, its own members, and any other source; or 
c.  Deny approval of the site plan. 
If additional modifications and/or conditions are required, the plan commission may withhold approval of the site plan until revisions depicting such additional modifications and/or conditions are submitted to the satisfaction of the plan commission, or its designee. Such modifications and/or conditions shall be made a part of the official record, and development activity on the subject property may not proceed until the revised site plan has been prepared, submitted and approved by the plan commission or its designee. The plan commission's approval of the site plan shall be considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed site plan. 
(4)  Standard of review. In reviewing the site plan the plan commission shall make findings on each of the following criteria to determine whether the submitted site plan shall be approved, approved with modifications and/or conditions, or denied: 
a.  Whether all standards of the zoning ordinance and other applicable city, state and federal regulations are met. 
b.  Whether the public health and safety is endangered. 
c.  Whether adequate public facilities and utilities are provided. 
d.  Whether adequate control of stormwater and erosion are provided, and the disruption of existing drainage patterns and vegetative cover is minimized insofar as is practical. 
e.  Whether appropriate traffic controls and parking are provided. 
f.  Whether appropriate landscaping and open space areas are provided. 
g.  Whether the appearance of structures maintains a consistency of design, materials, colors, and arrangement with nearby properties of similar use, which comply with the general architectural guidelines provided in subsections (h)(3)g.1 through 5 of this section. 
1.  Exterior construction materials shall be consistent with section 114-69. 
2.  Exterior building design or appearance shall not be of such unorthodox or abnormal character in relation to its surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive to generally accepted taste and community standards. 
3.  Exterior building design or appearance shall not be so identical with nearby buildings so as to create excessive monotony or drabness. 
4.  Exterior building design or appearance shall not be constructed or faced with an exterior material which is aesthetically incompatible with other nearby buildings or which presents an unattractive appearance to the public and surrounding properties. 
5.  Exterior building, sign, and lighting design or appearance shall not be sited on the property in a manner which would unnecessarily destroy or substantially damage the natural beauty of the area. 
6.  The basic intent of the zoning ordinance is fulfilled to ensure attractive, efficient, and appropriate development of land in the community. 
h.  Whether reasonable steps have been taken to avoid depreciating effects on surrounding property and the natural environment. 
(i)  Initiation of land use or development activity. Except with the written permission of the zoning administrator, absolutely no land use or development activity, including site clearing, grubbing, or grading, shall occur on the subject property prior to the approval of the required site plan. Any such activity prior to such approval shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to all applicable enforcement mechanisms and penalties. Any permission granted by the zoning administrator shall not be interpreted or construed, directly or indirectly, as an approval of the proposed development by the plan commission. Moreover, any permission granted by the zoning administrator can be revoked or modified by the zoning administrator or the plan commission at any time prior to final approval by the plan commission of the development. 
(j)  Modification of an approved site plan. Any and all variations between development and/or land use activity on the subject property and the approved site plan is a violation of this chapter. An approved site plan shall be revised and approved via the procedures of this section, so as to clearly and completely depict any and all proposed modifications to the previously approved site plan, prior to the initiation of said modifications. 
(k)  Sunset clause. All buildings and structures approved on a site plan shall be fully developed within two years of final approval of the site plan, unless a different date is established by the plan commission in writing. After the expiration of such period, no additional site plan development shall be permitted on undeveloped portions of the subject property. The plan commission may extend this period, as requested by the applicant, through the conditional use process following a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-292. - Zoning certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations governing the review and approval of zoning certificates of occupancy. This procedure is required to verify that completed development has complied with the approved site plan per the requirements of section 114-291, and the requirements of this chapter as a whole. 
(b)  Land uses and development requiring a certificate of occupancy. Zoning certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
(2)  New occupancy and/or new use of an existing building when the new use is of a different land use classification. 
(3)  Occupancy and use of vacant land. 
(4)  New use of vacant land when the new use is of a different land use classification. 
(5)  Any change in the use of a nonconforming use. No such occupancy, use or change of use shall take place until a zoning certificate of occupancy therefore has been issued by the zoning administrator, or designee. 
(c)  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Application. All applications for zoning certificates of occupancy shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application shall contain the name and address of the applicant and the property owner, and the address and tax parcel number of the site. 
(2)  Exemptions from application. Every application for a zoning permit, conditional use permit, or building permit shall also be deemed to be an application for a zoning certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be substantially altered or enlarged as determined by the zoning administrator. A separate application is not needed. 
(3)  When issued. If the work has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, a written zoning certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten working days after either: 
a.  The application therefore has been made; or 
b.  Notice is given to the city that the work authorized by a zoning permit, conditional use permit or building permit has been completed and the property is ready for final zoning inspection. 
(4)  Records. Every zoning certificate of occupancy shall state that both: 
a.  The building; and 
b.  The proposed use of a building or land; substantially complies with all provisions of this chapter. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
(5)  Certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses. Upon application, a zoning certificate of occupancy shall be issued for all nonconforming uses of land or buildings, created by adoption of this chapter or in existence at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Any application for a certificate for a nonconforming use, filed with the zoning administrator more than one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall require the applicant to prove, by clear and convincing evidence, that the use currently being made of the property is the same use of the property that was occurring on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to investigate and issue certificates of occupancy for a nonconforming use. 
(6)  Termination of a certificate of occupancy. It shall constitute a violation of this chapter for any person or other entity to do any of the things mentioned in subsection (b) of this section without having first obtained a zoning certificate of occupancy. Any certificate issued upon a false statement of any fact which is material to the issuance thereof shall be void. Whenever the fact of such false statement shall be established to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, he shall forthwith revoke the certificate, by notice in writing to be delivered by him to the holder of the void certificate upon the premises where the violation has occurred, or if such holder be not found there, by mailing the said notice of revocation by certified letter to his last known address. Any person who shall proceed thereafter with such work or use without having obtained a new zoning certificate of occupancy shall be deemed guilty of an additional violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-293. - Variances. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which enable the city to hear and decide requests for permitted variations from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest; where, owing to special factors, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done, as provided by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)7. 
(b)  Different types of variances. There are two types of variances: 
(1)  Area variances. Area variances address regulations regarding density, setbacks, frontage, height, landscaping, lighting, lot size, and other dimensional regulations which are designed to address uniformity of development, lot size, building configuration and size, and other similar features. Area variances do not address how a property may be used. 
(2)  Use variances. Use variances address how a property may be used, and primarily seek to vary or circumvent the list of allowable land uses prescribed for the property as contained in article II of this chapter. Use variances do not address the kind of dimensional regulations addressed by area variances. Care must be taken to not permit an applicant to label a use variance as an area variance in order to circumvent the more difficult standards applicable to use variances. 
(c)  Initiation of request for approval of a variance. Proceedings for approval of a requested variance shall be initiated by an application of the owner of the subject property, or their legally authorized representative. 
(d)  Application requirements. All applications for variances shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  Applicant information. Name and address of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer and contractor being used on the project, and the address and tax parcel number for the site. 
(2)  Ownership map. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the variance is proposed, and all other lands within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the city tax records. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided. 
(3)  Overall map. A map, such as the land use plan map, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the city as a whole. 
(4)  Description. A written description of the proposed variance, providing specific reference to those sections of this chapter from which the applicant seeks relief, and describing the specific terms, conditions and requirements of the variance proposed for the subject property. 
(5)  Site plan. A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development. Said site plan shall conform to any and all the requirements of section 114-291(c). 
(6)  Written justification. Written justification for the requested variance consisting of the reasons why the applicant believes the proposed variance is appropriate, particularly as evidenced by compliance with the standard set out in subsection (f)(5) of this section. 
(e)  Review by zoning administrator. 
(1)  The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (d) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, he shall return the application to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does fulfill the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, he shall so notify the applicant and forward the application to the board of appeals for further action. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall review and evaluate the application and shall comment in writing to the board of appeals on the variance requested in the application, taking into consideration the review standards of subsection (f)(5) of this section. The zoning administrator's written comments shall be submitted to the board of appeals on or before the public hearing described below. A copy thereof shall also be provided to the applicant. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall not refer the application to the board of appeals and no one shall place the application on the board's agenda until the zoning administrator, or designee, has certified that the application is complete. 
(f)  Review and determination by zoning board of appeals. 
(1)  Submission to zoning board of appeals required. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), no variance shall be granted except by review and action of the zoning board of appeals pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  Public hearing. The board of appeals shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing to consider the application within 30 days after filing of the complete application. The applicant may appear in person, by agent, and/or attorney. 
(3)  Notice. Notice of the requested variance and the public hearing shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). Said notice shall contain a description of the subject property and the proposed variance. In addition, at least ten days before said public hearing, the city clerk shall mail an identical notice to the applicant of the proposed variance; to the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the subject property; and to all property owners within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property as identified in subsection (d) of this section. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section. 
(4)  Formal decision. Within 30 days after the holding of the public hearing, or within an extension of said period approved by the applicant and granted by the zoning board of appeals, the zoning board of appeals shall make its findings and its determination regarding the application as a whole. The zoning board of appeals may request further information and/or additional reports from the zoning administrator and/or the applicant. The zoning board of appeals may take final action on said request for approval of the requested variance at the time of its initial meeting, or said proceedings may be continued from time to time for further consideration. The zoning board of appeals shall make a written report of its findings and determinations concerning the standards of subsection (f)(5) of this section. 
(5)  Standards of review. The following factors must be found to exist by the board of appeals in making its decision regarding a request for a variance, and each factor shall be addressed in the board's official written decision: 
a.  The requested variance must be in harmony with the recommendations of the comprehensive master plan. 
b.  The land must present an exceptional or extraordinary circumstance or condition which unreasonably prevents the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or which makes conformity with the requirements of this chapter unnecessarily burdensome. The response to this question shall clearly indicate how the subject property contains factors which are not present on other properties in the same zoning district. Specifically: 
1.  The hardship or difficulty shall be peculiar to the subject property and different from that of other properties, and not one which affects all properties similarly. Such a hardship or difficulty shall have arisen because of the unusual shape of the original acreage parcel; unusual topography or elevation; or because the property was created before the passage of the current, applicable zoning regulations, and will not accommodate a structure of reasonable design for a permitted use if all area requirements are observed; 
2.  Loss of profit or pecuniary hardship shall not, in and of itself, be grounds for a variance; 
3.  Self-imposed hardship shall not be grounds for a variance. Reductions resulting from the sale of portions of a property reducing the remainder of said property below buildable size or cutting-off existing access to a public right-of-way or deed restrictions imposed by the owner's predecessor-in-title are considered to be such self-imposed hardships; 
4.  Violations by, or variances granted to, neighboring properties shall not justify a variance; 
5.  The alleged hardship shall not be one that would have existed in the absence of a zoning ordinance; for example, if a lot were unbuildable because of topography in the absence of any or all setback requirements. 
c.  The variance must be needed so that the subject property can be developed in a manner similar to that of other properties under the same zoning district. The response to this question shall clearly indicate how the requested variance is essential to make the subject property reasonably developable so that property rights enjoyed by the owners of similar properties can be enjoyed by the owners of the subject property. 
d.  The granting of the proposed variance must not be a substantial detriment to adjacent properties. The response to this question shall clearly indicate how the proposed variance will have no substantial impact on adjacent properties. 
e.  The granting of the proposed variance must not result in a substantial or undue adverse impact on the character of the neighborhood, environmental factors, traffic factors, parking, public improvements, public property or rights-of-way, or other matters affecting the public health, safety, or general welfare, either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed as a result of the implementation of the intent, provisions, and policies of this chapter, the comprehensive plan, or any other plan, program, map, or ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the city or other governmental agency having jurisdiction to guide growth and development. The response to this question shall clearly indicate how the proposed variance will have no substantial impact on such long-range planning matters. 
f.  The exceptional or extraordinary circumstance or condition which the applicant claims as justification for the proposed variance must not have been created by the acts or omissions of the applicant or the applicant's predecessor-in-title, e.g., previous development decisions such as building placement, floor plan, building orientation, platting pattern, grading, etc., after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. The response to this question shall clearly indicate that such factors existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and were not created by action of the applicant or the applicant's predecessors-in-title. 
g.  If the proposed variance is a use variance, then, in addition to the foregoing standards, the applicant must also establish that the applicant will have no reasonable use of the property if the variance is not granted. 
(6)  Additional requirements in floodland districts. No variance shall be granted when it is found: 
a.  Filling and development contrary to the purpose and intent of the floodplain overlay district (FP) would result. 
b.  A change in the boundaries of the floodplain overlay district (FP) would result. 
c.  A lower degree of flood protection than a point two feet above the 100-year recurrence interval flood for the particular area would result. 
d.  Any action contrary to the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 116 would result. 
(7)  Effect of inaction. If the zoning board of appeals fails to make a determination within 30 days after said public hearing, then the request for the variance shall be considered denied. 
(g)  Effect of denial. No application for a variance which has been denied, in whole or in part, shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, unless the zoning administrator first determines that either: 
(1)  Substantial and material new evidence has arisen; or 
(2)  A substantial and material change of circumstances has occurred, regarding an issue which was relevant and significant to the prior decision to deny the application. 
(h)  Limited effect of a variance. Where the zoning board of appeals has granted a variance, such approval shall not change the use classification of either the building or premises, nor give it any new status as a nonconforming use other than that status which it held before the granting of the variance. Granting of a variance shall be considered unique to the variance granted, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed variance. 
(i)  Stay of proceedings. An application for a variance shall stay all legal proceedings furthering enforcement of any provisions of this chapter from which the applicant is requesting a variance, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after the request for the variance has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the zoning board of appeals or by a court of record. 
(j)  Notice to the DNR. The zoning board of appeals shall transmit a copy of each application for a variance to conservancy regulations in the shoreland-wetland, floodway, floodplain conservancy, or floodway fringe overlay zoning districts, and a copy of all shoreland floodland appeals, to the state department of natural resources (DNR) for review and comment at least ten days prior to any public hearings. Final action on the application shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its recommendation, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions relating to variances to shoreland conservancy regulations or to floodland regulations, and a copy of all decisions to shoreland conservancy and floodland appeals, shall be transmitted to the DNR within ten days of the date of such decision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-294. - Interpretations. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assign responsibility for the official interpretation of the provisions of this chapter, and to describe the required procedure for securing such interpretation. 
(b)  Initiation of request for an interpretation. Proceedings for an interpretation may be initiated by any of the following four methods: 
(1)  By an application of the owner or occupants of the subject property; 
(2)  By a request of the plan commission; 
(3)  By a request of the common council; or 
(4)  By a request of the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Application requirements. All applications from the owners or occupants of property shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application shall be comprised of all of the following: 
(1)  Applicant information. Name and address of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer and contractor being used on the project, and the address and tax parcel number for the site. 
(2)  Text. All requests for interpretations shall clearly indicate the part of the text of this chapter for which the interpretation is requested and the specific questions the applicant has regarding said text. If the applicant believes that the text is subject to several reasonable interpretations, the applicant shall set forth all such interpretations. 
(3)  Specific property. If the requested interpretation relates to the application of this chapter to a specific property, the additional following information shall be required: 
a.  A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the interpretation is requested, and all other lands within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the city tax records. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided; 
b.  A map, such as the land use plan map, of the generalized location of the subject property in relation to the city as a whole; 
c.  A written explanation of the issue which needs interpretation, including the applicant's proposed interpretation, and an explanation of how the proposed interpretation relates to type of activities, buildings, and structures currently located on, and/or proposed for, the subject property; and 
d.  If requested by the zoning administrator, a site plan of the subject property as proposed for development. Said site plan shall conform to all the requirements of section 114-291(c) or such requirements as the administrator may require. 
(4)  Land use. If the requested interpretation relates to the classification or treatment of a particular land use under the provisions of this chapter, a series of written responses to the following questions: 
a.  How is the subject land use, in general, in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the city's comprehensive plan, this chapter, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the city? 
b.  How is the subject land use in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the pertinent zoning district for which the interpretation is being sought? 
c.  Do the potential public benefits of the proposed interpretation outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of the proposed interpretation? 
(d)  Review by zoning administrator. 
(1)  The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall return the application to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the zoning administrator determines that the application does fulfill the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, he shall commence his review thereof. 
(2)  Within 30 days of filing of a complete application, the zoning administrator shall review and evaluate the application. This review shall take into consideration the standards for review presented in subsection (e) of this section. In evaluating the application, the zoning administrator may consult with consultants and city staff, such as the city attorney, city planner, DPW, city administrator and/or city engineer. The zoning administrator shall also evaluate the application to determine whether the request is in harmony with the recommendations of the city's comprehensive master plan. 
(3)  The zoning administrator, or such consultants or staff as the zoning administrator may deem appropriate (e.g., city attorney), shall prepare and forward a written report to the applicant indicating the interpretation of the zoning administrator. If the zoning administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the city's comprehensive master plan, the zoning administrator shall note this determination in the report. A copy of all such reports shall be forwarded to the plan commission. 
(e)  Standards for review of requested interpretations. This chapter shall be interpreted in a manner which is consistent with the purposes intended by the common council as noted in this chapter and the comprehensive plan. The intent of the standards and supporting definitions of this chapter is to protect both individual property owners and the general public from adverse impacts that may result from a proposed, modified, or existing land use. To this end, those called upon to interpret this chapter shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  Articulate certain public purpose underlying the standard for which an interpretation is required. 
Rationale. Before any zoning interpretation is made, there must be a discussion of the purpose for which the regulation was initially imposed. Each zoning regulation is intended to protect the interests of both present and future neighbors and the general public. Each standard is developed as a regulatory response to an identifiable potential negative impact. A sound interpretation of any standard cannot be ensured without careful analysis of the regulation and the end toward which it is directed. It is understood that there may be other public purposes underlying the interpretation which are not explicitly articulated. 
(2)  Articulate the actual impact of various proposed interpretations, permitting flexibility in design and prohibiting any interpretation that lowers the protection afforded to the public. 
Rationale. There is a critical distinction between an interpretation which provides a greater degree of design freedom to achieve a permitted land use, and an interpretation which permits a new or not previously permitted use, or which allows a use to be enlarged, or have its intensity increased beyond the degree specified in the chapter. Design freedom is to be encouraged, but a lowering of the standards of this chapter is to be prohibited. 
(3)  Determine whether the proposed interpretation will ensure a just balance between the rights of the landowner and all others who will be affected by that person's land use proposal. 
Rationale. If an interpretation would merely allow a design solution that is slightly different from the one expressly stated or permitted, and if it would result in a same or greater degree of protection to any affected party (either the adjoining landowners, the public at large, and/or a future property owner or renter), such an interpretation may be appropriately made. Any interpretation which would result in any identifiable loss of protection for one group to the benefit of others is contrary to the spirit of this chapter. Similarly, any interpretation which would either increase the nuisance potential of any use or alter the purpose for which the regulation was adopted shall be considered counter to the legislative intent of this chapter. Any interpretation which will result in any loss of protection or increase in intensity beyond that already permitted shall only be made if the party interpreting this chapter has the power to impose additional restrictions or requirements. 
(4)  Avoid substituting the judgment of the administrator for the legislative acts of the common council. 
Rationale. This chapter has been carefully designed by the common council to combine maximum achievement of public goals, and the protection of adjoining property owners, while providing flexibility for property owners to use their land for a variety of uses consistent with the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan of the city. Great care has been taken to balance the rights of competing groups while achieving maximum protection with flexibility and a range of use options. Persons interpreting this chapter should not substitute their own judgments for the legislative acts of the common council. 
(5)  Address the following standards on land use interpretation matters: 
a.  No interpretation shall allow the establishment of any land use which was previously considered and rejected by the common council on an application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, the official zoning map, or a previously applied for appeal from a requested interpretation. 
b.  No interpretation shall permit a land use listed as a use permitted by right, a special use, or a conditional use in another zoning district if the use is not listed as permitted in the zoning district of the subject property. 
c.  No interpretation shall permit a land use in a zoning district unless evidence is presented which demonstrates that the land use will comply with any and all regulations applicable to development in the subject property's zoning district. 
d.  No interpretation shall permit a land use in a particular zoning district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses permitted in that same district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses either not permitted in said district, or permitted in a more intensive district in the same zoning district category. 
e.  If the proposed land use is more similar to a land use permitted only as a conditional use in the subject property's district than to a use permitted by right, then an interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned upon the approval of a conditional use pursuant to section 114-288. 
(f)  Effect of a favorable land use interpretation. No interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specific zoning district shall authorize either the establishment of such use or the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure. A favorable interpretation merely authorizes the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals which may be required by this chapter. These permits and approvals include, but are not limited to, required site plans, special use permits, conditional uses, and certificates of occupancy. 
(g)  Limitations on favorable land use interpretation. 
(1)  No interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be valid for a period of more than 365 days from the date of issuance of the interpretation, unless a building permit is issued and development is actually begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a certificate of occupancy is obtained and a use commenced within that period. 
(2)  An interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be deemed to authorize only that particular use at that particular location for which the interpretation was issued. The interpretation shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate interpretation has not been issued. A favorable interpretation shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or more. 
(3)  An interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted by right or conditionally permitted shall have no precedential value. It is understood that, if the plan commission wished such interpretation to have precedential value, it would amend this chapter to include such interpretation herein. It is also understood that mistakes in interpretation often become apparent only after the interpretation becomes effective and the use is employed and observed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-295. - Appeals of zoning decisions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which enable the city to hear and decide requests for appeals from the decisions of the zoning administrator per section 114-295, as provided for by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)7. 
(b)  Initiation of request for review of zoning decision. Proceedings for the review of an appeal may be initiated by any aggrieved person, or by any officer, department, board, committee or commission of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Time limit for filing an appeal. An appeal shall be made within a period not exceeding 45 days from the date of issuance of the decision from which the appeal is taken. Failure to initiate this appeal procedure within this 45-day period shall constitute a final and binding waiver of the right to appeal said interpretation. 
(d)  Application requirements. All applications for review of an interpretation, regardless of the party of their initiation per subsection (b) of this section, shall be submitted to the city administrator, or designee, who shall determine if the application is complete. The city administrator shall act as the clerk for the zoning board of appeals in receiving said applications. A complete application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer and contractor being used on the project, and the address and tax parcel number for the site. 
(2)  A copy of all documents previously submitted by the applicant to the city which relate to the issue of the appeal. The city will supply copies of these items, at applicant's expense, if the applicant has lost or misplaced his own copies. 
(3)  A written statement from the applicant specifying the grounds for the appeal. Such statement shall indicate the reasons why an appeal is justified, based upon an analysis of the zoning administrator's decision. This statement shall be dated and signed by the applicant. 
(e)  Review by city administrator and zoning administrator. The submitted application shall be reviewed by the city administrator and the zoning administrator in the following steps: 
(1)  The city administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the application fulfills the requirements of subsection (d) of this section. If the city administrator determines that the application does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, he shall return the application to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how the application is inadequate. If the city administrator determines that the application is complete, he shall so notify the applicant and forward the application to both the zoning administrator and the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall review and evaluate the application, and shall comment, in writing, on the written justification for the appeal to the zoning board of appeals. The zoning administrator shall also evaluate the application to determine whether the request is in harmony with the recommendations of the city's comprehensive master plan. Before the date set for the public hearing, the zoning administrator shall forward this written report to the board of appeals, along with copies of all papers constituting the record of the zoning administrator on this application. If the zoning administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions of the city's master plan or zoning ordinance, the zoning administrator shall note this determination in the report. 
(f)  Review and action by the zoning board of appeals. 
(1)  Public hearing. The zoning board of appeals shall schedule a reasonable time and place for a public hearing, within 45 days after the administrator determines that the application is complete. 
(2)  Notice. Notice of the appeal and said public hearing shall conform to Wis. Stats. § 63.23(7)(e). Said notice shall contain a description of the appealed issue. At least ten days before said public hearing, the city clerk shall mail an identical notice: 
a.  To the applicant; 
b.  To the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any portion of the jurisdiction of this chapter; and 
c.  To any property owner within 200 feet of the subject property. Failure to mail said notice, provided it is unintentional, shall not invalidate proceedings under this section. 
(3)  Formal decision. Within 60 days after the filing of the complete application, or, within an extension of said period requested in writing by the applicant and granted by the zoning board of appeals, the zoning board of appeals shall make its findings. The zoning board of appeals may request further information and/or additional reports from the zoning administrator and/or the applicant. The zoning board of appeals may take final action on the application for appeal at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue the proceedings at applicant's request. Said final action shall be followed by a written report which shall include formal findings of facts developed and approved by the zoning board of appeals concerning the request. 
(4)  Board's authority. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)8, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Effect of inaction. If the zoning board of appeals fails to make a determination within 60 days after the filing of said complete application, then the request for the appeal shall be considered denied. 
(g)  Effect of denial. No application which has been denied, in whole or in part, shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of said order of denial, unless the zoning administrator, or designee, first determines that either: 
(1)  Substantial and material new evidence has arisen; or 
(2)  A substantial and material change of circumstances has occurred, regarding an issue which was relevant and significant to the prior decision to deny the application. 
(h)  Limited effect of a favorable ruling on an appeal. 
(1)  No ruling by the zoning board of appeals on an appeal finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be valid for a period of more than 365 days from the date of issuance of the ruling on the appeal, unless a building permit is issued and development is actually begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a certificate of occupancy is obtained and a use commenced within that period. 
(2)  A ruling by the zoning board of appeals on an appeal finding a particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be deemed to authorize only that particular use at that particular location for which the ruling was issued. The ruling shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate ruling has not been issued. A favorable ruling shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or more. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-296. - Planned development district procedures. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial, of proposed planned developments, and to provide for the possible relaxation of certain development standards pertaining to the underlying standard zoning district. 
(1)  Planned developments are intended to provide more incentives for development and redevelopment in areas of the community which are experiencing a lack of significant investment. Furthermore, planned developments are designed to forward both the aesthetic and economic development objectives of the city by controlling the site design and the appearance, density or intensity of development in terms of more flexible requirements for land uses, density, intensity, bulk, landscaping, and parking requirements. In exchange for such flexibility, the planned development shall provide a much higher level of site design, architectural control and other aspects of aesthetic and functional excellence than normally required for other developments. 
(2)  Planned developments have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties if allowed to develop simply under the general requirements of this chapter. In addition to such potential, planned developments also have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties which potentially cannot be determined except with a binding site plan, landscape plan and architectural plan, and on a case-by-case basis. In order to prevent this from occurring, all planned developments are required to meet certain stringent procedural requirements applicable only to planned developments, in addition to the general requirements of this chapter. A public hearing process is required to review a request for a planned development. This process shall essentially combine the process for a zoning map amendment with that required for a conditional use, with several additional requirements. 
(b)  Extent of flexible development standards. 
(1)  Permitted location. Planned developments shall be permitted with the approval of a planned development zoning district, specific to the approved planned development, within all zoning districts. 
(2)  Flexible development standards. The following exemptions to the development standards of the underlying zoning district may be provided with the approval of a planned development: 
a.  Land use requirements. All land uses listed as residential, institutional, or commercial in article II of this chapter may be permitted within a planned development. 
b.  Density and intensity requirements. All requirements listed in article II of this chapter for residential density and nonresidential intensity may be waived or modified within a planned development. 
c.  Bulk requirements. All bulk requirements listed in article II of this chapter may be waived or modified within a planned development. 
d.  Landscaping requirements. All requirements listed in article VI of this chapter may be waived or modified within a planned development. 
e.  Parking and loading requirements. All requirements listed in sections 114-55 and 114-57 may be waived or modified within a planned development. 
(3)  Requirements to depict all aspects of development. Only development which is explicitly depicted on the required site plan approved by the common council as part of the approved planned development shall be permitted, even if such development, including all aspects of land use, density and intensity, bulk, landscaping, and parking and loading, is otherwise listed as permitted in article II of this chapter. Requested exemptions from these standards shall be made explicit by the applicant in the application, and shall be recommended by the plan commission and approved explicitly by the common council. If not so requested and approved, such exemptions shall not be permitted. 
(c)  Initiation of request for approval of a planned development. Proceedings for approval of a planned development shall be initiated by: 
(1)  An application of the owner of the subject property; 
(2)  A recommendation of the plan commission; or 
(3)  Action of the common council. 
(d)  Application requirements. All applications for proposed planned developments, regardless of the party of their initiation per subsection (c) of this section, shall be approved as complete by the zoning administrator a minimum of two weeks prior to the initiation of this procedure. The zoning administrator shall forward copies of said complete application to the office of the city clerk. Said application shall apply to each of the process steps in subsections (e) through (h) of this section. 
(e)  Step 1: Pre-application conference. 
(1)  The applicant shall contact the zoning administrator to place an informal discussion item for the PD on the plan commission agenda. 
(2)  To be placed on the agenda, no details are required except the following: the names and addresses of the applicant, the owner of the site, the architect, professional engineer and contractor being used on the project (if known), and the address and tax parcel number for the site. 
(3)  At the plan commission meeting, the applicant shall engage in an informal discussion with the plan commission regarding the potential PD. Appropriate topics for discussion may include the location of the PD, general project themes and images, the general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses being considered, approximate residential densities and nonresidential intensities, the general treatment of natural features, the general relationship to nearby properties and public streets, and relationship to the master plan. 
(4)  Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the process shall not be binding, directly or indirectly, upon the applicant or the city, but shall be considered as merely an informal, non-binding discussion designed to give the applicant some feedback, positive and/or negative, on the proposal and to give the plan commission some general background before proceeding to the next step. 
(f)  Step 2: Concept plan. 
(1)  Submittal packet. The applicant shall submit to the zoning administrator a draft PD concept plan submittal packet, which shall contain all of the following items: 
a.  Location map. A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11 inches by 17 inches, as depicted on a copy of the city land use plan map; 
b.  General description. A general written description of proposed PD, including: 
1.  General project themes and images; 
2.  The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses; 
3.  Approximate residential densities and nonresidential intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious surface area ratio; 
4.  The general treatment of natural features; 
5.  The general relationship to nearby properties and public streets; 
6.  The general relationship of the project to the master plan; 
7.  An initial draft list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed PD and the location in which they apply and, a complete list of zoning standards which will be more than met by the proposed PD and the location in which they apply. Essentially, the purpose of this listing shall be to provide the plan commission with information necessary to determine the relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility; 
c.  Requested exemptions. A written description of potentially requested exemption from the requirements of the underlying zoning district, in the following order: 
1.  Land use exemptions; 
2.  Density and intensity exemptions; 
3.  Bulk exemptions; 
4.  Landscaping exemptions; and 
5.  Parking and loading requirements exemptions; and 
d.  Conceptual plan. A conceptual plan drawing (at 11 inches by 17 inches) of the general land use layout and the general location of major public streets and/or private drives. The applicant may submit copies of a larger version of the bubble plan in addition to the 11 inches by 17 inches reduction. 
(2)  Review by administrator. The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the PD concept submittal packet fulfills the requirements of subsection (f)(1) of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that the packet does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (f)(1) of this section, he shall return it to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how it is inadequate. If the administrator determines that the packet fulfills the requirements of subsection (f)(1) of this section, he shall so notify applicant and shall place the matter on the plan commission agenda. 
(3)  Review by plan commission. At the plan commission meeting, the applicant shall engage in an informal discussion with the plan commission regarding the conceptual PD. Appropriate topics for discussion may include any of the information provided in the PD concept plan submittal packet, or other items as determined by the plan commission. 
(4)  Non-binding effect. Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the process shall not be binding, directly or indirectly, upon the applicant or the city, but shall be considered as merely an informal, non-binding basis for proceeding to the next step. 
Rationale. The foregoing procedures are intended to give the plan commission several informal reviews of the concept plan before introduction of the formal petition for rezoning which accompanies the next step, the formal GDP application. Although time-consuming, this informal process is designed to give the plan commission lots of time to consider the PD, and at the same time, give the applicant lots of feedback so that the time and expense of the formal petition is minimized (or perhaps eliminated), by incorporation into the GDP of the comments and concerns raised during this preliminary informal process. 
(g)  Step 3: General development plan (GDP). 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this step is to evaluate whether the zoning for the proposed site should be changed from its current zoning to PD zoning which will create zoning unique to the property. Therefore, the focus of this step is on the same types of issues which affect all changes of zoning, i.e., density, intensity, the mix of use and the arrangement of site design. 
(2)  Submittal packet. The applicant shall submit to the zoning administrator a draft GPD plan submittal packet, which shall contain all of the following items: 
a.  Location map. A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11 inches by 17 inches, as depicted on a copy of the city land use plan map. 
b.  Ownership map. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the planned development is proposed, and all other lands within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of the county register of deeds as provided by the city. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction which maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided. 
c.  General description. A general written description of the proposed PD including: 
1.  General project themes and images; 
2.  The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses; 
3.  Approximate residential densities and nonresidential intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious surface area ratio; 
4.  The general treatment of natural features; 
5.  The general relationship to nearby properties and public streets; 
6.  The general relationship of the project to the master plan; 
7.  A statement of rationale as to why PD zoning is proposed. This shall identify barriers that the applicant perceives in the form of requirements of standard zoning districts and opportunities for community betterment the applicant suggests are available through the proposed PD zoning; 
8.  A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed PD and the location in which they apply and a complete list of zoning standards which will be more than met by the proposed PD and the location in which they apply shall be identified. Essentially, the purpose of this listing shall be to provide the plan commission with information necessary to determine the relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility; 
9.  A written description of potentially requested exemption from the requirements of the underlying zoning district, in the following order: 
(i)  Land use exemptions; 
(ii)  Density and intensity exemptions; 
(iii)  Bulk exemptions; 
(iv)  Landscaping exemptions; 
(v)  Parking and loading requirements exemptions. 
d.  GDP drawing. A general development plan drawing at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet (an 11 inches by 17 inches reduction shall also be provided by applicant) of the proposed project showing at least the following information in sufficient detail to make an evaluation against criteria for approval: 
1.  A conceptual plan drawing, at 11 inches by 17 inches, of the general land use layout and the general location of major public streets and/or private drives. The applicant may submit copies of a larger version of the bubble plan in addition to the 11 inches by 17 inches reduction; 
2.  Location of recreational and open space areas and facilities and specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for public acquisition and use; 
3.  Data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the approximate areas of large development lots and pads, density/intensity of various parts of the development, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio and landscape surface area ratio of various land uses, expected staging, and any other plans required by the plan commission or common council; and 
4.  Notations relating the written information provided in subsection (g)(2)c of this section to specific areas on the GDP drawing. 
e.  Landscaping. A general conceptual landscaping plan for subject property, noting approximate locations of foundation, street, yard and paving, landscaping, and the compliance of development with all landscaping requirements of this chapter and the use of extra landscaping and bufferyards. 
f.  Signage. A general signage plan for the project, including all project identification signs and concepts for public fixtures and signs which are proposed to vary from city standards or common practices. 
g.  Written justification. Written justification for the proposed planned development. 
(3)  Review by administrator. The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the GPD submittal packet fulfills the requirements of subsection (g)(2) of this section. If the administrator determines that the packet does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (g)(2) of this section, he shall return it to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how it is inadequate. If the administrator determines that the packet does fulfill the requirements of subsection (g)(2) of this section, he shall so notify applicant and shall place the matter on the plan commission agenda. 
(4)  Review by plan commission. The process for review and approval of the GDP shall be identical to that for conditional use permits per section 114-288(f) and, if land is to be divided, to that for preliminary and final plats of subdivision per this Code. 
(h)  Step 4: Precise implementation plan (PIP). 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this step is to obtain all the details necessary to establish specific conditions on the proposed development and operations. It is akin to a conditional use permit application for the whole development. 
(2)  Submittal packet. After the effective date of the rezoning to PD/GDP, the applicant may file an application for a proposed precise implementation plan (PIP) with the zoning administrator, which shall contain all of the following items: 
a.  Location map. A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at 11 inches by 17 inches, as depicted on a copy of the city land use plan map. The area included in a precise implementation plan may be only a portion of the area included in a previously approved general implementation plan. 
b.  Ownership map. A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the planned development is proposed, and all other lands within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the current records of the county register of deeds as provided by the city. Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction which maintains that control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be submitted in a form which is clearly reproducible with a photocopier, and shall be at a scale which is not less than one inch equals 800 feet. All lot dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be provided. 
c.  Written description. A general written description of proposed PIP including: 
1.  Specific project themes and images. 
2.  The specific mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses. 
3.  Specific residential densities and nonresidential intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious surface area ratio. 
4.  The specific treatment of natural features. 
5.  The specific relationship to nearby properties and public streets. 
6.  A statement of rationale as to why PD zoning is proposed. This shall identify barriers that the applicant perceives in the form of requirements of standard zoning districts and opportunities for community betterment the applicant suggests are available through the proposed PD zoning. 
7.  A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the proposed PIP and the location in which they apply and a complete list of zoning standards which will be more than met by the proposed PIP and the location in which they apply shall be identified. Essentially, the purpose of this listing shall be to provide the plan commission with information necessary to determine the relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design flexibility. 
d.  Plan drawing. A precise implementation plan drawing at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet (an 11 inches by 17 inches reduction shall also be provided by applicant) of the proposed project showing at least the following information in sufficient detail to make an evaluation against criteria for approval: 
1.  A PIP site plan conforming to all the requirements of section 114-291(c). If the proposed planned development is a group development, per section 114-130, a proposed preliminary plat or conceptual plat shall be provided in addition to the required site plan; 
2.  Location of recreational and open space areas and facilities and specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for public acquisition and use; 
3.  Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the precise areas of all development lots and pads, density/intensity of various parts of the development, floor area ratio, impervious surface area ratio and landscape surface area ratio of various land uses, expected staging, and any other plans required by the plan commission or common council; and 
4.  Notations relating the written information provided in subsection (h)(2)c of this section to specific areas on the GDP drawing. 
e.  Landscaping. A landscaping plan for subject property, specifying the location, species, and installed size of all trees and shrubs. This plan shall also include a chart which provides a cumulative total for each species, type and required location (foundation, yard, street, paved area or bufferyard) of all trees and shrubs. 
f.  Exteriors. A series of building elevations for the entire exterior of all buildings in the planned development, including detailed notes as to the materials and colors proposed. 
g.  Signage. A general signage plan for the project, including all project identification signs, concepts for public fixtures and signs, such as street light fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces and/or poles, and group development signage themes which are proposed to vary from city standards or common practices. 
h.  Organizational structure. A general outline of the intended organizational structure for a property owners association, if any; deed restrictions and provisions for private provision of common services, if any. 
i.  Consistency with GDP. A written description which demonstrates the full consistency of the proposed PIP with the approved GDP. 
j.  Variations. All variations between the requirements of the applicable PD/GDP zoning district and the proposed PIP development. 
k.  Public works. The applicant shall submit proof of financing capability pertaining to construction and maintenance and operation of public works elements of the proposed development. 
l.  Design information. The precise implementation plan (PIP) submission may include site plan and design information, allowing the plan commission to combine design review and review of the PIP. Design review may, at the choice of the applicant, be deferred until a later time when specific site and building developments will be brought forth. 
m.  Other. The plan commission or common council may specify other plans, documents or schedules that must be submitted prior to consideration or approval of the PIP, as such may be relevant to review. 
(3)  Review by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator, or designee, shall determine whether the PIP fulfills the requirements of subsection (h)(2) of this section. If the administrator determines that the PIP does not fulfill the requirements of subsection (h)(2) of this section, he shall return it to the applicant with a brief statement identifying how it is inadequate. If the administrator determines that the PIP does fulfill the requirements of subsection (h)(2) of this section, he shall so notify applicant and shall place the matter on the plan commission agenda. 
(4)  Process for review. The process for review and approval of the PD shall be identical to that for conditional use permits per section 114-288(f) and, if land is to be divided, to that for preliminary and final plats of subdivision per this Code, except that in addition to approval by the plan commission, all PD's must also be approved by the common council. Creation of a PD is tantamount to an amendment to the zoning map and zoning regulations and, therefore, should be reviewed and approved by the common council. 
(5)  Development timetable. All portions of an approved PD/PIP not fully developed within five years of final common council approval shall expire, and no additional PD-based development shall be permitted. The common council may extend this five-year period by up to five additional years via a majority vote following a public hearing. 
(i)  Review and action by the common council. The common council shall consider the plan commission's recommendation regarding the PD. The council may request further information and/or additional reports from the plan commission, zoning administrator, and/or the applicant. The council may conduct one or more meetings on the application. The common council may approve the PD as originally proposed, may approve the PD with modifications per the recommendations of the zoning administrator, the plan commission, authorized outside experts, or its own members, or may deny the PD. If the common council wishes to make significant changes to the PD, as recommended by the plan commission, then the procedure set forth in subsections (3)(h)(2)c. and d. of this section shall again be followed prior to council action. The common council's approval of a PD shall be considered the approval of a unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other proposed PD. 
(j)  Minor changes. During the construction of a PD, the zoning administrator, with the consent of either the city administrator or the DPW, is authorized to approve minor variations and minor changes to any previously-approved PD, without compliance with the foregoing procedures, provided the spirit and intent of the original PD is preserved. All such variations shall be approved in writing and, whenever the variation changes any term or condition of a written resolution previously recorded with the register of deeds, the variation shall also be recorded. 
    Rationale. The intent of this section is to avoid the expensive and time-consuming process of a PD whenever a minor change is needed. During construction, problems often arise which require minor changes to PD's. It is expensive, time-consuming, unnecessary and wasteful for the applicant, the plan commission and the council to go through the whole PD process just to approve a minor change. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-297. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The zoning administrator or a designee is hereby designated as the administrative and enforcement officer for the provisions of this chapter. The duty of the zoning administrator is to interpret and administer this chapter and to issue, after on-site inspection, all permits required by this chapter. 
(b)  Duties. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator or a designee, who in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority shall: 
(1)  Determine that all detailed site analyses, building permits, certificates of occupancy, sign permits, site plans, and their constituent plans, comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters and land to determine compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by him to ensure compliance with this chapter. If, however, he is refused entry after presentations of his identification, he may procure a special inspection warrant in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(4)  Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, waters and land to determine compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments, conditional uses, temporary uses, sign permits, site plans, occupancy permits, variances, appeals, interpretations, and applications therefore. 
(6)  Record the first floor and lowest floor (basement or crawl space) elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered, or improved in the floodland districts. 
(7)  Receive, file and forward all applications for all procedures governed by this chapter to the designated official bodies. 
(8)  Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of structures, lands, and waters, give notice of all violations of this chapter to the owner, resident, agent, or occupant of the premises, and report uncorrected violations to the city attorney in a manner specified by him/her. 
(9)  Institute, in the name of the city, any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator of this chapter, as provided by law. 
(10)  Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until he has inspected and approved such use or erection. 
(11)  Where useful, set marks on bridges or buildings or other markers which show the depth of the regional flood; or may set marks delineating the boundaries of wetlands. 
(12)  Request assistance and cooperation from the police department, the public works department and the city attorney as deemed necessary. 
(13)  Make available to the public, to the fullest extent possible, all reports and documents concerning the city's comprehensive plan and ordinances. In addition, information in the form of reports, bulletins, maps, and engineering data shall be readily available and widely distributed. The common council may set fees necessary to recover the cost of providing information to the public. 
(14)  Designate a deputy zoning administrator. 
(15)  Make interpretations regarding the provisions of this chapter per section 114-294. 
(16)  Grant minor variations from the dimensional setback, height, and area requirements of this chapter; up to a maximum variation of five percent for setbacks and height limitations; and up to a maximum variation of five percent or 1,000 square feet for area requirements, whichever is less; so long as the spirit and intent of the performance standards are preserved. 
(17)  Evaluating site plans and formulating a recommendation to the plan commission regarding: 
a.  The standards of review applicable thereto; and 
b.  Such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the proposed development is in harmony with the purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the city comprehensive plan, this chapter, and any other plan, program, or ordinance adopted or under consideration pursuant to official notice by the city. The committee may conduct such reviews of the proposed site and such meetings with the applicant as it deems necessary to evaluate the application and formulate its recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-298. - Plan commission. 
    The plan commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the city to the common council, other public officials and other interested organizations and citizens. The commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys. In general, the plan commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this Code, one of its most important functions is to make recommendations to the common council, which shall be in writing. The commission's minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. The commission may, in arriving at its recommendation, on occasion and of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-299. - Reserved. 
Sec. 114-300. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall have the power and duty to review and determine all matters relating to requested variances from the provisions of this chapter or appeals regarding an interpretation of the zoning administrator of the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Organization. The board of appeals may adopt rules for its government and procedure. Meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson, and at such other times as the board of appeals may determine. The chairperson, or in his absence an elected acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meeting shall be open to the public. The board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board of appeals, which is the city clerk's office, and shall be a public record. 
(2)  Powers. 
a.  The board of appeals shall have the following powers to: 
1.  Hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator. 
2.  Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Code upon which the board of appeals is required to pass. 
3.  Authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this Code as will not be contrary to the public interest, when, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
4.  Permit in appropriate cases, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code, a building or premises to be erected or used for such public utility purposes in any location which is reasonably necessary for the public convenience and welfare. 
b.  In exercising the above listed powers, the board of appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass or to effect any variation in the requirements of this Code. 
c.  In addition to the foregoing powers, the board of appeals shall have the following specific powers: 
1.  To interpret the provisions of this Code in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown on the zoning map accompanying and made a part of this Code, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout on the aforesaid map. 
2.  To call on any other city department for assistance in the performance of its duties and it shall be the duty of such other departments to render such assistance as may be reasonably required. 
d.  Except as specifically provided, no action of the board of appeals shall have the effect of permitting in any district uses prohibited in such districts. 
(3)  Procedures. Except where another procedure is specifically provided in this chapter, e.g., variance procedure of section 114-293, the following procedures shall apply: 
a.  Appeals. Except where appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the administrative officers, such appeal shall be taken within the time established, and if no specific time is established, within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board of appeals, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with payment of a filing fee as may be established by the common council. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeals all papers constituting the record of appeals upon which the action appealed from was taken. The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals and give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide to same within a reasonable time. 
b.  Notice of hearing. The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing, cause notice thereof to be published in the official newspaper not less than seven days prior thereto, cause notice to be given to the appellant or applicant and the administrative officer appealed from by regular mail or by personal service not less than five days prior to the date of hearing. In every case involving a variance, notice shall also be mailed not less than five days prior to the hearing to the holders of title of all land within 300 feet of any part of the subject building or premises involved in the appeal. 
c.  Hearings. Hearings on appeals shall be public and shall be conducted according to the rules of procedure adopted by the board. At the hearing, the appellant or applicant may appear in person, and/or by agent or by attorney. Decisions of the board following public hearing may be made either in public or closed session as the board shall determine, in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 19, subch. V (Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq.). 
d.  Findings. Findings of fact and reasons for all actions taken shall be reduced by the board to writing in the minutes of the proceedings. 
e.  Decision. The zoning board of appeals shall decide all appeals and applications within 30 days after the public hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the board's decision to the appellant or applicant, zoning administrator, and city plan commission. 
1.  Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit ordered or authorized by this board. 
2.  Variances, substitutions, or use permits granted by the board shall expire within six months unless substantial work has commenced pursuant to such grant. 
3.  Applicants receiving variances in floodlands shall be notified, in writing, by the board of appeals that increased flood insurance premiums and risk to life or property may result from the granting of the variance. The board shall keep a record of the notification in its files. 
(4)  Wetland and floodland mapping disputes. 
a.  Wetland disputes. Whenever the board of appeals is asked to interpret a lakeshore shoreland-wetland or floodland district boundary where an apparent discrepancy exists between the city's final wetland inventory map and actual field conditions, the city shall contact the state department of natural resources (DNR) to determine if the wetland inventory map is in error. If the DNR staff concurs that the particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the board of appeals shall direct the city plan commission to initiate appropriate action to rezone the property within a reasonable amount of time. 
b.  Floodland disputes. Whenever the board of appeals is asked to interpret a floodland boundary where an apparent discrepancy exists between the federal flood insurance study and the actual field conditions, the following procedure shall be used. The floodland boundary shall be determined by use of the flood profiles contained in an engineering study, or where such information is not available to the board of appeals, the person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given the opportunity to present his own technical evidence. Where it is determined that the floodplain is incorrectly mapped, the board of appeals shall advise the city plan commission of its findings and the plan commission shall proceed to petition the common council for a map amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Zoning board of appeal, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). 
Sec. 114-301. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for procedures requested by a private party. All applicants shall pay an application fee for zoning text amendments, zoning map amendments, zoning permits, conditional use review and approval, temporary use review and approval, sign permits, site plan review and approval, certificates of occupancy, variances, interpretations, appeals, and planned development. The fees for the procedures and permits established by this chapter shall be established by the city. 
(b)  Fees for procedures requested by the city. There shall be no fee in the case of applications filed in the public interest by the common council, the plan commission, another agency, or any official of the city. 
(c)  Payment of fees. Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the appropriate officer of the city (per the requirements of this chapter), and are not refundable. 
(1)  Application fees do not include, and are in addition to, building permit fees established by the city building code, and other impact fees which may be imposed for driveways, and utility hook-ups. 
(2)  A double application fee shall be charged by the city if an application is submitted after the applicant has committed an act or omission for which the applicant now seeks an amendment. Such double fee shall not release the applicant from full compliance with this chapter nor from prosecution for violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Reimbursable costs. 
(1)  Consultants. The city planner, the city engineer, the city attorney, and other city staff, may expend substantial amounts of time in the investigation and processing of the various applications required by this chapter. In addition to city staff involvement, the city may retain the services of professional consultants including, but not limited to, engineers, architects, attorneys, urban planners, environmental specialists, landscaping specialists, and recreation specialists in the review, analysis, investigation and processing of such matters. 
(2)  Payment. 
a.  Any person, firm or corporation requesting action by the city on any application required herein, shall reimburse the city, within the limits established herein, for: 
1.  The cost of staff time expended in the administration, investigation and processing of applications for such applications; and 
2.  The cost to the city charged by any professional consultant retained by the city to work on any such matter. 
b.  The amount charged by the city for staff time shall be established by the city, and the amount charged for retained consultants shall be the amount which the consultant charges to the city. The amount which may be charged by the city without agreement from the applicant shall not exceed $1,000.00. If the reimbursable costs are likely to exceed $1,000.00, the city shall notify the applicant of the same and shall negotiate an agreement with the applicant regarding the payment of any costs exceeding $1,000.00. Such agreement shall be negotiated before such costs are incurred, and, notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the city may withhold action on any matter until such agreement has been reached. 
c.  The city may delay any and all action and steps required above, including public hearings, until such time as all fees required hereunder have been paid. An application is not considered complete and ready for consideration until all fees have been paid. 
(3)  Collection of costs. The city may require all or part of these costs to be paid in advance by the applicant, or the city may withhold action on any matter until payment has been received from the applicant. Any costs not paid by the applicant may be assigned by the city as a special assessment or charge against the subject property, or may be collected from the applicant through any procedure permitted by law. 
(4)  Appeal or waiver of costs. An applicant may appeal to the city council the payment of costs or the terms of any agreement regarding the payment of costs. The common council, by resolution, may alter any such agreement or may waive all or part of any costs for any specific project, or may authorize other staff or the plan commission to waive such costs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-302. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, contractor, developer, builder, electrician, plumber, or other person or entity, to build, construct or use any land or structure, or to engage in any development activity, including disruption of protected vegetation, in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or otherwise neglect, refuse or fail to comply with this chapter's requirements. Any and all persons, including the owner, occupant, contractor, developer, builder, electrician, plumber, etc., who violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in subsection (b) of this section, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses, including actual reasonable attorney's and other fees involved in the case. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. Each person participating in or committing the offense shall be liable. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who fails to comply with the provisions of this Code or any order of the zoning administrator shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit an amount established by the city. 
(c)  City promulgated correction of violation. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the city reserves and maintains the continued right to abate violations of this chapter. 
(d)  Hazardous condition caused by violation of this chapter. If the zoning administrator determines that a violation of this chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation poses a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the zoning administrator shall cause the violation to be abated. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred per subsection (f) of this section. The zoning administrator is hereby authorized to abate a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  Non-hazardous condition caused by violation of this chapter. If the zoning administrator determines that a violation of this chapter exists, and further determines that the nature of such violation is not such as to pose great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the zoning administrator shall serve written notice by certified mail on the current owner of the property, as indicated by current city tax records, on which said violation is occurring, to remove said violation within a period of time established by the zoning administrator, but not less than ten working days. If such violation is not removed within such time period, the zoning administrator may cause the violation to be abated. Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred per subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Cost of abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the cost of abating a violation of this chapter, shall be collected as a debt from the owner of the property on which said violation has occurred. An account of the expenses incurred by the city to abate the violation shall be kept by the city, and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the violation shall be mailed to the last known address of said property owner by certified mail, and shall be payable within 30 calendar days from the mailing thereof. If such costs and expenses remain unpaid 60 calendar days from the mailing thereof, the city shall enter such charges onto the tax roll as a special tax as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0909. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1092 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Appendix A - CHARTER ORDINANCES 
ARTICLE I. - ORD. NO. 2015-1082[1] 
CITY OF MAUSTON 
CHARTER ORDINANCE 
Ordinance 2015-1082 
Repealing previously Adopted Charter Ordinances and Adopting New Charter Ordinance 
    WHEREAS, the previous total recodification of the Mauston Code of Ordinances was completed in 1991; and 
    WHEREAS, the City recently undertook the task of recodifying the Mauston Code of Ordinances; and 
    WHEREAS, review of the code disclosed some inconsistencies and redundancies within the existing code; and 
    WHEREAS, changes in State Statutes have made some previously adopted Charter Ordinances obsolete; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, on a motion duly made and seconded, the Common Council of the City of Mauston does hereby repeal all previous charter ordinances hereby adopts the following charter ordinance: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this article is Charter Ord. No. 2015-1082, adopted December 8, 2015. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Repealer. 
    All charter ordinances adopted by the city prior to the adoption of this charter ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 2. - Primary elections. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 8.11(1)(b), whenever three (3) or more candidates file nomination papers for an elective City office, a primary to nominate two (2) candidates for the office shall be held. 
Sec. 3. - Election and term of alderpersons. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(b), one alderperson shall be elected from each District and shall serve a term of two years. Alderpersons from Districts one, three, five and seven shall be elected during the spring election of each odd-numbered year. Alderpersons from districts two, four and six shall be elected during the spring election of each even-numbered year. 
Sec. 4. - Administrator/clerk/treasurer/comptroller 
(a)  Offices of clerk, treasurer and comptroller, and administrator combined. This subsection modifies Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1). Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3)(c), the statutory offices of clerk, treasurer and comptroller, and the new office of the administrator are hereby combined into the office of city administrator/clerk/treasurer/comptroller (hereinafter "administrator"). All references in city ordinances to clerk, treasurer and/or comptroller shall mean the administrator. 
(b)  Termination. 
(1)  This subsection modifies Wis. Stats. § 17.12. 
(2)  The council, by majority vote, may terminate the employment of the administrator at any time, with or without cause. If termination is for cause, the city may immediately terminate the employment upon service of written notice to the employee and shall not be obligated to pay salary or provide benefits beyond the date of service of notice. If termination is without cause, one of the following procedures shall be used by the city: 
a.  The city shall provide a 120-day notice of such termination, during which time his employment and all benefits thereof will continue; or 
b.  The city shall immediately terminate his employment, but shall pay a termination benefit equal to 120 days of salary and all benefits accruing during said 120-day period. 
(3)  The Administrator may terminate his employment with the city at any time by serving a written notice of such termination upon the mayor at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of termination. He shall carry out the duties of his office through the date of termination. 
Sec. 5. - City attorney; termination. 
(a)  This section modifies Wis. Stats. § 17.12. 
(b)  The council, by majority vote, may terminate the employment of the city attorney at any time, with or without cause. If termination is for cause, the city may immediately terminate the employment upon service of written notice to the attorney and is not obligated to pay salary or provide benefits beyond the date of service of notice. If termination is without cause, one of the following procedures shall be used by the city: 
(1)  The city shall provide a 30-day notice of such termination, during which time his employment and all benefits thereof will continue; or 
(2)  The city shall immediately terminate his employment, but shall pay a termination benefit equal to 30 days of salary and all benefits accruing during said 30-day period. 
(c)  The city attorney may terminate his employment with the City at any time by serving a written notice of such termination upon the mayor at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of termination. He shall carry out the duties of his office through the date of termination. 
Sec. 6. - Director of public works; termination. 
(a)  This section modifies Wis. Stats. § 17.12. 
(b)  The council, by majority vote, may terminate the employment of the director of public works at any time, with or without cause. If termination is for cause, the city may immediately terminate the employment upon service of written notice to the employee and is not obligated to pay salary or provide benefits beyond the date of service of notice. If termination is without cause, one of the following procedures shall be used by the city: 
(1)  The city shall provide a 60-day notice of such termination, during which time his employment and all benefits thereof will continue; or 
(2)  The city shall immediately terminate his employment, but shall pay a termination benefit equal to 60 days of salary and all benefits accruing during said 60-day period. 
(c)  The director of public works may terminate his employment with the city at any time upon serving a written notice of such termination upon the mayor at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of termination. He shall carry out the duties of his office through the date of termination. 
Sec. 7. - City assessor; termination. 
(a)  This section modifies Wis. Stats. § 17.12. 
(b)  The council, by majority vote, may terminate the employment of the assessor at any time, with or without cause. 
(c)  The Assessor may terminate his employment with the city at any time by serving a written notice of such termination upon the mayor at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of termination. He shall carry out the duties of his office through the date of termination. 
Sec. 8. - Building inspector; termination. 
(a)  This section modifies Wis. Stats. § 17.12. 
(b)  The council, by majority vote, may terminate the employment of the building inspector, with or without cause, at any time. 
(c)  The building inspector may terminate his employment with the city at any time by serving a written notice of such termination upon the mayor at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of termination. He shall carry out the duties of his office through the date of termination. 
Sec. 9. - Zoning administrator; termination. 
(a)  This section modifies Wis. Stats. § 17.12. 
(b)  The council, by a majority vote, may terminate the employment of the zoning administrator, with or without cause, at any time. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may terminate his employment with the city at any time by serving a written notice of such termination upon the mayor at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of termination. He shall carry out the duties of his office through the date of termination. 
Introduced and adopted this   8th   day of   December   , 2015. 
  APPROVED:   ATTEST: _____
 Brian T. McGuire, Mayor _____
 Nathan Thiel, City Administrator  
•  Dates of Readings:     11/24/15      and      12/08/15    
•  Date of Adoption:     12/08/15    
•  Votes: Two-thirds vote of the members elect required 
•  D. Emery  Aye  D. Nielsen  Aye  L. Householder  Aye  F. McCoy  Aye 
S. Leavitt  Aye  R. Noe  Aye  F. Babcock  Aye 
•  Date of Publication:     12/19/2015  and  12/26/2015    
•  Effective Date: Sixty (60) days after publication   February 25, 2016  
Appendix B - FEE SCHEDULE 
SCHEDULE OF CHARGES, FEES AND FORFEITURES SET ANNUALLY BY COMMON COUNCIL [1] 
Description 1 Description 2 2018 Alcohol "Class A" Intoxicating liquor license $300.00 Alcohol "Class B" Intoxicating liquor license $500.00 Alcohol "Class A" Cider only license (as of 11/15 no 'fee') - Alcohol "Class A" Fermented malt beverage $100.00 Alcohol "Class B" Fermented malt beverage 6-month $50.00 Alcohol "Class B" Fermented malt beverage license $100.00 Alcohol "Class C" $100.00 Alcohol Operator's license $30.00 Alcohol Temporary "class B" wine (picnic-wine), includes wine walks $10.00 Alcohol Temporary "class B" beer/malt beverage (picnic-beer) $10.00 Alcohol Temporary "class B" fermented malt beverage (picnic) $10.00 Alcohol Temporary operator's license $0.00 Amusement Amusement devices $15.00 Animals Cat-Late fee (after 4/1) $5.00 Animals Cat-Spayed/neutered $5.00 Animals Cat-Unaltered $10.00 Animals Dog-Spayed/neutered $5.00 Animals Dog-Unaltered $10.00 Animals Dog-Late fee (after 4/1) $5.00 Misc. Any forfeiture not otherwise specified, first offense $25.00-$1,000.00 Misc. Any forfeiture not otherwise specified, second offense $50.00-$1,000.00 Misc. Community room use-Deposit $50.00 Misc. Community room use-Non-resident or non-local (plus deposit) $50.00 Misc. Community room use-Sat. or Sun. (plus deposit AND non-resident/non-local) $50.00 Misc. Copies-Double sided $0.40 Misc. Copies-Single sided $0.25 Misc. NSF check charge $25.00 Misc. NSF check charge-Utility payment $25.00 Misc. Personal property collection costs - Misc. Research of delinquencies, assessments, outstanding fees and charges $20.00 Misc. (Internal) Lodging (reimbursement to employees) - Misc. (Internal) Meal-Breakfast Attachment Misc. (Internal) Meal-Lunch Attachment Misc. (Internal) Meal-Supper Attachment Misc. (Internal) Mileage (reimbursement to employees) Attachment Mobilehome PK Annual license fee ($100.00 minimum) $2.00 Mobilehome PK Application for extension of park $100.00 Mobilehome PK Application for new park $200.00 Mobilehome PK Monthly parking fee/tax - Mobilehome PK Transfer of license $10.00 Prev/Protect Smoking in certain areas Attachment PW/Parks Non-resident reservation fee $25.00 PW/Parks Band shelter-Daily $50.00 PW/Parks Boat launch permit $2.00 PW/Parks Boat launch permit sticker $15.00 PW/Parks Park shelter reservation fee $50.00 PW/Parks Park concession stand reservation fee (plus shelter res. fee) $25.00 PW/Parks Park special event $100.00 PW/Parks Veterans Memorial Park ball field lights (plus ball field res. fee) $25.00 PW/Parks Veterans Memorial Park ball fields $50.00 PW/Parks Veterans Memorial Park ball fields-Practice $50.00 Room Tax Failure to file return and/or pay tax in timely manner Attachment Sales Cigarette and tobacco products license $25.00 Sales Direct seller permit $100.00 Sales Direct seller permit $15.00 Sales Flea market permit $150.00 Sales Flea market permit $50.00 Sales Pawn broker and secondhand article dealers license - Sales/Service Ambulance fee $5.17 Sales/Service Public transit/shared-ride program fares Attachment Sales/Service Taxicab operator's license fee $0.00 Sales/Service Taxicab vehicle license application fee $0.00 FD Prev/Protct Emergency response fee fire/emergency event three hours or less $500.00 FD Prev/Protct Emergency response fee fire/emergency event more than three hours $1,000.00 FD Prev/Protct Emergency response fee miscellaneous service call $100.00 FD Prev/Protct Routine fire code annual and semi-annual inspection $0.00 FD Prev/Protct Routine fire code annual and semi-annual reinspection-Failed $75.00 FD Prev/Protct Routine fire code annual and semi-annual reinspection-Passing $0.00 PW/Parks Boat launch fee no permit citation $25.00 PW/Streets 2-hour parking violations Attachment PW/Streets Alternate side parking violation Attachment Safety Breaking curfew-Juvenile $100.00 Safety Breaking curfew-Responsible party $100.00 Traffic & Vehicles Abandoned vehicle-Impound storage $2.00 PW Driveway permit $10.00 PW Equipment rental Attachment PW Excavation-When in city R-O-W $25.00 PW Excavation by utility companies (optional) $500.00 PW Labor rates Attachment PW Mowing offenses Attachment PW Snow clearing/shoveling offenses Attachment PW Solid waste disposal, generating $200.00 PW Street/sidewalk obstruction/encroachment use permit $25.00 PW/Sewer Sewer connection alteration permit fee $25.00 PW/Sewer Sewer mandatory hook-up violation $5.00 PW/Sewer Sewer mandatory hook-up violation-Appeal $100.00 PW/Water Cross connection inspection $0.00 PW/Water Cross connection inspection fee reinspection-Failed $75.00 PW/Water Cross connection inspection fee reinspection-Passing $0.00 PW/Water Groundwater monitoring well or borehole on city property $25.00 PW Garbage/solid waste collection fee residential property $11.00 PW Solid waste collection fee mobile home parks $11.00 PW/Sewer New service diagram deposit (to be paid with service application) $50.00 PW/Sewer Sewer connection-New service $400.00 PW/Sewer Sewer monthly fixed and flow charges Attachment PW/Water Install water meter for new service $35.00 PW/Water Private well-Two-year permit-New $10.00 PW/Water Private well-Two-year permit-Renewal $5.00 PW/Water Reinstall water meter (after business hours) $55.00 PW/Water Reinstall water meter (during business hours) $35.00 PW/Water Turn water on after disconnection (after business hours) $45.00 PW/Water Turn water on after disconnection (during business hours) $30.00 PW/Water Turn water on for new service $30.00 PW/Water Water monthly fixed and flow charges Attachment Zoning Amendments to official zoning maps (§ 22.903) $100.00 Zoning Amendments to text (§ 22.902) $100.00 Zoning Appeals of zoning decisions (§ 22.912) $150.00 Zoning Application for interpretation (§ 22.911) $0.00 Zoning Application for planned dev. districts-Application fee $250.00 Zoning Application for planned dev. districts-Deposit $250.00 Zoning Application for variance $150.00 Zoning Certificate of occupancy (§ 22.909) $0.00 Zoning Conditional use permit (§ 22.905)-Signs $50.00 Zoning Conditional use permit (§ 22.905)-Accessory structure $100.00 Zoning Conditional use permit (§ 22.905)-Principal structure $200.00 Zoning Extra-territorial zoning district additional fee $5.00 Zoning Floodplain zoning permits $50.00 Zoning Parking spaces central business district-Fee in lieu of $0.00 Zoning Parkland dedication fee-Mobilehome park dev./expansion-Per unit $0.00 Zoning Parkland dedication fee-Per unit $250.00 Zoning Shoreland-wetland certificate of compliance $0.00 Zoning Shoreland-wetland legal notice publications Actual costs Zoning Shoreland-wetland public hearing fee $0.00 Zoning Shoreland-wetland zoning amendments $45.00 Zoning Shoreland-wetland zoning appeals $45.00 Zoning Shoreland-wetland zoning permits $50.00 Zoning Shoreland-wetland zoning violations $10.00-$1,000.00 Zoning Signs for permitted uses $30.00 Zoning Site plan review fees (§ 22.938(4)) - Zoning Special meetings $200.00 Zoning Subdivision $5.00 Zoning Temporary use permit (§ 22.906) $25.00 Zoning/Building Airport zoning restrictions $10.00-$50.00 Zoning/Building Alteration/improvement. Shed 100 sq. ft. or less, same size window/door, siding, cabinets. No inspection required. $0.00 Zoning/Building Bed and breakfast establishment inspection $0.00 Zoning/Building Commercial early start $181.50 Zoning/Building Commercial electrical $0.06 Zoning/Building Commercial erosion control $181.50 Zoning/Building Commercial HVAC $0.05 Zoning/Building Commercial new construction and additions (plus applicable mechanicals) $0.14 Zoning/Building Commercial new construction, addition, remodel-Storage buildings/shell buildings (plus applicable mechanicals) $0.09 Zoning/Building Commercial plumbing $0.06 Zoning/Building Commercial remodel (plus applicable mechanicals) $0.10 Zoning/Building Detached garage $96.80 Zoning/Building Fence $20.00 Zoning/Building General violation of zoning ordinances $10.00-$200.00 Zoning/Building In ground pool (where applicable) $211.75 Zoning/Building Inspections, other-Zoning and building $85.00 Zoning/Building Mfd. and HUD dwellings with attached garage and/or decks $363.00 Zoning/Building Municipal well recharge area contamination $100.00-$500.00 Zoning/Building other (sheds, decks, etc.) $0.61 Zoning/Building Raze/demo structure $10.00 Zoning/Building Relocation of structure-Preliminary inspection $302.50 Zoning/Building Residential addition $0.25 Zoning/Building Residential addition-Erosion control $60.50 Zoning/Building Residential electrical only (including service upgrade) $108.90 Zoning/Building Residential HVAC only $96.80 Zoning/Building Residential plumbing only $96.80 Zoning/Building Residential remodel/alteration $0.25 Zoning/Building Residential rental property inspection fee first residential unit (per building or dwelling) $0.00 Zoning/Building Residential rental property inspection fee reinspection-Failed $75.00 Zoning/Building Residential rental property inspection fee reinspection-Passing $0.00 Zoning/Building Residential rental property registration fee $25.00 Zoning/Building Residential, new-Early start $72.60 Zoning/Building Residential, new-Erosion control (one and two family dwelling) $96.80 Zoning/Building Residential, new-Includes garage, decks, basements and mechanicals $0.25 Zoning/Building Residential, new state seal $2.00 Zoning/Building Roofing-Improvement permit form $25.00 Zoning/Building Wind energy conversion system $0.00  
MILEAGE AND PER DIEM RATES 
Meal information retrieved from GSA website; 
follow the link below for current fiscal year information 
http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/104877 
Meals 2018 Breakfast Lunch Dinner Wisconsin Dells $15.00 $16.00 $28.00 Madison $15.00 $16.00 $28.00 Milwaukee $15.00 $16.00 $28.00 Wisconsin other $11.00 $12.00 $23.00 Chicago $17.00 $18.00 $34.00 Minneapolis/St. Paul $17.00 $18.00 $34.00 Average $15.00 $16.00 $29.00  
Meals will be reimbursed up to the amounts listed as the average above. 
Receipts must be included. 
Meal, non-alcoholic beverages and gratuity only. 
Mileage rate information retrieved from IRS website; 
follow the link below for current fiscal year information 
https://www.irs.gov/Tax-Professionals/Standard-Mileage-Rates 
Year Mileage Rate 2017 $0.535 per mile 2018 $0.545 per mile  
SMOKING IN CERTAIN AREAS 
Any person, agent, firm, or corporation violating section 26-7(i)(1): 
Offense Forfeiture Deposit First $100.00-$250.00 $100.00 Second $100.00-$350.00 $100.00 Third $100.00-$450.00 $100.00  
Any person, agent, firm, or corporation violating section 26-7(i)(2): 
Offense Forfeiture Deposit First Warning $0.00 Second $100.00-$250.00 $100.00 Third $100.00-$250.00 $100.00 Total forfeiture for a single day $250.00  
ROOM TAX REPORTING AND PAYMENTS 
Failure to File Room Tax Return or Failure to Pay Room Tax When Due 
See Section 34-1 for Details 
Days Delinquent Penalty 1-30 5% of tax due, but not less than $50.00 31-60 15% of tax due, but not less than $100.00 60+ 25% of the room tax due for the previous year or $5,000.00, whichever is less  
Filing a late tax return and/or tax payment without paying the forfeiture, shall upon conviction, incur an additional $100.00 forfeiture, plus the unpaid penalty, plus costs of prosecution. 
TAXI FARES 
Fares $$ Adult (age 18 and older) $3.75 Student (age 5-17) $2.00 Elderly (age 60 and older) $2.00 Disabled $2.00 Children (age 4 and under) 
 Accompanied by adult 
 Alone 
  
$0.00 
$2.00 Agency fares (MCOs) (managed care organization) $5.00 In-route drive-through charge per stop 
Interim stop is on the route to destination (generally within one block of direct route); no one leaves the vehicle (i.e., drive-through bank, drive-through restaurant) $1.50 Out-of-route drive-through charge per stop Standard 
fare rates Mileage charge-Per mile or portion of mile 
Mileage charges begin and end at the Mauston city limits $1.50  
Service area-Maximum of five-mile radius outside city limits: 
• All trips must originate or terminate within the city (emergencies may be considered on a case by case basis by management). 
• Mileage charges begin and end at the city limits. 
• Service is not provided outside the five-mile radius except in the case of emergency or as a result of an emergency. 
Hours of operation: 
• Seven days per week, 6:30 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 
• Monday-Friday, two vehicles on duty, 7:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. 
• Saturday, two vehicles on duty, 9:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. 
• Sunday, two vehicles on duty, 7:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m. 
Holidays (no service): 
• New Year's Day 
• Easter Sunday 
• Thanksgiving Day 
• Christmas Day 
PARKING VIOLATIONS 
Two-Hour Parking Violations 
Reference State Statute 345.28 
Payment Timeframe Forfeiture Within seven days of issuance $20.00 First notice issued on eighth day, seven additional days to pay $40.00 Second notice issued eighth day after first notice, five additional days to pay; on the sixth day after second notice, registration is suspended $50.00 Must be paid to have license unsuspended $75.00  
Effective January 30, 2016. 
WINTER ALTERNATE SIDE PARKING VIOLATIONS 
Citation amount escalates for multiple offenses within a snow season 
as per Section 36-113 
Payment Timeframe Forfeiture Within seven days of issuance $20.00 First notice issued on eighth day, seven additional days to pay $40.00 Second notice issued eight days after first notice, five additional days to pay; on the sixth day after second notice, registration is suspended $50.00 Must be paid to have license unsuspended $75.00  
Effective January 30, 2016. 
2018 EQUIPMENT RENTAL RATES 
Also See State Highway Maintenance Manual Report 
for Additional Equipment Rates 
Equipment Description Hourly Plus Daily Dump truck <16,000 GVW $75.00 Dump truck w/snow plow or sander $100.00 Sand/ 
salt Sand/salt per ton $100.00 Sand/salt per yard $100.00 Flatbed truck w/hoist $30.00 Pick-up truck >1 ton $40.00 Utility truck w/hoist $50.00 Street sweeper (pick-up type) $150.00 Labor Front end loader (3 yard) $150.00 Labor Utility tractor $30.00 Tractor w/attachments $45.00 Tractor loader and backhoe $125.00 Striping machine $25.00 Barricades, flasher stands and traffic cones Available only in 
emergency situations 
$25.00 refundable 
damage deposit Portable generator emergencies only $50.00 Fuel Concrete saw, plus add'l charge of $2.00/linear foot $18.00 Labor Jet truck, plus add'l charge for water $200.00 $360.00 Personnel hourly rate $34.00 Personnel hourly rate when OT applies (1.5 x hourly rate) $51.00 Personnel hourly rate for weekends and holidays (2.5 hourly rate) $85.00  
Rental rates-Additional information: 
1.  A $50.00 damage deposit will be required on all rental equipment. 
2.  The city will not pick-up or deliver. Costs are portal-to-portal. 
3.  The decision to rent equipment will be made by the director of public works. 
4.  Equipment with operator is 1.5 times hourly rate (OT) for work over 40 hours; Saturday and Sunday is 2.5 times hourly rate. 
5.  Director of public works reserves the right to determine if a city equipment operator is to be used with a piece of equipment. 
MOWING-SHOVELING 
For each offense, the cost billed to the responsible party shall be the greater of: 
Listed fee 
OR 
Costs incurred plus $50.00 administrative fee 
Mowing 
Offenses Incurred During a Calendar Year 
First offense $100.00 Second offense $200.00 Third and subsequent offenses $300.00  
Sidewalk Clearing/Shoveling 
Offenses Incurred During a Snow Season 
First offense $ 75.00 Second offense $150.00 Third and subsequent offenses $250.00  
SEWER FIXED AND FLOW CHARGES 
Sewer Monthly Fixed Meter Charges 
Customer Class 5/8"-3/4" 1" 1-1/4" 1-1/2" 2" 3" 4" Allocation Factor 1 2.5 3.7 5 8 15 25 Residential $20.27 $50.67 $74.98 Commercial $30.40 $76.00 $112.48 $152.00 $243.20 $456.00 $760.01 Industrial $30.40 $76.00 $112.48 $152.00 $2,473.20 $456.00 $760.01 Public Authority $30.40 $76.00 $112.48 $152.00 $243.20 $456.00 $760.01 Sand Ridge (2) $1,950.04 WI Pride Cheese Special $1,185.96  
Sewer Monthly Flow Charges Per 1,000 Gallons 
Customer Class Charges Residential $2.27 Commercial $3.40 Public Authority $3.40 Industrial $3.40 Sand Ridge $4.53 Wis. Pride Monitoring required  
WATER FIXED AND FLOW CHARGES 
Water Monthly Fixed Meter Charges 
Meter Size 5/8"-3/4" 1" 1 1/4" 1 1/2" 2" 3" 4" Customer Class Residential $10.30 $15.45 Commercial $10.30 $15.45 $20.60 $25.75 $37.08 $59.74 $91.67 Public Authority $10.30 $15.45 $20.60 $25.75 $37.08 $59.74 $91.67 Industrial $10.30 $15.45 $20.60 $25.75 $37.08 $59.74 $91.67 Sand Ridge $37.08 x 2 Wis. Pride (Special) $1,221.54  
Water Monthly Flow Charges Per 1,000 Gallons 
First 14,000 gallons $2.96 Next 153,000 gallons $2.40 Over 167,000 gallons $1.98  
  
(Res. 2017-22 , Exh. A, 11-28-2017) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2017-22 , Exhibit A, adopted Nov. 28, 2017, amended appendix B in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former appendix B pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 2015 recodified Code. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1991 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1991 Code, as amended through May 26, 2015, which are included herein. Sections of the 1991 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1991 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1.01 1-1 - 1-2 1.02 1-4 1.03 1-7 2.02 10-2 2.03 10-3 2.04 10-4 2.05 10-1 3.101 10-5 3.102 2-1 3.104 2-25 3.105 2-26 3.107 2-56 3.108 2-2 3.201 2-117 3.202 2-118 3.203 2-119 3.205 2-120 3.206 2-121 3.208 2-122 3.209 2-123 3.211 34-1 3.304 2-86 3.305 2-87 3.307 2-88 3.308 2-89 3.310 2-90 3.311 2-91 3.313 2-92 3.314 2-93 3.316 2-94 3.319 2-3 3.401 2-173 3.403 2-174 3.404 2-175 3.405 2-176 3.407 2-178 3.408 2-179 3.409 2-180 3.411 2-181 3.414 2-172 3.501 2-204 3.502 2-205 3.504 2-203 3.505 2-182 3.601 12-21 3.602 12-22 3.604 12-23 3.605 12-24 3.607 12-25 3.608 12-26 3.609 12-27 5.01 2-264 5.05 2-265 5.06 2-266 6.01 2-296 6.02 2-297 6.04 2-298 6.06 2-299 6.07 12-1 6.08 2-300 6.09(1) 16-1 6.09(2) 2-301 6.09(3) 2-301 6.09(4) 2-301 6.09(5) 2-301 6.09(6) 2-301 6.09(7) 2-301 6.09(8) 16-1 6.09(9) 2-301 - 16-1 7.01 2-319 7.04 2-320 7.05 2-321 8.101 38-21 8.102 38-22 8.103 38-23 8.104 38-24 8.106 38-25 8.107 38-26 8.109 38-1 8.110 14-19 8.111 14-20 8.201 38-58 8.202 38-56 8.204 38-59 8.205 38-60 8.206 38-62 8.208 38-63 8.209 38-61 8.211 38-64 8.212 38-91 8.213 38-92 8.215 38-93 8.216 38-65 8.218 38-94 8.219 38-95 8.221 38-96 8.222 38-66 8.223 38-57 10.102 4-40 10.103 4-41 10.104 4-42 10.105 4-43 10.107 4-75 11.201 26-2 11.203 26-3 11.204 26-4 11.206 26-33 11.207 26-34 11.208 26-35 11.209 26-36 11.211 26-61 11.212 26-62 11.213 26-5 11.214 26-6 11.215 26-7 11.903 26-1 12.10 6-1 12.11 6-25 12.12 6-26 12.13 6-2 12.14 6-30 12.15 6-27 12.17 6-29 12.18 6-28 12.20 20-26 12.21 20-25 12.22 20-47 12.23 20-48 12.24 20-49 12.25 20-29 12.26 20-28 12.27 20-50 12.28 20-27 12.30 20-74 12.31 20-76 12.32 20-77 12.33 20-78 12.34 20-75 12.40 8-1 12.41 8-2 12.42 8-23 12.43 8-24 12.44 8-25 12.45 8-26 12.46 8-27 12.50 20-3 12.60 40-1 12.61 40-23 12.62 40-24 12.63 40-25 12.64 40-26 12.65 40-27 12.66 40-2 12.70 20-100 12.71 20-101 12.102 20-1 12.103 20-2 13.02 24-1 13.03 24-2 13.20 24-26 13.21 24-25 13.30 24-56 13.31 24-57 13.90 24-3 13.401 24-88 13.402 24-89 13.403 24-90 13.404 24-109 13.405 24-110 13.406 24-111 13.407 24-112 13.408 24-139 13.409 24-140 13.411 24-141 13.412 24-142 13.413 24-144 13.414 24-145 13.415 24-146 13.416 24-147 13.417 24-143 14.10 36-1 14.20 36-90 14.30 36-115 14.31 36-119 14.32 36-121 14.33 36-122 14.34 36-123 14.35 36-116 14.36 36-114 14.37 36-117 14.38 36-118 14.39 36-113 14.40 36-143 14.41 36-144 14.50 36-174 14.60 36-202 14.70 20-131 14.71 20-132 14.72 20-133 14.73 20-134 14.74 20-135 14.75 20-136 14.80 36-2 14.82 36-91 14.83 36-4 14.84 36-31 14.85 36-5 14.86 36-3 14.87 36-92 14.88 36-6 14.90 36-32 14.91 36-33 14.92 36-55 14.93 36-56 14.94 36-57 14.95 36-58 15.10 32-1 15.11 32-4 15.13 32-5 15.14 32-6 15.15 32-7 15.16 32-8 15.17 32-9 15.18 32-10 15.19 32-11 15.20 32-12 15.21 32-13 15.23 32-3 15.25 32-2 15.30 32-45 15.31 32-46 15.40 28-19 15.41 28-21 15.42 28-22 15.43 28-23 15.44 28-24 15.45 28-25 15.46 28-26 15.47 28-27 15.48 28-28 15.49 28-20 15.50 30-2 15.51 30-3 15.52 30-4 15.53 30-1 17.102 102-2 17.106 102-1 17.109 102-3 17.201 102-83 17.202 102-84 17.203 102-85 17.204 102-86 17.206 102-82 17.300 102-57 17.301 102-58 17.302 102-59 17.303 102-60 17.400 102-25 17.401 102-26 17.402 102-81 17.403 102-61 17.404 102-29 17.405 102-30 17.406 102-31 17.407 102-32 17.408 102-33 17.409 102-34 17.410 102-28 17.411 102-27 19.01 18-19 19.02 18-20 19.03 18-21 19.04 18-22 20.11 112-3 20.13 112-5 20.14 112-4 20.15 112-6 20.16 112-1 20.20 112-61 20.21 112-62 20.22 112-63 20.23 112-64 20.24 112-65 20.25 112-66 20.30 112-33 20.31 112-35 20.32 112-36 20.33 112-34 20.34 112-7 20.40 112-2 21.11 108-2 21.12 108-1 21.13 108-6 21.14 108-3 21.15 108-4 21.16 108-5 21.20 108-59 21.21 108-63 21.22 108-60 21.23 108-64 21.24 108-62 21.25 108-7 21.26 108-61 21.30 108-87 21.31 108-88 21.32 108-89 21.33 108-90 21.34 108-91 21.35 108-92 21.36 108-93 21.40 108-115 21.41 108-116 21.42 108-117 21.50 108-148 21.51 108-149 21.52 108-151 21.53 108-152 21.54 108-153 21.55 108-154 21.56 108-155 21.57 108-156 21.58 108-157 21.59 108-158 21.60 108-159 21.61 108-160 21.62 108-161 21.63 108-162 21.64 108-163 21.65 108-164 21.66 108-150 21.81 108-33 21.83 108-34 21.84 108-35 22.100 114-1 22.101 114-2 22.102 114-3 22.103 114-4 22.104 114-5 22.105 114-6 22.106 114-7 22.108 114-8 22.109 114-9 22.110 114-10 22.115 114-11 22.120 114-12 22.121 114-13 22.122 114-14 22.123 114-15 22.125 114-17 22.200 114-38 22.201 114-39 22.202 114-40 22.203 114-41 22.204 114-42 22.205 114-43 22.206 114-44 22.206(2) 114-45 22.207(1) 114-46 22.207(2) 114-47 22.207(3) 114-48 22.207(4) 114-49 22.207(5) 114-50 22.207(6) 114-51 22.208(1) 114-52 22.208(2) 114-53 22.208(3) 114-54 22.208(4) 114-55 22.208(5) 114-56 22.208(6) 114-57 22.208(7) 114-58 22.208(8) 114-59 22.208(9) 114-60 22.209 114-61 22.301 114-81 22.302 114-82 22.303 114-83 22.304 114-84 22.305 114-85 22.306 114-86 22.307 114-87 22.401 114-118 22.402 114-119 22.403 114-120 22.405 114-121 22.406 114-122 22.407 114-123 22.408 114-124 22.409 114-125 22.410 114-126 22.411 114-127 22.412 114-128 22.413 114-129 22.414 114-130 22.501 114-159 22.503 114-160 22.505 114-161 22.506 114-162 22.508 114-163 22.509 114-164 22.511 114-165 22.512 114-166 22.514 114-167 22.515 114-168 22.517 114-169 22.518 114-170 22.519 114-171 22.521 114-172 22.522 114-173 22.524 114-174 22.525 114-175 22.526 114-176 22.529 114-177 22.530 114-178 22.532 114-179 22.533 114-180 22.535 114-181 22.536 114-182 22.537 114-183 22.539 114-184 22.540 114-185 22.541 114-186 22.542 114-187 22.601 114-213 22.602 114-214 22.603 114-215 22.604 114-216 22.608 114-217 22.609 114-218 22.610 114-219 22.611 114-220 22.613 114-221 22.614 114-222 22.615 114-223 22.801 114-255 22.803 114-256 22.805 114-257 22.807 114-258 22.809 114-259 22.810 114-260 22.901 114-284 22.902 114-285 22.903 114-286 22.904 114-287 22.905 114-288 22.906 114-289 22.907 114-290 22.908 114-291 22.909 114-292 22.910 114-293 22.911 114-294 22.912 114-295 22.914 114-296 22.932 114-297 22.933 114-298 22.934 114-299 22.936 114-300 22.938 114-301 22.940 114-302 23.10 110-1 23.11 110-2 23.12 110-3 23.13 110-4 23.14 110-5 23.15 110-6 23.16 110-7 23.20 110-33 23.21 110-34 23.30 110-57 23.31 110-58 23.32 110-59 23.40 110-77 23.41 110-78 23.42 110-79 23.43 110-80 23.44 110-81 23.45 110-82 23.46 110-83 23.50 110-110 23.51 110-111 23.60 110-136 23.61 110-137 23.62 110-138 23.70 110-160 23.71 110-161 24.101 104-1 24.102 104-2 24.103 104-3 24.104 104-4 24.105 104-5 24.200 104-29 24.201 104-30 24.202 104-31 24.203 104-32 24.204 104-33 24.301 104-55 24.302 104-56 24.303 104-57 24.304 104-58 24.401 104-90 24.402 104-91 24.403 104-92 24.501 104-113 24.502 104-114 24.503 104-115 24.504 104-116 24.601 104-146 24.602 104-147 24.603 104-148 24.701 104-180 24.702 104-181 24.703 104-182 24.704 104-183 24.705 104-184 24.706 104-185 24.800 104-209 24.801 104-210 24.802 104-211 24.900 104-231 24.1001 104-256 25.01 1-71 - 1-72 - 1-73 25.02 1-52 26.101 22-1 26.102 22-3 26.103 22-4 26.104 22-5 26.105 22-6 26.106 22-7 26.108 22-2 26.124 114-16  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances adopted on or after February 24, 2015. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 2015-1078 2-24-2015 I 106-19 II 106-21 III 106-22 IV 106-23 V 106-24 VI 106-25 VII 106-26 VIII 106-27 IX 106-28 X 106-20 Ord. No. 2015-1079 3-10-2015 - 2-182 - 34-1 Ord. No. 2015-1080 5-26-2015 1 114-51 - 114-60 2 114-87 3 114-161 Ord. No. 2015-1081 8-11-2015 - 36-120 Ord. No. 2015-1082 12-8-2015 - App. A, Art. I Ord. No. 2016-1083  3- 8-2016 - Adopting Ord. Ord. No. 2016-1086  7-12-2016 -       Rpld 6-29(a)(3) Ord. No. 2016-1087  8-23-2016 - 14-19 Ord. No. 2016-1088  8-23-2016 - 38-1 Ord. No. 2016-1085 10-25-2016 - 22-1 Ord. No. 2017-1092  4-11-2017 1       Rpld 114-1-114-17 - 114-38-114-61 - 114-81-114-87 - 114-118-114-130 - 114-159-114-187 - 114-213-114-223 - 114-255-114-260 - 114-284-114-302 -       Added 114-1-114-16 - 114-38-114-48 - 114-81-114-87 - 114-114-114-131 - 114-159-114-186 - 114-253-114-261 - 114-284-114-302 Ord. No. 2017-1093  4-11-2017 - 1-73 - 24-2, 24-3 - 24-25 - 24-57 Ord. No. 2017-1095 11-28-2017 - 6-2 - 6-30 Ord. No. 2017-1096 11-28-2017 - 34-1 Ord. No. 2017-1097 12-12-2017 -       Added 2-124 Res. No. 2017-22 11-28-2017 Exh. A App. B Ord. No. 2018-1099  7-24-2018 - 36-2 -       Added 36-173 - 36-174 Ord. No. 2018-2002  2-13-2018 - 32-6(a) Ord. No. 2018-2005  2-13-2018 - 22-1 - 22-7  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Wisconsin Statutes (Wis. Stats.). 
Wis. Stats. 
Section Section 

in Code chs. 5-12 Ch. 10 (note) 5.15 10-4 5.25 10-5 5.76 10-5 8.10(6)(bm) 22-4 8.11 22-4 8.11(1)(b) App. A, § 2 8.50(4)(fm) 22-4 13.48(13) 104-5 - 110-5 16.61(3)(e) 2-2 17.12 App. A, § 4- 
App. A, § 9 19.01(4)(c) 22-3 19.21 et seq. 2-2 19.34(1) 2-2 19.35(3) 2-2 19.59 2-56 19.81 et seq. 2-25 - 114-300 23.33 36-1 - 36-173 - 36-174 23.33(11) 36-174 23.33(11)(am)3 36-174 27.08 2-176 29.337 26-62 ch. 30 Ch. 40 (note) - 104-32 - 104-56, 104-57 - 110-57 30.11 104-256 - 114-16 30.121 110-59 30.121(1) 110-161 30.2022 104-5 - 110-5 30.50-30.71 40-1 30.77(2) 40-1 30.77(4) 40-26 ch. 31 104-32 - 104-56 - 110-57 ch. 34 2-117 34.05 2-117 43.54 2-173 46.03(22) 114-123 ch. 48 22-5 - 26-4 50.01(1) 114-121 ch. 62 Ch. 2 (note) 62.08 10-2 62.09-62.09(13) 2-86-2-89 62.09 Ch. 2, Art. III - 2-93 62.09(1) 2-94 62.09(1)(a) 2-91, 2-92 62.09(1)(b) App. A, § 3 62.09(3)(c) App. A, § 4 62.09(5) 10-1 62.09(8) Ch. 2, Art. II 62.1 Ch. 2, Art. II 62.11(3)(f) 2-26 62.11(5) Ch. 24 (note) 62.12(7) 2-117 62.13 2-89, 2-90 - 2-264 - 2-298 62.13(6) 2-174 62.13(8)       Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 3 - 2-296 - 2-300 62.14(1) 2-175 62.14 2-204 62.15 Ch. 2, Art. IV - Ch. 32 - Ch. 38, Art. III 62.15(1) 2-321 62.16 Ch. 32 (note) 62.175 Ch. 38, Art. III 62.18 Ch. 38, Art. III 62.21(2) 2-25 62.21(3) 2-25 62.22 Ch. 32 (note) 62.221 110-161 62.23 2-178 - 104-1 - 104-211 - 110-1 - 114-123 62.23(5) 110-59 - 114-2 62.23(7)(c) 114-4 62.23(7)(d) 114-285, 114-286 62.23(7)(d)2 110-110 62.23(7)(e) 2-180 - 104-182 - 106-28 - 114-293 - 114-295 - 114-300 62.23(7)(e)7 114-293 - 114-295 62.23(7)(e)8 114-295 62.23(7)(h) 104-146 62.23(7)(he) 114-178 62.23(7)(i) 114-123 62.23(7)(i)1 114-123 62.23(7)(i)2 114-123 62.23(7a) 114-9 - 114-16 62.231 Ch. 110 (note) - 110-1 - 114-2 - 114-86 63.23 110-6 63.23(7)(d)2 110-110 63.231 110-59 ch. 65 Ch. 2, Art. IV ch. 66 Ch. 2 (note) 66.0101 2-26 66.0103 1-1 - ch. 114 (note) 66.0104 Ch. 24, Art. IV 66.0109 et seq. Ch. 1, Art. II, 
Div. 2 66.0111 1-52 - 26-1 66.0113(3) 1-52 66.0114 36-32 66.0119 2-301 - 22-5 - 38-1 - 102-30 - 114-297 66.0401 114-170 66.0409 26-61 66.0425 Ch. 32 (note) - 32-12, 32-13 66.0431 36-5 66.0433(1) 20-1 66.0433(2) 20-2 66.0435 Ch. 108 (note) - Ch. 108, Art. III - 108-6 - 108-117 66.0435(2) 108-64 66.0435(3)(c) 108-61 66.0435(6) 108-115 66.0502 2-3 - 2-89, 2-90 66.0511 Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 66.0513 Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 66.0601 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 66.0607 2-119 66.0615 2-182 66.0615(1) 34-1 66.0627 2-300 66.0701 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) - 38-64 66.0703 30-1 66.0801 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 66.0813(3) 38-26 66.0821 38-92 66.0907 32-4, 32-5 66.0907(4) 32-2 66.0909 114-302 66.1011 Ch. 18, Art. II 66.1019 Ch. 102, Art. III 66.1201 2-181 ch. 67 Ch. 2, Art. IV ch. 68 38-1 70.46(4) 2-86 - 2-179 70.47(7)(af) 2-91 70.67(1), (2) 2-124 ch. 71 114-44 71.57 et seq. 114-44 73.03(55) 2-179 73.09 2-91 74.37 2-91 85.13 36-56 86.07(2) 114-159 87.30 104-1 - 104-231 - 110-1 - 110-6 87.30 114-2 - 114-86 87.30(2) 110-138 94.65 114-176 94.67(25) 114-176 ch. 95 Ch. 8 (note) 95.39 114-176 100.37(1)(c) 114-176 ch. 101 Ch. 16 (note) - Ch. 102 (note) 101.123 26-7 101.14 2-301 - 16-1 101.58(2)(f) 114-176 101.58(2)(j) 114-176 101.60 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. III - 102-83 101.80 et seq. 102-86 101.86 102-86 101.91 Ch. 108 (note) 101.971 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. III - 102-83 106.04 18-22 106.50 18-19 - 18-21, 18-22 111.335(1)(c) 6-26 111.335 20-134 ch. 114 Ch. 4 (note) - 4-41 114.135 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. II 114.14(2)(g) 4-41 114.15 4-42 114.151 Ch. 4, Art. II - 4-40 114.2 4-41 118.105 36-3 124.05(5) 6-26 ch. 125 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-1, 6-2 - 6-29, 6-30 - 114-124 125.04(5)(b) 6-26 125.10 Ch. 6 (note) 125.12 6-30 125.17(3) 6-25 125.25 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 125.25(4) 6-25 125.26(4) 6-25 125.26(6) 6-27 125.51 Ch. 6, Art. II 125.51(2) 6-25 125.51(3)(b) 6-28 134.71 20-100 134.71(6) 20-101 139.08(4) 6-2 ch. 145 102-1 - 102-85 145.01(10) 102-1 160.50 Ch. 18, Art. II 162.13 Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 chs. 172-174 Ch. 8 (note) ch. 174 Ch. 8, Art. II - 8-27 174.05 8-24 174.05(4) 8-25 174.053 8-23 ch. 194 36-5 202.12 20-48 213.095 2-299 218.45 38-57 ch. 227 110-111 ch. 236 Ch. 112 (note) 236.02(12)(am) 104-256 236.10 et seq. Ch. 112, Art. II 236.34 112-66 236.45 Ch. 112 (note) 250.01 2-94 254.61(5) 26-7 280.30 14-19 ch. 281 28-19 281.31 110-1 - 110-110 281.31(2m) 110-161 281.45 38-25 chs. 287-289 Ch. 28 (note) ch. 287 28-19 287.07 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. II 287.09 Ch. 28, Art. II 287.10 Ch. 28, Art. II - 28-19 287.11(2m) 28-21 287.13 28-19 287.81 26-3 ch. 289 28-19 289.01(33) 114-125 289.35 114-2 ch. 299 28-19 ch. 323 Ch. 12 (note) - Ch. 12, Art. II 323.02 12-21 323.14 Ch. 12, Art. II 323.15 12-22 chs. 340-350 Ch. 36 (note) - 36-1 340.01 36-122 340.01(2g) 114-163 342.40 36-118 345.11 36-55 345.20-345.53 36-32 345.26(2) 36-57 345.28 36-55, 36-56 - 36-113 346.41 36-31 346.48(2)(b)2 36-120 346.50 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. IV 346.57 et seq. 36-90 346.70 36-4 ch. 349 Ch. 36 (note) 349.065 et seq. 36-31 349.09 36-31 349.11 36-90 349.13 Ch. 36, Art. IV - 36-115 - 36-117 349.17(2) 36-91 349.19 36-4 350.02 36-202 350.03 36-202 350.04 36-202 350.047 36-202 350.13 36-202 402.105 20-25 - 20-74 ch. 423 20-29 703.27 114-114 710.15 108-6 ch. 755 Ch. 22 (note) - 22-1 755.01(4) 22-2 755.03(2) 22-3 755.045 22-5 755.05 22-5 757.02(1) 22-3 ch. 800 22-7 800.06 22-4 800.09 et seq. Ch. 1, Art. II, 
Div. 2 801.11 110-161 ch. 815 1-72, 1-73 ch. 823 Ch. 24 (note) - Ch. 24, Art. II ch. 938 22-7 938.17(2)(cm) 22-5 938.261 22-5 938.343(4) 22-5 938.344 22-5 939.22 6-2 939.23 34-1 941.20 et seq. 26-61 943.24 1-73 943.50 1-73 ch. 945 24-25 946.10 2-56 946.11 2-56 946.12 2-56 946.13 2-56 ch. 951 Ch. 8 (note) ch. 980 38-56 ch. 985 104-256 - 108-90 - 110-83 - 110-161 - 112-36 - 114-16 - 114-288 985.05 2-1 990.001(4) 1-2 990.001(6) 1-3 990.001(11) 1-7 990.01 1-2  
