CODE OF ORDINANCES VILLAGE OF McFARLAND, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the Village Board of Trustees 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
McFARLAND, WISCONSIN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Mike Harried 
Village President 
____________ 
Kate Barrett 
David Crane 
Matt Dodge 
Sally Hansen 
Sharon Payne 
Kevin Wernet 
Village Trustees 
____________ 
Don Peterson 
Village Administrator 
____________ 
Lawrence Bechler 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Deb Neal 
Village Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1998 Code, as supplemented through December 1997, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Village Board. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1998 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been titled to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER ORDINANCES 	CHT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publisher is most grateful to Don Peterson, Village Administrator, Deb Neal, Village Clerk, and Lawrence E. Bechler, Village Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Village's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section titles; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin. 2009. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2009-23 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF McFARLAND, DANE COUNTY, WISCONSIN; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED; AND PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
The Village Board of the Village of McFarland do hereby ordain as follows: 
SECTION 1. 
The Code of Ordinances is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive Ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent Ordinance of the Village passed on or before December 31, 2009 to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
SECTION 2. 
All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2010, and all Ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Village of McFarland, enacted on final passage on or before December 31, 2009, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from the Code after January 1, 2010, except as hereinafter provided. 
SECTION 3. 
(a)  The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect the following, except that some of the following provisions existing at the time of adoption may be amended by this recodification: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Ordinance; 
(2)  Any Ordinance or Resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Village, or any contract or obligations assumed by the Village; 
(3)  The administrative Ordinances or Resolutions of the Village not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the Code; 
(4)  Any appropriation Ordinance or Resolution; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the Village Board to any person, firm or corporation; 
(6)  Any Ordinance or Resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street, road or public way in the Village; 
(7)  Any Ordinance or Resolution establishing the prescribing of street or road grade of any streets or roads in the Village; 
(8)  Any Ordinance or Resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special assessments therefor; 
(9)  Any Ordinance or Resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the Village; 
(10)  Any Ordinance or Resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures, except that these Ordinances have been amended as part of this recodification; 
(11)  The one- and two-family dwelling Building Code; and any other Building Codes except that these Ordinances have been amended as part of this recodification; 
(12)  The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the Village of whatever name or description; 
(13)  Any Ordinance annexing property to the Village; 
(14)  Zoning Ordinances; 
(15)  Charter Ordinances; 
(16)  Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations relating to sewer and water main construction; 
(17)  the March 27, 2006 Ordinance adopting the Village of McFarland Comprehensive Plan and the July 13, 2009 Ordinance amending said Plan. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal be construed to revive any Ordinance or part of an Ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent Ordinance which is repealed by this Ordinance. 
SECTION 4. 
A copy of the Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk, preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the Village Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the Village Clerk or someone authorized by the Village Clerk, to insert in their designated places all amendments, Ordinances or Resolutions which indicate the intention of the Village Board to make the same a part of the Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Code all provisions which may be repealed from time to time by the Village Board. This copy of the Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it. 
SECTION 5. 
All Ordinances or parts in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
SECTION 6. 
This Ordinance shall become effective January 1, 2010. 
Passed, Approved and Adopted by the Village Board on this 14th day of December, 2009, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0103. 
APPROVED: 
_____	
Michael Harried, Village President 	
 
ATTEST: 
_____	
Deb Neal, Village Clerk 	
  
PART I - CHARTER ORDINANCES[1] 
VILLAGE OF McFARLAND CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 1-88 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE TO CREATE A PROCEDURE FOR DEFINING 
[AUTHORITY,] COMMITTEE, BOARD AND COMMISSION VACANCIES 
The Village Board of the Village Board of McFarland do ordain as follows: 
Section 1: The Village of McFarland, pursuant to Wis. Stats. 1985 §§ 17.03(13) and 66.01, hereby elects to declare by special provision of law the events which may create a vacancy on Village [Authorities,] Committees, Boards and Commissions. 
Section 2: Section 1.05(f) of the McFarland Municipal Code is hereby created to read as follows. 
"(f)  Attendance. The chair of each [authority,] committee, board and commission shall maintain a record of the attendance of the members at meetings. Any member who misses a meeting shall give prior notice of the absence to the chair. On any [authority,] committee, board or commission chaired by a non-trustee, if the non-trustee chair misses a meeting, he or she shall give prior notice of the absence to another [authority,] committee, board or commission officer, who shall thereafter maintain a record of the non-trustee chair's attendance at meetings. Failure to attend regularly scheduled meetings four times in any year commencing from the annual organizational meeting shall be deemed to be an event by which the member or chair vacates the position to which he or she was appointed. The chair or other officer shall notify the Village Clerk of any vacancies created by absences, and the Clerk shall confirm the vacancy in writing to the former member or chair and the President." 
Section 3: This is a charter ordinance and shall take effect 60 days after its passage and publication unless within such 60 day period a referendum petition as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.01 shall be filed, in which case this ordinance shall not take effect until it shall have been submitted to a referendum vote of the electors and approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. 
The above and foregoing charter ordinance was duly adopted at a regular meeting of the Village Board on the 19th day April, 1988 at McFarland, Wisconsin. 
ORDINANCE 96-07 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE TO MODIFY THE TERMS OF 
OFFICE OF THE CITIZEN MEMBERS OF THE PLAN COMMISSION 
Purpose: For may [many] years, the citizen members of the Plan Commission have been appointed for gradually lengthening terms to provide experience without being committed to a full three-year term of office. One effect of this selection process is the possibility that many terms of office may expire in a given year, losing the benefits of staggered terms of office. 
This Ordinance attempts to balance the existing policy with the benefits of staggered terms. 
Sponsor: Administrator Peterson 
Recommended Referral: Plan Commission 
Public Hearing: Suggested 
The Village Board of the Village of McFarland do hereby ordain as follows: 
1.  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 61.195, 61.197 and 66.01, the Village of McFarland hereby elects not to be governed by those portions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1), as made applicable to villages by Wis. Stats. § 61.35, which are in conflict with this Ordinance. 
2.  Section 2-4-3(b)(12) of the McFarland Municipal Code is hereby repealed and recreated to read as follows: 
"(2)  Citizen Members. The citizen members shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to Village Board approval, at the organizational meeting, for the terms set forth herein. Upon an initial appointment, a citizen member shall serve a one year term. If the citizen member is reappointed, the second term shall be for a term of no less than one nor more than three years, so that no more than two reappointed citizen members' terms shall expire in any one year. Thereafter, for any subsequent term, the citizen members shall serve staggered three year terms." 
This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect 60 days after its passage and publication unless within such 60 day period a referendum petition as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.01 shall be filed, in which case this Ordinance shall not take effect until it shall have been submitted to a referendum vote of the electors and approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. 
The above and foregoing Charter Ordinance was duly adopted at a regular meeting of the McFarland Village Board on the 13 day of May, 1996. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the Charter Ordinances of the Village. They are included in chronological/numerical order. Each Charter Ordinance contains the substance as adopted by the governing body, but publication clauses and signatures have been omitted. Charter Ordinances that have been repealed or are otherwise no longer in effect are included by title with the repealed text stricken through with an explanation of the status in an editor's note preceding such Charter Ordinance. Complete copies of each Charter Ordinance as adopted are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk and with the Wisconsin Secretary of State. The status of each Charter Ordinance which is superseded or no longer in effect is indicated in an editor's note for each applicable Charter Ordinance. The Charter Ordinances have also been included in the codification and the location of the Charter Ordinance is indicated in the editor's note for each ordinance. Changes made for clarity have been enclosed in brackets. 
State Law reference— Charter ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103. 
 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
This Code and the ordinances contained herein shall be known and referred to as the "Code of Ordinances, Village of McFarland, Wisconsin," and may also be cited as the "McFarland Municipal Code." 
(Code 1998, § 1-1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the following rules or meanings shall be applied in the construction and interpretation of ordinances codified in this Code of Ordinances unless such application would be clearly inconsistent with the plain meaning or intent of the ordinances: 
(a)  Code, Code of Ordinances and McFarland Municipal Code. This Code of Ordinances of the Village of McFarland unless the context of the Section clearly indicates otherwise. 
(b)  Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these ordinances, the day of the act or event from which the period of time begins to run shall not be included, but the last day of the period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. If the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. As used in this Section, "legal holiday" means any statewide legal holiday specified by Wisconsin law. 
State Law reference— Similar rule of construction, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(4). 
(c)  County. Dane County, Wisconsin. 
(d)  Delegation of authority. Unless otherwise prohibited, whenever by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission, committee, authority, or other agency of the Village is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer or employee shall mean and include such officer or any designee or authorized subordinate and shall also include the successor in function to such officer or employee. 
(e)  Fine. The equivalent of the word forfeiture. 
(f)  General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed according to their plain meaning in common usage. However, words or phrases with a technical or special meaning shall be understood and construed according to that technical or special meaning if such is the intent of the ordinances. 
(g)  Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more Village officers or employees shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. 
State Law reference— Similar rule of construction, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(8). 
(h)  May and shall. The word "may" is permissive. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(i)  Oath. Includes affirmation in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. If any oath or affirmation is required to be taken such oath or affirmation shall be taken before and administered by some officer authorized by the laws of this state to administer oaths, at the place where the same is required to be taken or administered, unless otherwise expressly directed, and, when necessary, duly certified by such officer. If an oath is administered it shall end with the words "so help me God." In actions and proceedings in the courts, a person may take an oath or affirmation in communication with the administering officer by telephone or audiovisual means. 
State Law reference— Similar rule of construction, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(24). 
(j)  Officers. Refers solely to local offices created by state statute. 
(k)  Officers, departments, authorities, boards, committees, commissions, etc. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, committee, commission, authority or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin." 
(l)  Officials. All Village officers and employees. 
(m)  Owner. As applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
(n)  Person. Any of the following entities: natural persons, corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, limited liability partnerships, associations, bodies politic or any other entity of any kind which is capable of being sued. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(1). 
(o)  Singular and plural. Every word in these ordinances referring to the singular number only shall also be construed to apply to several persons or things, and every word in these ordinances referring to a plural number shall also be construed to apply to one person or thing. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(1). 
(p)  State. The State of Wisconsin. 
(q)  State law reference acts by agents. When an ordinance requires an act be done by a person which may be legally performed by an authorized agent of that principal person, the requirement shall be construed to include all acts performed by such agents. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(9). 
(r)  Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude the interpretation of the verb in the future tense where appropriate. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(3). 
(s)  The phrase used for shall include, but not be limited to, the phrases "arranged for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
(t)  Wisconsin Administrative Code, Wis. Admin. Code. The Wisconsin Administrative Code as of the adoption of this Code, as amended or renumbered from time to time. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(5). 
(u)  Wisconsin Statutes, Wis. Stats. The Wisconsin Statutes for 2015—2016, as amended from time to time. Future amendments shall be incorporated herein. 
(v)  Village. The Village of McFarland, Dane County, Wisconsin. 
(Code 1998, § 1-1-2; Ord. No. 99-06, § 1, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 2-14-2011; Ord. No. 2017-17 , § 1, 7-10-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. §§ 990.001, 990.01.  
Sec. 1-3. - Titles of Sections. 
The titles of the several Sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere words to indicate the contents of the Section or any part of the Section and unless expressly otherwise provided, they shall be so deemed when any of such Sections, including the titles, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-4. - References to Chapters or Sections. 
All references to Chapters, Articles, Divisions or Sections are to the Chapters, Articles, Divisions and Sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
The state law references and editor's notes appearing after Sections throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after Sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the Section.  
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing Code or ordinances; effect of repeal. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are the same in substance as those of the Code provisions and ordinances heretofore existing shall be construed as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactment. Any act done, offense committed, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time of such repeal shall not be affected by such repeal, but may be enjoined, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected.  
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, penalties. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-9. - Ordinances unaffected by Code. 
All ordinances heretofore adopted by the Village Board that are in conflict with the provisions of this Code are hereby repealed, except all ordinances or parts of ordinances relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with any of the provisions of this Code: 
(a)  The issuance of corporate bonds, notes and obligations of the Village. 
(b)  The establishment of grades, curb and ditch lines and widths of sidewalks or roadways in the public highways. 
(c)  The fixing of salaries of public officials and employees. 
(d)  Rights, licenses or franchises granted by the Village or pursuant to its authority. 
(e)  The creation of any contract with the Village or any of its lawfully authorized authorities, boards, committees, commissions, departments, or agencies. 
(f)  The lighting of highways, roadways and streets. 
(g)  The naming and changing of names for public highways, grounds and parks. 
(h)  Release of persons, firms or corporations from liability. 
(i)  Tax and special assessment levies. 
(j)  Construction of public works. 
(k)  Annual budget and appropriation ordinances, resolutions and actions. 
(l)  Annexations. 
(m)  Rezonings or Zoning Map amendments.  
Sec. 1-10. - Repeal. 
When any ordinance having the effect of repealing a prior ordinance is itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive the prior ordinance or any part thereof, unless expressly so provided. 
(Code 1998, § 1-1-2(k); Ord. No. 99-06, § 1, 2-8-1999) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(1).  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. 
(b)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by Section, Subdivision, Division, Article or Chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance.  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Village. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate titles and headings for Chapters, Articles, Divisions, Subdivisions and Sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such headings and titles or in any such headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to Chapters, Articles, Divisions, Subdivisions and Sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to Chapters, Articles, Divisions, Subdivisions or Sections. 
(5)  Change the terms "this ordinance" or similar terms to "this Chapter," "this Article," "this Division," "this Subdivision," "this Section" or "Sections _____ to _____" (inserting Section numbers to indicate the Sections of the Code that embody the substantive Sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code.  
Sec. 1-13. - Separability of provisions. 
If any provision of this Code of Ordinances is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other provisions of these ordinances. 
(Code 1998, § 1-1-4)  
Sec. 1-14. - Effective date of ordinances. 
(a)  Code. The Code of Ordinances of the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin shall take effect as provided by state law. 
(b)  Subsequent ordinances. All ordinances passed by the Village Board subsequent to the adoption of the Code of Ordinances, except when otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect from and after their publication. 
(Code 1998, § 1-1-5; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Effective date of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 61.50; Code of Ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103.  
Sec. 1-15. - Village Clerk-Treasurer to maintain copies of documents incorporated by reference. 
Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein and the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office a copy of any such material as adopted and as amended from time to time. Materials on file at the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office shall be considered public records open to reasonable examination by any person during the office hours of the Village Clerk-Treasurer subject to such restrictions on examination as the Village Clerk-Treasurer imposes for the preservation of the material. 
(Code 1998, § 1-1-7; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 5, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 1, 6-26-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 1, adopted June 26, 2017, changed the title of § 1-15 from "Village Clerk to maintain copies of documents incorporated by reference" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 1-16. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  General penalty. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this Code, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense—Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution and all applicable surcharges and assessments, and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  Second offense—Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each such offense, together with costs of prosecution and all applicable surcharges and assessments, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding six months. 
In addition to the general penalty in this Section or any other penalty imposed for violation of any Section of this Code, any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. 
(b)  Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Village from taking and maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(c)  Other remedies. The Village shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution above including, but not limited to, restitution and community service. 
(Code 1998, §§ 1-1-6, 11-3-9) 
State Law reference— Actions for violation of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0114; unpaid forfeitures, Wis. Stats. § 66.0115; restitution, Wis. Stats. § 800.093; community service, Wis. Stats. § 800.094.  
Sec. 1-17. - Authorization for use of citation. 
The Village hereby elects to use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances. All Village officers and other Village personnel charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code of Ordinances are hereby authorized pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(1)(a), to issue citations for violations of this Code of Ordinances, including ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists. 
(Code 1998, § 1-2-1; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 2, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Actions for violation of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0114; citation for ordinance violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0113; actions in municipal courts, Wis. Stats. § 800.02.  
Sec. 1-18. - Officials authorized to issue citation. 
Citations authorized in Section 1-17 may be issued by law enforcement officers of the Village and by the following designated Village officials with respect to Sections of the Code which are directly related to the official's area of responsibility. The officials granted authority to issue citations under this Section may delegate the authority to other Village employees within the designated official's department with the approval of the Village Board: 
(a)  Building Inspector. 
(b)  Fire Inspector. 
(c)  Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Inspector. 
(d)  Electrical Inspector. 
(e)  Plumbing Inspector. 
(f)  Zoning Administrator. 
(g)  Village Forester. 
(h)  Director of Public Works. 
(i)  Weed Commissioner. 
(j)  Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer. 
(Code 1998, § 1-2-2; Ord. No. 2020-14 , § 1, 4-27-2020)  
Sec. 1-19. - Form of citation. 
The form of the citation to be issued by Village police officers or other designated Village officials is incorporated herein by reference and shall provide for the following information: 
(a)  The name, address, date of birth and physical description of the alleged violator; 
(b)  The factual allegations describing the alleged violation; 
(c)  The date, time and place of the offense; 
(d)  The Section of the ordinance violated; 
(e)  A designation of the offense in such manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so; 
(f)  The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court; 
(g)  A statement that in essence informs the alleged violator: 
(1)  That the alleged violator may make a cash deposit of a specified amount to be mailed to a specified official within a specified time; 
(2)  That if the alleged violator makes such a deposit; such alleged violator need not appear in court unless subsequently summoned; 
(3)  That if the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not appear in court, the alleged violator will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture plus all applicable costs, assessments and surcharges, not to exceed the amount of the deposit, or will be summoned into court to answer the complaint if the court does not accept the plea of no contest; 
(4)  That if the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does not appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a summons or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the nonappearance to be a plea of no contest and enter judgment under Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(3)(d), or the Village may commence an action against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture, plus all applicable costs, assessments and surcharges; 
(5)  That if the court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that prohibits conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct prohibited by Wisconsin Statutes punishable by fine or imprisonment or both, and that the violation resulted in damage to the property of or physical injury to a person other than the alleged violator, the court may summon the alleged violator into court to determine if restitution shall be ordered under Wis. Stats. § 800.093. 
(h)  A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the alleged violator shall sign an appropriate statement which accompanies the citation to indicate that the alleged violator read the statement required under Subsection (g) of this Section and shall send the signed statement with the cash deposit; 
(i)  Such other information as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1998, § 1-2-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0113(1)(b), 800.02(2)(a).  
Sec. 1-20. - Schedule of cash deposits. 
The schedule of cash deposits for the various ordinances for which a citation may be issued are as established on the deposit schedule promulgated by the municipal court and adopted by the Village Board, a copy of which is on file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. In addition to the deposit amount listed, the deposit must include court costs, surcharges, and assessments as imposed by Wis. Stats. § 800.10. The Chief of Police shall be provided a copy of all bond schedules and amendments thereto. 
(Code 1998, § 1-2-4; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 6, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 2, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Bond or cash deposit for violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0111; fees and costs in municipal court, Wis. Stats. § 800.10.  
Sec. 1-21. - Receipt of cash deposits. 
Deposits shall be made in cash, money order, personal checks, certified check, credit card, debit card or electronic payment to the Clerk of Municipal Court. Receipts shall be given for all deposits received. 
(Code 1998, § 1-2-5)  
Sec. 1-22. - Procedure. 
Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(3), relating to violator's options and procedures on default, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1998, § 1-2-6; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 3, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Violator's options, default procedure, Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(3).  
Sec. 1-23. - Nonexclusivity of Chapter. 
(a)  Adoption of Sections 1-17—1-22 does not preclude the Village Board from adopting any other ordinance providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matters. 
(b)  The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the Village or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter does not preclude the issuance of a citation under this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 1-2-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 66.0113(4).  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power and duty of village president, Wis. Stats. § 61.24; power and duty of village board, Wis. Stats. § 61.34; power and duty of village clerk, Wis. Stats. § 61.25; power and duty of village treasurer, Wis. Stats. § 61.26; power and duty of deputy village treasurer, Wis. Stats. § 61.261; power and duty of village assessor, Wis. Stats. § 61.27; power and duty of village peace officers, Wis. Stats. § 61.31; code of ethics, Wis. Stats. § 19.41 et seq.; judgments against public officers, Wis. Stats. § 895.46. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VILLAGE GOVERNMENT AND ELECTIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-19. - Village government. 
The Village is a body corporate and politic with the powers of a municipality at common law and governed by the provisions of the Wis. Stats. Chs. 61 and 66, laws amending those chapters, other acts of the legislature and the Constitution of the State of Wisconsin. 
(Code 1998, § 2-1-1) 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Wis. Const., art. XI, sec. 3.  
Sec. 2-20. - Official newspaper. 
The official Village newspaper shall be The McFarland Thistle, to be used for the publication of legal and/or official notices and documents. 
(Code 1998, § 2-1-3) 
State Law reference— Designation of official newspaper for the village, Wis. Stats. § 985.05.  
Secs. 2-21—2-43. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Annual elections, Wis. Stats. § 61.19. 
 
Sec. 2-44. - Election officials. 
Pursuant to the Wisconsin Statutes, there is hereby established one set of election inspectors to conduct all elections of the Village, which shall consist of at least five election inspectors. However, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall have the power to increase the number of election inspectors or select two or more sets of election inspectors to work at different times on election day and permit the Village Clerk-Treasurer to establish different working hours for different election inspectors assigned to the same polling place. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall determine in advance of each election whether the number of election inspectors for such election should be increased or provide for the selection of two or more sets of election inspectors. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may serve as a tabulator. 
(Code 1998, § 2-1-4; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 7, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 10-14-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 3, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Appointment of election officials, Wis. Stats. § 7.30.  
Sec. 2-45. - Nomination of candidates for elective Village office. 
(a)  All candidates for elective Village office in the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin, shall be nominated by a nonpartisan primary, under Wis. Stats. § 8.05(5). 
(b)  Nomination papers shall be signed by not less than 20 nor more than 100 electors of the Village. The papers shall be circulated not sooner than December 1 preceding the election and shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer not later than 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in January or the next day if Tuesday is a holiday. 
(c)  No additional candidates may be nominated, by caucus or otherwise, except as above provided. 
(d)  Notice of the nonpartisan primary shall be given by the Village Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1998, § 2-1-5; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 8, 9, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 4, 5, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Nomination in villages, Wis. Stats. § 8.05.  
Sec. 2-46. - Election poll hours. 
The voting polls in the Village shall be opened from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for all elections. 
(Code 1998, § 2-1-2) 
State Law reference— Poll hours, Wis. Stats. § 6.78.  
Sec. 2-47. - Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers. 
(a)  The Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers shall be composed of the Village Clerk-Treasurer, or a qualified elector of the Village designated by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and two other qualified electors of the Village appointed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer for a term of two years commencing on January 1 of each odd-number year. The Village may appoint additional inspectors under Wis. Stats. § 7.30(2)(a) to assist the board of absentee canvassers in canvassing absentee ballots under this Section. 
(b)  The Village Board declares in lieu of canvassing absentee ballots at polling places under Wis. Stats. § 6.88, the Municipal Board of Absentee Canvassers may canvass absentee ballots at an election held in the Village. 
(c)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give at least 48 hours' notice of any meeting under this Section. 
(d)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer, no later than the closing hour of the polls, shall post at the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office and on the Internet at a site announced by the Village Clerk-Treasurer before the polls open, and shall make available to any person upon request, a statement of the number of absentee ballots that the Village Clerk-Treasurer has mailed or transmitted to electors and that have been returned by the closing hour on election day. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1(2-1-6), 10-13-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 6, 7, 6-26-2017)  
Secs. 2-48—2-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - VILLAGE BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Power and duty of village board, Wis. Stats. § 61.34. 
 
Sec. 2-66. - Established. 
The Village President and Trustees shall constitute the Village Board. The Village Board shall be vested with all the powers of the Village not specifically given some other officer, as well as those powers set forth elsewhere throughout this Code. Members of the Village Board shall be residents of the Village at the time of their election and during their terms of office. 
(Code 1998, §§ 2-2-1, 2-2-7) 
State Law reference— Village board, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.20, 61.32, 61.34.  
Sec. 2-67. - Village Trustees. 
(a)  Election, term, number. The Village shall have six Village Trustees in addition to the Village President, who is a Village Trustee by virtue of office as Village President. Three Village Trustees shall be elected at each annual spring election for a term of two years, commencing on the third Tuesday of April in the year of their election. 
(b)  Appointment as Village President. A Village Trustee shall be eligible for appointment as Village President to fill an unexpired term. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-2) 
State Law reference— Trustees, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.20, 61.23, 61.325.  
Sec. 2-68. - Village President. 
(a)  Election. The Village President shall be elected at the annual spring election in odd-numbered years for a term of two years, commencing on the third Tuesday of April in the year of election. 
(b)  Duties. The Village President shall by virtue of office be a Trustee and preside at all meetings of the Village Board, have a vote as Trustee, and sign all ordinances, rules, bylaws, regulations and commissions adopted or authorized by the Village Board and all orders drawn on the treasury. The Village President shall maintain peace and good order, see that the Village ordinances are faithfully obeyed, and in case of disturbance, riot or other apparent necessity appoint as many special marshals as the Village President shall deem necessary, who for the time being shall possess all the powers and rights of constables. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-3) 
State Law reference— Village president, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.23, 61.24.  
Secs. 2-69—2-132. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE VILLAGE BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-133. - General powers of the Village Board. 
(a)  Generally. The Village Board shall be vested with all the powers of the Village not specifically given some other officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Village Board shall have the management and control of the Village property, finances, highways, streets, navigable waters and the public service, and shall have the power to act for the government and good order of the Village, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public, and may carry its powers into effect by license, regulation, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation, fine, imprisonment and other necessary or convenient means. The powers hereby conferred shall be in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express language. 
(b)  Acquisition and disposal of property. The Village Board may: 
(1)  Acquire property, real or personal, within or without the Village, for parks, libraries, historic places, recreation, beautification, streets, waterworks, sewage or waste disposal, harbors, improvement of watercourses, public grounds, vehicle parking areas and for any other public purpose; 
(2)  Acquire real property within or contiguous to the Village, by means other than condemnation, for industrial sites; 
(3)  Improve and beautify the same; 
(4)  Construct, own, lease and maintain buildings on such property for instruction, recreation, amusement and other public purposes; and 
(5)  Sell and convey such property. 
Condemnation shall be as provided by the Wis. Stats. Ch. 32. 
(c)  Acquisition of easements and property rights. Confirming all powers granted to the Village Board and in furtherance thereof, the Village Board is expressly authorized to acquire by gift, purchase or condemnation under the Wisconsin Statutes, any and all property rights in lands or waters, including rights of access and use, negative or positive easements, restrictive covenants, covenants running with land, scenic easements and any rights for use of property of any nature whatsoever, however denominated, which may be lawfully acquired for the benefit of the public or for any public purpose, including the exercise of powers granted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23; and may sell and convey such easements or property rights when no longer needed for public use or protection. 
(d)  Village finances. The Village Board may levy and provide for the collection of taxes and special assessments; may refund any tax or special assessment paid, or any part thereof, when satisfied that the same was unjust or illegal; and generally may manage the Village finances. The Village Board may loan money to any school district located within the Village or within which the Village is wholly or partially located in such sums as are needed by such district to meet the immediate expenses of operating the schools thereof, and the Board of the District may borrow money from such Village accordingly and give its note therefor. No such loan shall be made to extend beyond August 30 next following the making thereof or in an amount exceeding one-half of the estimated receipts for such district as certified by the State Superintendent of Public Instruction and the local school clerk. The rate of interest on any such loan shall be determined by the Village Board. 
(e)  Construction of powers. Consistent with the purpose of giving to villages the largest measure of self-government in accordance with the spirit of the home rule amendment to the Constitution, Article XI, Section 3, the grants of power to the Village Board in this Section and throughout this Code shall be liberally construed in favor of the rights, powers and privileges of villages to promote the general welfare, peace, good order and prosperity of the Village and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-5) 
State Law reference— Powers of village board, Wis. Const., art. XI, sec. 3, Wis. Stats. § 61.34(1), (3)—(5).  
Sec. 2-134. - Cooperation with other municipalities. 
The Village Board, on behalf of the Village, may join with other counties, villages, cities, towns or other governmental entities in a cooperative arrangement for executing any power or duty in order to attain greater economy or efficiency, including joint employment of appointive officers and employees. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-6; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 6, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Powers of the village board, cooperation with other municipalities, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.34(2), 66.0301, 66.0311.  
Sec. 2-135. - Parliamentary powers. 
The Village Board has the power to preserve order at its meetings, compel attendance of Village Trustees and punish nonattendance and it shall be judge of the election and qualification of its members. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-7) 
State Law reference— Meetings, Wis. Stats. § 61.32.  
Sec. 2-136. - Salaries. 
(a)  The Village President and other Village Trustees who make up the Village Board, whether operating under general or special law, may by a three-fourths vote of all the members of the Village Board determine that a salary be paid the Village President and Village Trustees. The salaries and compensation to be paid shall be determined by ordinance of the Village Board. Salaries heretofore established shall so remain until changed by ordinance and shall not be increased or diminished during their terms of office. 
(b)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 61.32 and 755.04 and this Section of the McFarland Municipal Code, the salaries of the following Village officials are hereby modified, effective April 21, 2015: 
(1)  The salary of the Village Trustees is hereby increased to $40.00 per meeting attended. 
(2)  The salary of the Village President is hereby changed to $1,800.00 per year plus $40.00 per meeting attended. 
(3)  For purposes of this Division, "meeting" shall mean all regular and special meetings of the Village Board or any regular or special Committee or Commission meetings attended by the officer as a member of that Committee or Commission. Attendance at meetings of Committees or Commissions of which that officer is not a member shall not be compensated. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-8; Ord. No. 2002-12, 10-14-2002; Ord. No. 2004-23, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2012-22, 12-10-2012; Ord. No. 2013-18, 11-25-2013) 
State Law reference— Village board compensation, Wis. Stats. § 61.32.  
Secs. 2-137—2-154. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MEETINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Meeting, Wis. Stats. § 61.32; meetings to be open to the public, exceptions, Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-155. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held on the second Monday and fourth Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. If such second or fourth Monday is a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the following secular day at the same time and place, or at such other date and time as the Village Board shall designate. When the Village Board designates a date and time for the regular Village Board meeting, notice thereof shall be posted at the McFarland Municipal Center and in the official Village newspaper prior to such re-scheduled meeting date. All meetings of the Village Board shall be held at the McFarland Municipal Center, unless specified otherwise in the minutes of the preceding meeting or by written notice posted at the regular meeting place at least three hours prior to any meeting. In any event, all regular Village Board meetings shall be held within the boundaries of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-9(a))  
Sec. 2-156. - Annual organizational meeting. 
The Village Board shall hold an annual organizational meeting on the third Tuesday in April following the spring election for the purpose of organization. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-9(b))  
Sec. 2-157. - Committee of the whole. 
The Village President may declare the entire Village Board a committee of the whole for informal discussion at any meeting or for any other purpose, and shall be ex officio chairperson of the committee of the whole. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-4(c)(3))  
Sec. 2-158. - Board minutes. 
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of all Village Board proceedings and cause the proceedings to be published. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-9(c); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 11, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 8, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Meetings, Wis. Stats. § 61.32.  
Sec. 2-159. - Special meetings. 
(a)  Special meetings of the Village Board may be called by the Village President, or by two Village Trustees filing a written request with the Village Clerk-Treasurer at least 24 hours prior to the time specified for such meeting. The Village Clerk-Treasurer, in consultation with the Village President, shall select the day for the special meeting and immediately notify each Village Trustee of the time and purpose of such meeting. The notice shall be delivered or mailed to each Village Trustee personally or left at the Village Trustee's usual place of abode a minimum of 24 hours prior to the meeting time. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall cause a record of such notice to be filed in the Village office prior to the time fixed for such special meeting. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting except for the purposes stated in the notice thereof. Notice to the public of special meetings shall conform to the open meeting requirements of Wis. Stats. §§ 61.32 and 19.81 et seq. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice immediately upon the call for such meeting being filed. 
(b)  The request for any special meeting shall state the purpose for which the meeting is to be called. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-10; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 12, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 9, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Meetings and notice, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.32, 985.02(2)(a); open meetings, Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq.  
Sec. 2-160. - Open meetings; adjournment of meetings. 
(a)  Open meetings law compliance. All meetings shall be open to the public, unless falling within a lawful exception of the Wisconsin Open Meetings Law, Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq. 
(b)  Adjournment of meetings. Regular sessions of the Village Board may be adjourned from time to time for later reconvening. Any such adjournment may provide for reconvening at the same place or another place. An adjournment to a closed session may be only for a permitted purpose as enumerated in Wis. Stats. § 19.85, and must meet the other requirements of said Wis. Stats. § 19.85. 
(c)  Meetings to be open. During the holding of any open session in the regular meeting room or in the substituted meeting room, said room and said meeting shall at all times be open and remain open to all citizens. 
(d)  Closed meetings. The provisions of this Code do not prohibit the Village Board or any committee thereof from having a closed meeting which is legally convened and legally held in a room in said building other than the official meeting room or in some other building in the Village. 
(e)  Attendance of Village officers. Each department head shall attend any regular or special meeting of the Village Board whenever an item of business that falls within that department head's area of responsibility is on the agenda for discussion or action, or whenever requested by the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-11) 
State Law reference— Meetings, Wis. Stats. § 61.32; open meetings, Wis. Stats. § 19.81 et seq.  
Sec. 2-161. - Quorum. 
(a)  Four members of the Village Board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn or compel attendance of absent members if a majority of the members-elect is not present. The Village President shall be counted in computing a quorum. 
(b)  When the presiding officer shall have called the members to order, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall proceed to call the roll, noting who are present, and who are absent. If, after having gone through with the call, it shall appear that a quorum is not present, the fact shall be entered in the minutes, and the members present may adjourn to a later date in the month. If they do not establish the next meeting date, the Village Board shall stand adjourned to the time appointed for the next regular meeting unless a special meeting is called sooner. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-12; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 13, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 10, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Meetings, Wis. Stats. § 61.32.  
Sec. 2-162. - Presiding officers. 
(a)  The Village President shall preside. The Village President shall preside over meetings of the Village Board. In the case of absence of the Village President, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall call the meeting to order and the Village Trustees present shall elect one of their number as presiding Village Trustee. 
(b)  Duties. The Village President or presiding Village Trustee shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order, and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these rules. Any member shall have the right to appeal from a decision of the Village President or presiding Village Trustee. Such appeal is not debatable and must be sustained by a majority vote of the members present excluding the Village President or presiding Village Trustee. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-13; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 14, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 11, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Meetings, Wis. Stats. § 61.32.  
Sec. 2-163. - Meeting agendas; order of business. 
(a)  Agenda. 
(1)  The order of business at all regular or special meetings shall be according to the agenda prepared by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. All matters to be presented at a Village Board meeting shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer no later than 4:30 p.m. on the Wednesday preceding the scheduled regular Village Board meeting to enable the Village Clerk-Treasurer to prepare the agenda and all attachments and distribute them to the Village Board. Matters filed after 4:30 p.m. on the Wednesday preceding the Village Board meeting will not be placed upon the agenda, unless authorized by the Village President or the Village Administrator for good cause shown. 
(2)  A submitting department shall include copies of all material necessary to consider the agenda item. 
(3)  The Village President shall advise the Village Clerk-Treasurer whether to include an item on the agenda, except that the Village Trustees calling a special meeting shall decide which items shall be first considered at such special meeting. 
(4)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall afford the Village Trustees and Village Attorney maximum reasonable notice of agenda items as each situation allows. 
(b)  Index number. Prior to action thereon, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall assign to each ordinance and resolution a chronological index number which shall be maintained by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The end product thereof shall be designated "Proceedings of the McFarland Village Board," which shall be maintained by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(c)  Order of business. Generally, the following order of business may be observed in the conduct of all regular Village Board meetings. 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Roll call. 
(3)  Public hearings (if needed). 
(4)  Public appearances. 
(5)  Consent agenda. 
(6)  Reports. 
(7)  Business. 
(8)  Adjournment. 
(d)  Order to be followed. No business shall be taken up out of order unless authorized by the Village President or by majority consent of all Village Trustees and in the absence of any debate whatsoever. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-14; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 15—18, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 2-9-2009; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 12—14, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-164. - Introduction of business; resolutions and ordinances; disposition of communications. 
(a)  Ordinances. All ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared as follows: 
(1)  Each ordinance shall include a note stating the purpose thereof prepared by the sponsor. All ordinances submitted to the Village Board shall be in writing and shall include at the outset a brief statement of the subject matter and a title. 
(2)  The sponsor of an ordinance may be the Village President, one or more Village Trustees, a department head or a committee, board, or commission. The Village Clerk-Treasurer or the Village Attorney may sponsor ordinances when changes in state law make it necessary or desirable for the Village to act rapidly. 
(3)  Each ordinance may contain a recommended referral to appropriate subunits of the Village Board. 
(4)  On ordinances that require special handling, the Village Attorney shall assure that an editorial note is prepared showing compliance with such special handing. 
(5)  The Village Attorney shall approve each ordinance as to form prior to its placement on the agenda for Village Board action. 
(6)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer may reject any ordinance from placement on the agenda which fails to comply with this Section. 
(7)  Unless requested by a Village Trustee before a final vote is taken, no ordinance, resolution or bylaw need be read in full. 
(8)  Resolutions may be referred to an appropriate standing committee for an advisory recommendation. 
(b)  Subject and numbering of ordinances. Each ordinance shall be related to no more than one subject. Amendment or repeal of ordinances shall only be accomplished if the amending or repealing ordinance contains the Code Section number of the ordinance to be amended or repealed, and the title of amending and repealing ordinances shall reflect their purpose to amend or repeal. 
(c)  Notice. The Village Board may take action on an ordinance only if it appears on the written agenda for the meeting at which action is requested. 
(d)  Disposition of petitions, communication, etc. Every petition or other writing of any kind, addressed to the Village Board or to the Village Administrator or other Village officer for reference to the Village Board, shall be delivered by such other Village officer to the Village President or to the presiding officer of the Village Board as soon as convenient after receipt, and, in any event, prior to or at the opening of the next meeting of the Village Board following the receipt. Every such petition, or other writing, and every paper, communication or other proceeding which shall come before the Village Board for action, may be referred by the Village President or presiding officer to the appropriate authority, board, committee or commission, unless objected to by some member of the Village Board. 
(e)  Reference and reports. The presiding officer may refer new business coming to the Village Board to the appropriate standing committee unless otherwise referred or acted upon by the Village Board. All referrals, unless otherwise provided for in the referral, shall be reported on at the next regular Village Board meeting unless the standing committee has no regularly scheduled meetings before the next Village Board meeting. Village Board motions based upon committee or commission action is permissible only on items specifically on the agenda. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-15; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 19—21, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 15, 16, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 61.50.  
Sec. 2-165. - Publication and effect of ordinances. 
(a)  All ordinances imposing any penalty or where otherwise required by law shall be published once in the official newspaper of the Village or posted according to state law, and shall be immediately recorded by the Village Clerk-Treasurer in a book kept for that purpose and/or this Code. A printed copy of such ordinance or regulation in any book, pamphlet or newspaper and published or purporting to be published therein by direction of the Village Board shall be prima facie proof of due passage, publication and recording thereof. 
(b)  All ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after passage and publication/posting (if required) thereof, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-16; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 22, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 17, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Meetings, Wis. Stats. § 61.32; ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 61.50.  
Sec. 2-166. - Conduct of deliberations. 
(a)  Roll call votes. A roll call shall not be necessary on any questions or motions except as follows: 
(1)  When the ayes and noes are requested by any member. 
(2)  On confirmation and on the adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriations or disbursing money or creating any liability or charge against the Village or any fund thereof in excess of $25,000.00. 
(3)  When required by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(b)  Record of votes. All aye and no votes shall be recorded in the official minutes. The ayes and noes shall be ordered upon any question at the request of any member of the Village Board or the Village President, and the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall call the roll. 
(c)  Parliamentary procedure. Except as provided below, the Village Board shall in all other respects determine the rules of its procedure, which shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, which is hereby incorporated by reference, unless otherwise provided by ordinance or Wisconsin Statutes, except when otherwise limited or modified by this Code: 
(1)  No Village Trustee shall address the Village Board until recognized by the presiding officer. The Village Trustee shall thereupon address the Village Board and confine remarks to the question under discussion and avoid all personalities. 
(2)  When two or more Village Trustees simultaneously seek recognition, the presiding officer shall name the Village Trustee who is to speak first. 
(3)  No person other than a Village Trustee shall address the Village Board except under order of business, except the citizens may address the Village Board with permission of the presiding officer as to matters which are being considered by the Village Board at the time. 
(4)  When a question is in debate, no action shall be in order except: 
a.  To adjourn; 
b.  To lay on the table; 
c.  The previous question; 
d.  To postpone to a certain date; 
e.  To refer to a standing, select or special committee; 
f.  To amend; 
g.  To postpone indefinitely; 
and these several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they stand. 
(5)  The movant may request leave to withdraw a motion at any time prior to voting on the question. Such a request requires no second. If any member objects, the presiding officer shall put the question of granting the request to vote. 
(d)  Compelling votes. No member may be compelled to vote. When a member abstains from voting, the effect is the same as if the member voted on the prevailing side. 
(e)  Majority vote. Unless a larger number is required by statute, ordinance or bylaw, a majority vote of those present at a legally constituted meeting is necessary to carry a question. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-17; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 23, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 18, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-167. - Reconsideration of questions. 
Any member voting on the prevailing side may move for reconsideration of any question except those which cannot be reconsidered pursuant to Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised at the same meeting or the next succeeding regular meeting. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-18)  
Sec. 2-168. - Disturbances and disorderly conduct. 
Whenever any disturbance or disorderly conduct shall occur in any of the meetings of the Village Board, the Village President or presiding Village Trustee may cause the room to be cleared of all persons causing such disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-19)  
Sec. 2-169. - Amendment of rules. 
The rules of Sections 2-166—2-168 shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and then it shall require a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-20)  
Sec. 2-170. - Suspension of rules. 
These rules shall not be suspended except by a two-thirds vote of all the members of the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 2-2-21)  
Secs. 2-171—2-181. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROCEDURES APPLYING TO STATUTORILY AUTHORIZED VILLAGE AUTHORITIES, BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS, AND STANDING COMMITTEES 
 
Sec. 2-182. - Application. 
The following general procedures shall apply to all statutorily authorized Village authorities, boards, committees, commissions, and standing committees except where a different procedure is specified by ordinance.  
Sec. 2-183. - Composition. 
(a)  The composition of each statutorily authorized Village authority, board, committee and commission shall be as set forth in Article IV. 
(b)  The composition of each standing committee shall be no less than five members and shall include one Village Trustee to serve as chairperson and one Village Trustee to serve as vice-chairperson and not less than three citizen members, the only exception being the Public Utilities Committee which shall have five citizen members.  
Sec. 2-184. - Residency required for service on statutorily authorized authorities, boards, committees, commissions, and standing committees. 
No person not a resident of and not residing in the Village shall be appointed in a voting capacity to any statutorily authorized Village authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee except the Emergency Management Committee and the Library Board. Any member of a statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee who moves from the Village shall be removed from such statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee, but may be appointed to serve in an ex officio capacity.  
Sec. 2-185. - Appointments. 
(a)  All regularly occurring vacancies on each statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee shall be filled by appointment of the Village President, subject to confirmation by the Village Board, except where a different procedure is specified by ordinance, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Article IV, Division 8 of this Chapter—Library Board; and 
(2)  Article IV, Division 9 of this Chapter—Plan Commission. 
(b)  Appointments to each statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee shall be made at the annual meeting of the Village Board in April, or as soon thereafter as possible, and at such other times as vacancies may occur. 
(c)  The chairperson of each standing committee shall promptly submit to the Village President a list of persons proposed to fill any citizen member vacancies or reappointments and the Village President shall generally make appointments or re-appointments from that list, subject to confirmation by the Village Board.  
Sec. 2-186. - President to designate chairpersons. 
The Village President shall appoint the chairperson of the statutorily authorized authorities, boards, committees, commissions, and standing committees in accordance with the procedures set forth in the appropriate ordinances and statutes, except that the members of the Board of Review, Community Development Authority, Ethics Board, Library Board, and Police and Fire Commission shall select their own chairperson and such other officers as deemed necessary.  
Sec. 2-187. - Committee membership. 
(a)  All Village Trustees shall serve on at least one standing committee. 
(b)  The Village President and Village Administrator shall be ex officio members of each standing committee. 
(c)  The Village President may be appointed to serve as chairperson or as a member of a specific committee.  
Sec. 2-188. - Attendance. 
The chairperson of each statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee shall maintain a record of the attendance of the members at meetings. Any member who must miss a meeting shall give prior notice of the absence to the chairperson. Failure to attend regularly scheduled meetings four times in any year, commencing from the annual organizational meeting, shall be deemed to be an event by which the member or chairperson vacates the position to which the member or chairperson was appointed. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the chairperson of any vacancies created by absences, and confirm the vacancy in writing to the former member, chairperson, and the Village President. 
( Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 19, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-189. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Statutorily authorized authorities, boards, committees and commissions shall have the powers and duties assigned by ordinance or statute as described or prescribed in Article IV of this Chapter. 
(b)  Standing committees shall review such matters as may be referred to them by the Village Board and shall submit advisory recommendations within their jurisdiction for Village Board action. All standing committees as described in Article V of this Chapter are subunits of the Village Board and perform no executive or administrative Village function other than as specifically authorized by ordinance or policy adopted by the Village Board. 
(c)  No statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee shall assume responsibility for the administration of any Village department except for the Library Board. 
(d)  In case of ambiguity or apparent conflict between the preceding definition of standing committee authority and a definition of the authority of a Village officer, employee, board, or association, the latter shall prevail.  
Sec. 2-190. - Quorum. 
A quorum exists whenever one more than half of the number of members of a statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee meeting are present. Any meeting will adjourn ten minutes after the noticed starting time if no quorum is present.  
Sec. 2-191. - Meetings and public notice. 
(a)  Compliance with open meetings law. Any meeting of a statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee shall be conducted in compliance with the Wisconsin Open Meetings Law. All meetings shall be open to the public unless falling within a lawful exception pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.81. 
(b)  Public notice. For every regular meeting of a statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee the Village Clerk-Treasurer or designee, shall: 
(1)  Schedule a date, time and place for its meetings; 
(2)  Post an agenda of the matters to be taken up at such meeting and notify the official Village newspaper in advance of each such regular meeting of the date, time, subject matter and place thereof; 
(3)  Place the agenda on the official Village website; 
(4)  When necessary, publish notice in the official Village newspaper in compliance with state law; 
(c)  Special meetings. Nothing in Subsection (a) of this Section shall preclude the calling of a special meeting or dispensing with the publication of notice or such posting of the agenda, for good cause, but such special meetings shall nonetheless comply in all respects with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 19.81 and 19.89. 
( Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 20, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-192. - Minutes and Reports. 
(a)  The recorder of each statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee shall file a copy of the meeting minutes of such statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee with the Village Clerk-Treasurer prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of such statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee. The meeting minutes shall include the date, time, and place of the meeting and the members attending; report on all agenda items; and provide all necessary historical background to familiarize the Village Board with the issue. Approved minutes are deemed to be the product of the entire statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee, whether any item therein is approved unanimously or not. 
(b)  If a Village Trustee member on a particular statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee disagrees with the position taken by that body on an issue, such member may address the Village Board with the minority position only if the member notifies the statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee, either at the meeting or by written notice after the meeting, that such member intends to support the minority position before the Village Board. Upon such notification, the Village Board shall permit one statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee member supporting the majority position equal time to address the Village Board on such issue. 
( Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 21, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-193. - Cooperation of Village officers. 
All Village officers shall, upon request of the chairperson of any statutorily authorized authority, board, committee, commission, and standing committee, confer with that body and supply, within a reasonable time, such information as that body may request upon any pending matter. Information requests requiring considerable staff time or financial resources require prior approval of the Village Board.  
Secs. 2-194—2-204. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STATUTORILY AUTHORIZED AUTHORITIES, BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-205. - Statutorily authorized authorities, boards, committees and commissions established. 
The following is a list of the statutorily authorized authorities, boards, committees and commissions of the Village: 
(a)  Board of Review. 
(b)  Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(c)  Community Development Authority. 
(d)  Emergency Management Committee. 
(e)  Ethics Board. 
(f)  Landmarks Commission. 
(g)  Library Board. 
(h)  Plan Commission. 
(i)  Police and Fire Commission.  
Secs. 2-206—2-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF REVIEW 
 
Sec. 2-216. - Composition. 
(a)  The Board of Review shall consist of five members and two alternate members who shall be residents, none of whom shall occupy any public office or be publicly employed, unless serving as an alternate member as set forth in this subsection. The members shall be appointed by the Village President with confirmation by the Village Board and shall hold office as members of the Board of Review for staggered terms of five years commencing on the third Tuesday of April in the particular year for which appointed or until their successors are appointed and qualified. An alternate member of the Board of Review shall have the same duties and responsibilities as a regular member of the Board of Review with regard to any hearings in which the alternate member is involved. 
(b)  The Board of Review shall include at least one voting member who, within two years of the Board of Review's first meeting, has attended a training session under Wis. Stats. § 73.03(55).  
Sec. 2-217. - Officers. 
The members of the Board of Review shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson, which said election shall be held at the first annual meeting of the Board of Review. The Board of Review shall have the Village Clerk-Treasurer serve as Clerk for the Board of Review who shall keep an accurate record of all of its proceedings and give the necessary notices. 
( Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 22, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-218. - Compensation. 
The members of the Board of Review shall receive compensation as determined by ordinance of the Village Board under Wis. Stats. § 70.46(1).  
Sec. 2-219. - Powers and Duties. 
The duties and functions of the Board of Review shall be as prescribed in Wis. Stats. §§ 70.46 and 70.47.  
Sec. 2-220. - Meetings. 
In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 70.47(3)b, the Village Board may designate hours for the annual Board of Review proceedings other than those set forth in Wis. Stats. § 70.47(3)a. The Board of Review may adjourn from day to day or from time to time, until such time as its business is completed, providing that adequate notice of each adjournment is given as provided in Wis. Stats. § 70.47(3)(aL).  
Sec. 2-221. - Objections to valuations to be written. 
The Board of Review may not hear an objection to the amount or valuation of property unless, at least 48 hours before the Board of Review's first scheduled meeting, the objector provides to the Board of Review's Clerk written or oral notice of an intent to file an objection, except that, upon a showing of good cause and the submission of a written objection, the Board of Review shall waive that requirement during the first two hours of the Board of Review's first scheduled meeting, and the Board of Review may waive that requirement up to the end of the fifth day of the session or up to the end of the final day of the session if the session is less than five days with proof of extraordinary circumstances for failure to meet the 48-hour notice requirement and failure to appear before the Board of Review during the first two hours of the first scheduled meeting. Objections to the amount or valuation of property shall first be made in writing and filed with the Clerk of the Board of Review within the first two hours of the Board of Review's first scheduled meeting, except that, upon evidence of extraordinary circumstances, the Board of Review may waive that requirement up to the end of the fifth day of the session or up to the end of the final day of the session if the session is less than five days. The Board of Review may require such objections to be submitted on forms approved by the Department of Revenue, and the Board of Review shall require that any forms include stated valuations of the property in question. Persons who own land and improvements to that land may object to the aggregate valuation of that land and improvements to that land, but no person who owns land and improvements to that land may object only to the valuation of that land or only to the valuation of improvements to that land. No person shall be allowed in any action or proceedings to question the amount or valuation of property unless such written objection has been filed and such person in good faith presented evidence to the Board of Review in support of such objections and made full disclosure before the Board of Review, under oath, of all of that person's property liable to assessment in such district and the value thereof. The requirement that it be in writing may be waived by express action of the Board of Review.  
Sec. 2-222. - Confidentiality of certain information. 
(a)  Whenever the Village Assessor, in the performance of the Village Assessor's duties, requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), or any successor statute thereto, then such income and expense information that is provided to the Village Assessor shall be held by the Village Assessor on a confidential basis; except, however, that said information may be revealed to and used by persons in the discharging of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office, including, but not limited to, use by the Village Assessor in performance of official duties of the Village Assessor's office and use by the Board of Review in performance of its official duties; or pursuant to order of a court. Information shall not be disclosed by any such individuals to any person not authorized to receive that information. 
(b)  Income and expense information provided to the Village Assessor under this Section, unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, shall not be subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1).  
Secs. 2-223—2-232. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 
 
Sec. 2-233. - Composition. 
A Board of Zoning Appeals shall be appointed and governed by the state zoning enabling law as contained in Wis. Stats. § 62.23, the Village Zoning Code and ordinances and this Section. The laws of the state or Village and local ordinances shall prevail in that order. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five non-Village-Trustee citizen members, and two non-Village-Trustee alternate members, appointed by the Village President subject to confirmation by the Village Board, for a three-year staggered term of office. The members shall be removable by the Village Board for cause upon written charges and upon public hearing. The Village President shall designate one of the members as chairperson. The Village President shall annually designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and the other as second alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only when a member of the Board of Zoning Appeals refuses to vote because of conflict of interest or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so act only when the first alternate so refuses or is absent or when more than one member of the Board of Zoning Appeals so refuses or is absent. The above provisions, with regard to removal and the filling of vacancies, shall apply to such alternates.  
Sec. 2-234. - Powers and Duties. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the powers prescribed by state law and in Sections 62-362 through 62-367.  
Sec. 2-235. - Meetings. 
(a)  All meetings and hearings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open to the public, except that the Board of Zoning Appeals may go into closed session to deliberate after a hearing on an appeal. The final vote on an appeal shall be taken in open session by roll call vote, recorded and open for public inspection in the Board of Zoning Appeal's office of the Community Development Department. 
(b)  Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or at such other times as the Board of Zoning Appeals may determine. Notice of a special meeting shall be mailed to each member at least 48 hours prior to the time set for the meeting, or announcement of the meeting shall be made at any meeting at which all members are present. 
(c)  Hearings may be held at any regular or special meeting at the time set by the chairperson. 
(d)  A quorum for any meeting or hearing shall consist of three members, but a lesser number may meet and adjourn to a specified time. If a quorum is present, the Board of Zoning Appeals may take action under this Subsection by a majority vote of the members present. 
(e)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall be public record. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this Code or with the applicable Wisconsin Statutes. 
(f)  If a Board of Zoning Appeals member is unable to participate in any case because of a conflict of interest per the Ethics Code (Article V of this Chapter), the chairperson shall direct an alternate member to act instead. Disqualification of a member for a conflict of interest shall not decrease the number of votes required for acting upon any matter, but such member may be counted in determining whether a quorum is present for the transaction of business. 
( Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 23, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-236. - Offices. 
The Village Board shall provide suitable offices for holding hearings and the presentation of records, documents, and accounts.  
Secs. 2-237—2-246. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 2-247. - Composition. 
(a)  The Village Board has determined there exists within the Village a need for blight elimination, urban renewal and community development programs and projects and housing projects. The Community Development Authority of the Village is created for the purpose of carrying out blight elimination, slum clearance, urban renewal programs and projects and housing projects. 
(b)  The Community Development Authority shall consist of seven commissioners who are residents appointed by the Village President with the confirmation of the Village Board and who shall have sufficient ability and experience in the fields of urban renewal, community development and housing. 
(c)  Two commissioners shall be Village Trustees of the Village Board and shall serve during their term of office as Village Trustees. 
(d)  The terms of non-Village-Trustees shall be staggered four years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(e)  The Community Development Authority shall choose annually from its members a chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary. 
(f)  Commissioners shall be reimbursed their actual and necessary expenses including local travel expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties, but shall receive no other compensation.  
Sec. 2-248. - Powers and duties. 
The Community Development Authority shall have all the powers set forth under Wis. Stats. § 66.1335(4) to undertake, as approved by the Village Board, blight elimination urban renewal and community development programs and projects and housing projects.  
Secs. 2-249—2-258. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-259. - Composition. 
There is created an Emergency Management Committee composed of a Village Trustee and as many additional members as may be determined by the Village Board who shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to the confirmation of the Village Board. Each member shall have a two-year term of office.  
Sec. 2-260. - Powers and duties. 
The Emergency Management Committee shall have all the powers set forth under Wis. Stats. § 166.03 and shall be an advisory and planning group to the Emergency Management Director and the Village Board on all matters pertaining to emergency management.  
Secs. 2-261—2-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ETHICS BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Composition. 
(a)  There is hereby created an Ethics Board to consist of seven members; one Village trustee as appointed by the Village Board for a one year term as a nonvoting member; one Village public official or public employee who is not a Village trustee as a nonvoting member; and five voting citizen members, all appointed by the President and confirmed by the Village Board. 
(b)  Terms of office for nontrustee members shall be three years. The Village public official or public employee member shall be appointed for staggered three years or the duration of their employment. 
(c)  The Ethics Board shall elect its own chairperson and vice-chairperson, and the Village Attorney shall furnish the Ethics Board whatever legal assistance is necessary to carry out its functions.  
Sec. 2-272. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Ethics Board advises the Village Board on maintaining an Ethics Code (Article VIII of this Chapter) which sets forth standards of conduct for Village officials and employees, interprets those ethics guidelines, and investigates any verified complaint alleging improper conduct under the Ethics Code. 
(b)  The Ethics Board may make recommendations to the Village Board with respect to amendments of this Chapter. 
(c)  The Ethics Board shall provide a standard form for persons to use when submitting a verified complaint alleging violations of the Ethics Code. "Verified" means that the complainant has made a declaration under oath or affirmation, before a notary public, that the complaint is true. 
(d)  In the event any person submits a verified complaint alleging that any Village official or employee has violated the Ethics Code, the Village Clerk and the Chairperson of the Ethics Board shall conduct an initial review of the complaint to determine whether it is complete in form. If the Clerk and Chairperson determine that the verified complaint is incomplete, they shall notify the complainant and provide the complainant with an opportunity to submit the additional information needed to complete the verified complaint. 
(e)  Following determination by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and the Chairperson of the Ethics Board that the complaint is complete, the Ethics Board shall review whether the facts alleged in the verified complaint, if true, would constitute improper conduct under Article VIII of this Chapter and warrant further investigation. The Ethics Board shall decide whether this review is conducted in an open meeting or may be closed under Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(b) or (1)(f). If the Ethics Board determines that the verified complaint does not allege facts sufficient to constitute a violation of Article VIII of this Chapter, it shall dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant. If the Ethics Board determines that the verified complaint was brought for harassment purposes, the Ethics Board shall so state. 
(f)  If the Ethics Board determines that the facts alleged in the verified complaint if true, would constitute improper conduct under Article VIII of this Chapter, the Ethics Board shall conduct an investigation into the merits of the complaint. The Ethics Board may solicit the assistance of Village officers and employees to assist in the investigation, and may retain outside contractors if deemed necessary to perform the investigation. 
(g)  The Ethics Board shall notify the person whose conduct is under investigation of any meetings where evidentiary hearings are held or where a decision is reached on whether to proceed further on the complaint. The Ethics Board shall decide whether these proceedings shall be conducted in open meetings or shall be closed under Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(b) or (1)(f). The Ethics Board may issue subpoenas and administer oaths. 
(h)  Upon completion of the investigation, the Ethics Board shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with all constitutional requirements of due process and issue written findings of fact and conclusions of law determining the propriety of the conduct of the person whose conduct is under investigation. 
(i)  If appropriate, the Ethics Board shall refer the matter to the Village Board, District Attorney or other proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 2009-24, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 24, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-273. - Advisory opinions. 
When a public official or public employee has doubt as to the applicability of a provision of this Section to such public official or public employee, such person may apply to the Ethics Board for an advisory opinion. The public official or public employee shall have the opportunity to present their interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of provisions of this Section before such advisory decision is made. This Section shall be operative in all instances covered by its provisions, except when superseded by an applicable statutory provision when statutory action is mandatory, or when the application of a statutory provision is discretionary but determined to be more appropriate or desirable. It is prima facie evidence of the intent to comply with this Article when a person who refers a matter to the Ethics Board for an advisory opinion abides by that opinion and the material facts are as stated in the request. The Ethics Board shall not make public the identity of an individual requesting an advisory opinion except under the circumstances specified in Wis. Stats. § 19.59(5)(b). 
(Ord. No. 2009-24, § 2, 12-14-2009)  
Secs. 2-274—2-282. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - LANDMARKS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-283. - Composition. 
A Landmarks Commission is hereby created, consisting of five members. Of the membership, one shall be a Village Trustee and four shall be citizen members. Each member shall have, to the highest extent practicable, a known interest in historic preservation. The Village President shall appoint the commissioners subject to confirmation by the Village Board. The term for each member shall be three years.  
Sec. 2-284. - Powers and Duties. 
In addition to its duties prescribed in Chapter 62, Article II, Division 6, the Landmarks Commission shall: 
(a)  Actively work for the passage of legislation permitting full or partial tax exemptions to properties it has designated under the provisions of this Section to encourage owners of historic properties to assist in carrying out the intent of this Section. 
(b)  Cooperate with the State Historic Preservation Officer and the State Historic Preservation Review Board in trying to include properties designated hereunder as historic structures, sites or districts in the National Register of Historic Places. 
(c)  Work for the continuing citizen education about the historic heritage of the Village and the historic structures and sites designated under the provisions of this Section. 
(d)  As it deems advisable, receive and solicit funds for the purpose of historic preservation in the Village. Such funds shall be placed in a separate Village account for such purposes.  
Secs. 2-285—2-294. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - LIBRARY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-295. - Composition. 
(a)  There is created, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 43.54(1)(a), the Library Board of the E. D. Locke Public Library. 
(b)  The Library Board shall consist of seven citizens, appointed by the Village President and subject to approval by the Village Board. Not more than one Village Trustee shall at any one time be a member of the Library Board. The Village President shall appoint the Superintendent of the McFarland School District, or a representative of the Superintendent, to represent the McFarland School District on the Library Board.  
Sec. 2-296. - Appointment. 
The Library Board members other than any Village Trustee and the Superintendent of the McFarland School District or representative, shall be appointed for a staggered term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as regular appointments are made. Any Village Trustee shall be annually appointed by a two-thirds vote at the organizational meeting of the Village Board. The Superintendent of the McFarland School District or representative shall serve an indefinite term until such representative's successor is appointed and qualified.  
Sec. 2-297. - Nonresident members. 
Not more than two members of the Library Board may be residents of towns adjacent to the Village.  
Sec. 2-298. - Officers. 
The Library Board shall annually choose from its members a president and such other officers as it deems necessary.  
Sec. 2-299. - Powers and duties. 
The Library Board shall have all the powers set forth under Wis. Stats. § 43.58.  
Secs. 2-300—2-309. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - PLAN COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-310. - Composition. 
The Village Plan Commission shall consist of seven members including the Village President, who shall be its presiding officer, and at least one but no more than two Village Trustees. The remaining members shall be citizens. In addition, the Community Development Director shall be an ex officio member of the Plan Commission, without voting rights. Citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications.  
Sec. 2-311. - Appointment. 
(a)  Village Trustee member. The Village Trustee members shall be annually appointed by a two-thirds vote at the organizational meeting of the Village Board. 
(b)  Citizen members. The citizen members shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to Village Board approval, at the organizational meeting, for the terms set forth herein. Upon an initial appointment, a citizen member shall serve a one-year term. If the citizen member is reappointed, the second term shall be for a term of no less than one nor more than three years, so that no more than two reappointed citizen members' terms shall expire in any one year. Thereafter, for any subsequent term, the citizen members shall serve staggered three-year terms.  
Sec. 2-312. - Records. 
The Plan Commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Four members shall constitute a quorum but all actions shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of all of the members of the Plan Commission. 
( Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 25, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-313. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Village Comprehensive Plan. 
(1)  The Plan Commission shall make, adopt and, as it deems necessary, amend, extend or add to the Village Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan shall be a guide to the physical, social and economic development of the Village including areas outside of its boundaries which, in the Plan Commission's judgment, bear relation to the development of the Village. The Village Comprehensive Plan, with the accompanying maps, plats and descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the Plan Commission's recommendations for such development, and shall include all elements required under Wis. Stats. § 66.1001. 
(2)  The adoption of the Plan or any part, amendment or addition thereto, shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of all the members of the Plan Commission following all procedural requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.1001(4). The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter, and other matters intended by the Plan Commission to form the whole or any part of the Plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the adopted Plan or part thereof by the identifying signature of the secretary of the Plan Commission, and a copy of the Plan or part thereof shall be certified to the Village Board. The Comprehensive Plan, and any amendment thereto, shall be effective only upon enactment by the Village Board of an ordinance adopting the recommended plan or amendment. 
(3)  The Plan Commission shall periodically review and update the Comprehensive Plan as it deems appropriate. Any person may apply to the Plan Commission for an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan at any other time provided, however, that any proposed amendment substantially similar to a proposal previously rejected by the Plan Commission or Village Board shall not be resubmitted for a period of 12 months following the previous vote. Applications shall be made on a form provided by the Community Development Department and shall be accompanied by the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  Matters referred to Plan Commission. The Village Board shall refer to the Plan Commission, for its consideration and report before final action is taken by the Village Board, public body or officer, the following matters: 
(1)  The location of any statue or other memorial; 
(2)  The location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment, change of use, sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land for any street, alley or other public way, park, playground, airport, area for parking vehicles, or other memorial or public grounds; 
(3)  The location, extension, abandonment or authorization for any public utility whether publicly or privately owned; 
(4)  All plats or other land divisions in the Village or within the territory over which the Village is given platting jurisdiction by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236; 
(5)  The location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing or sale of lands for public or semi-public housing, slum clearance, relief of congestion, or vacation camps for children; and 
(6)  The amendment or repeal of any land use ordinance. 
(c)  Miscellaneous powers. The Plan Commission may make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the Village to public officials and agencies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the Village Board, programs for public improvements and the financing thereof. The Plan Commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and markers thereon. In general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning in cooperation with the Village Board. The Plan Commission shall oversee community development block grants. The Village Board may refer to the Plan Commission for its consideration and recommendation any matter pertaining to planning and development of land within the Village and within 1½ miles of the limits of the Village. All plats, certified surveys, land divisions or replats of any lands within the limits of the Village or any lands outside the Village and within 1½ miles of the limits of the Village shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for its recommendation to the Village Board before the same are approved by the Village Board. 
( Ord. No. 2019-05 , §§ 1—3, 3-25-2019)  
Secs. 2-314—2-323. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-324. - Composition. 
(a)  There is hereby created for the Village, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.65(1)(b), a Board of Police Commissioners. There is hereby created for the Village, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.65(2)(b), a Board of Fire Commissioners. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.65(3g)(a), said Board of Police Commissioners and Board of Fire Commissioners are hereby consolidated into the Police and Fire Commission for the Village. 
(b)  The Police and Fire Commission shall consist of five citizen members, appointed by the Village President and subject to confirmation by the Village Board, who shall serve staggered five-year terms. 
(c)  The Police and Fire Commission shall choose annually from its members a president and such other officers as it deems necessary.  
Sec. 2-325. - Powers and Duties. 
The Police and Fire Commissioners shall have the power and authority conferred under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.13(1), (3)—(5), (5m) and (7).  
Secs. 2-326—2-346. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STANDING COMMITTEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-347. - Established. 
The following is a list of standing committees of the Village: 
(1)  Communications and Technology Committee. 
(2)  Finance Committee. 
(3)  Natural Resources Committee. 
(4)  Parks and Recreation Committee. 
(5)  Personnel Committee. 
(6)  Public Safety Committee. 
(7)  Public Utilities Committee. 
(8)  Public Works Committee. 
(9)  Senior Outreach Services Committee. 
(10)  Volunteer Committee. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § 1, 9-9-2013)  
Secs. 2-348—2-357. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-358. - Jurisdiction. 
The Communications and Technology Committee sets policies and oversees the administration, operations, and programming of the Village's cable channel. The Communications and Technology Committee also oversees the operation of the Village's website and major purchases of computer hardware and software.  
Sec. 2-359. - General Provisions. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0420 are hereby incorporated as though fully set forth herein. The additional provisions of this Chapter supplement those provisions of the state statutes and constitute an expression of the Village's home rule authority. Any person who owns, leases, operates, controls, constructs or maintains a video service or cable television service shall comply at all times with the provisions herein when constructing, operating or maintaining a video service or cable television service in the Village.  
Sec. 2-360. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this Chapter shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0420(2), which is incorporated as though fully set forth herein.  
Sec. 2-361. - Video service provider fee and PEG channel monetary support. 
(a)  Video service provider fee. Video service providers and cable operators shall pay, in addition to the PEG support fee set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section, a video service provider fee to the Village in an amount equal to five percent of the provider's gross receipts. 
(b)  Public, educational and government (PEG) channel monetary support. Video service providers and cable operators shall pay, in addition to the video service provider fee set forth in Subsection (a) of this Section, a monthly fee of $0.25 per subscriber, which payment shall be used to fund PEG access related external costs. The allocation of the PEG channel monetary support fee between public access and government access activities/channels shall be at the sole discretion of the Village and which allocation the Village may alter at any time and without notice. 
(c)  Supporting documentation. Payment of the fees set forth in Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section shall be accompanied by documentation verified by an agent or officer with the authority to legally bind the provider that is sufficient for the City to verify the accuracy of the fees being paid by the provider. The failure to provide such documentation shall subject the provider to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $5,000.00 per day until such time the documentation is provided to the Village.  
Sec. 2-362. - Peg channel requirements. 
(a)  Number of PEG channels. Video service providers and cable operators shall provide capacity for three PEG channels. These channels shall be allocated as follows: one specifically designated for the McFarland Cable Channel for the operation by the Village of a governmental access channel; one channel dedicated for use by WYOU, which is operated as a public access channel by WYOU Community Television Inc., and one channel dedicated for use as an educational access channel by the McFarland School District. 
(b)  Location of PEG channels. PEG channels must be carried on any service tier that is viewed by more than 50 percent of the video service provider's or cable operator's customers. Video service providers or cable operators may not charge an extra fee nor require the rental of special equipment in order for their customers to view such PEG channels if such fees or equipment are not required to view any of the non-PEG channels on such service tiers. 
(c)  Quality of PEG channels. Video service providers and cable operators shall not carry a PEG television signal in a lesser format or lower resolution than that afforded to a nonbroadcast digital programmer carried on the video or cable system. The signal quality of PEG channels shall be indistinguishable or better than the signal of other non-PEG channels carried by the video service provider or cable operator. 
(d)  Drops/origination points. Video service providers and cable operators shall apply and maintain upstream capacity from all current origination points (a/k/a "live drops") and shall provide sufficient capacity for carriage of a television signal from each of these origination points at all times. These origination points are all located in the Village as follows: 
(1)  McFarland Municipal Center; 5920 Milwaukee Street; 
(2)  E.D. Locke Public Library; 5920 Milwaukee Street; 
(3)  McFarland High School; 5101 Farwell Street; 
(4)  Indian Mound Middle School; 6330 Exchange Street; 
(5)  Madison Curling Club; 4802 Marsh Road. 
(e)  Substantial utilization of PEG channels and PEG programming. 
(1)  Procedures for disconnection due to failure to substantially utilize PEG channel. 
a.  Written notice of objection to program as not locally produced. A video service provider or cable operator must provide written notice to the PEG channel director within ten days of the first or original airing of any program that the video service provider or cable operator is objecting to the program as having not been locally produced. Such notice shall describe with particularity the program being objected to, the date and time the program was first aired and the factual basis supporting the objection. Failure to timely provide this notice waives the objection and, therefore, such program will be counted towards the determination of whether said PEG channel is being substantially utilized. 
b.  Written notification of failure to substantially utilize channel. A video service provider or cable operator must provide written notification to any PEG channel director within ten days following any week in which the video service provider or cable operator objects that the PEG channel has not been substantially utilized. Such notice shall describe with particularity the time period being objected to, the dates and times during the week in which qualifying programming was not aired and the factual basis supporting the objection. Failure to timely provide this notice waives the objection and, therefore, such programming period will be counted towards the determination of whether said PEG channel is being substantially utilized. 
c.  Written notification of intention to disconnect, reprogram or drop PEG channel. A video service provider or cable operator must provide 120 days' advance written notification to any PEG channel director that the video service provider or cable operator intends to disconnect, reprogram or drop. A video service provider or cable operator may not disconnect, reprogram or drop any PEG channel that it has not timely provided with such written notice. Furthermore, should any PEG channel director provide the video service provider or cable operator with a written response that the PEG channel was substantially utilized by the municipality, the video service provider or cable operator shall not disconnect, reprogram or drop the PEG channel. 
d.  Penalty for failing to provide notice. If any video service provider or cable operator disconnects, reprograms or drops any PEG channel without providing the notice as required in Subsections (e)(1)a through c of this Section the video service provider or cable operator shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Immediate reinstatement of the PEG channel to its location in the channel line-up prior to the disconnection, reprogramming or dropping of the channel. 
2.  The issuance of a citation demanding a forfeiture of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00 for each day that the PEG channel is disconnected, reprogrammed or dropped. 
(2)  Locally produced programming. Locally produced programming shall include all programming produced by any PEG channel and shall include all programming that has not been commercially aired. "Locally produced programming" includes any program that was in part produced for original airing in the broadcast market in which it was produced either in part or in whole. The term "locally produced" shall not require that the programming was created, filmed or produced in the McFarland or Dane County area. PEG stations may share and exchange programming content in order to meet the substantial utilization requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.0420(5)(b). 
(f)  Underwriting of Programming. PEG channels may transmit noncommercial programming to subscribers generally or specific recipients of video service providers or cable operators. Nothing herein shall in any way prohibit or prevent PEG channels from accepting grants or sponsorships in support of such programming nor shall PEG channels be prohibited from acknowledging such grants or sponsorships before, during or immediately after such PEG programming has been broadcast in a manner that is similar to the manner in which the Public Broadcasting System (PBS) acknowledges the substantially similar support of its programming content. Such acknowledgements shall comply with the requirements of 47 USC 399b as though the PEG channel was a public broadcast station. 
(g)  Notice of intention to move PEG channel locations/designations. Any video service provider or cable operator who intends to move any PEG channel from the channel designations may only make such a change after providing 60 days' advance written notice to the affected PEG channel. Additionally, such video service provider or cable operator shall engage in a public education program of such intensity and duration as to reasonably inform the general public of the proposed PEG channel designations.  
Sec. 2-363. - Police powers, design/construction standards and rights-of-way. 
(a)  Subject to police powers. Video service providers and cable operators are subject to the police power of the Village to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety, health and welfare of the public. The grant of a statewide video or cable franchise does not render or to any extent lose, waive, impair or lessen the lawful powers and rights, now or hereafter vested in the Village under the Constitution and statutes of the state to regulate the use of streets and public ways or to regulate any matter affecting the safety, health and welfare of the public. The Village shall make the video service provider's and cable operator's history of compliance with such codes and ordinances available to the Department of Financial Institutions so that the Department of Financial Institutions may determine the provider or operator's legal, financial and technical qualifications to provide video services. 
(b)  Design, permits, construction and excavation. Video service providers and cable operators shall comply with all applicable Village codes and ordinances including, without limitation by expression herein, Section 53-122, and shall be subject to any forfeitures so specified for any violations thereof. The Village shall make the person's history of compliance with such codes and ordinances available to the Department of Financial Institutions so that the Department of Financial Institutions may determine the provider's or operator's legal, financial and technical qualifications to provide video services.  
Secs. 2-364—2-373. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FINANCE COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-374. - Jurisdiction. 
The Finance Committee advises the Village Board on annual operating and capital budgets, municipal borrowing, fiscal policies, investment policies, and purchasing procedures.  
Secs. 2-375—2-384. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PARKS, RECREATION AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMITTEE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2014-09, adopted May 27, 2014, repealed former Div. 4 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Div. 4, § 2-385 pertained to the Natural Resources Committee. 
 
Sec. 2-385. - Jurisdiction. 
The Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Committee advises the Village Board on the acquisition, management, enhancement, and public use of natural and conservancy areas, policies and practices directed at maintenance of a healthy and diverse urban forest, the planning, acquisition and development of parks and park facilities and the nature and structure of recreation programs. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-27-2014)  
Secs. 2-386—2-395. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2014-09, adopted May 27, 2014, repealed former Div. 5, § 2-396, which pertained to the Parks and Recreation Committee. See Div. 4. 
 
Secs. 2-396—2-406. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PERSONNEL COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-407. - Jurisdiction. 
The Personnel Committee advises the Village Board on personnel policies, changes in organization structure and classification and compensation plans.  
Secs. 2-408—2-417. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PUBLIC SAFETY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-418. - Jurisdiction. 
The Public Safety Committee advises the Village Board on policy issues relating to the operations of the Police Department, and the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, matters involving licensing and regulation, ordinances controlling public offenses and nuisances, and matters of public health. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1, 11-11-2013)  
Secs. 2-419—2-428. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-429. - Composition. 
The Public Utilities Committee shall consist of seven voting members, two of whom shall be Village Trustees. In addition, the Director of Public Works shall be an ex officio member of the Public Utilities Committee, without voting rights. The five citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications.  
Sec. 2-430. - Appointment. 
(a)  Village Trustee members. The Village Trustee members of the Public Utilities Committee shall be appointed annually by the Village President subject to the approval of the Village Board at the organizational meeting of the Village Board. 
(b)  Citizen members. The citizen members shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to Village Board approval, at the organizational meeting. The term of each citizen member shall be for a staggered term of five years, and the Village President shall annually, subject to the approval of the Village Board at its organizational meeting on the third Tuesday of April, appoint one member of the Public Utilities Committee for a term of five years. In case of vacancy, the Village President may, subject to the approval of the Village Board, at any regular or special meeting, appoint a member for the unexpired term. 
(c)  Officers. The Village President, subject to the confirmation of the Village Board, shall select from among the Village Trustee members of the Public Utilities Committee a chairperson and vice-chairperson.  
Sec. 2-431. - Meetings. 
The Public Utilities Committee may make rules for its own proceedings and for the governing of the utilities. It shall keep books of account in the manner and form prescribed by the Wisconsin Public Service Commission, which shall be open to the public. The Public Utilities Committee shall have the general management and supervision of the Village water, sewer and stormwater utilities, and all matters connected therewith, and shall have the general power and authority to make rules and regulations for the management of said utilities as it shall from time to time find necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management and protection of said utilities.  
Sec. 2-432. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Finances. The Public Utilities Committee will be responsible for preparing and recommending an annual budget to the Village Board reflecting needed expenditures and anticipated revenues, as well as preparing and modifying sewer and stormwater rates and filing water rate modification requests with the Wisconsin Public Service Commission when sound business practices deem it appropriate. 
(b)  Long-range planning. The Public Utilities Committee shall prepare, adopt and, as necessary, amend a long-range plan projecting the needs for the Village utilities in the future, in areas of fiscal responsibility, personnel, new construction and scheduled maintenance practices.  
Sec. 2-433. - Auditing expenditures. 
The Village Treasurer shall provide a monthly statement to the Public Utilities Committee of the expenditures, revenues and fund balances relating to utility operations.  
Sec. 2-434. - Construction. 
The Public Utilities Committee shall receive reports from the Director of Public Works, who shall supervise and superintend the installation of all new machinery, wells, reservoirs, mains, transmission, collection and distribution and service pipes, as well as any repairs or reconstructions of the same or any part thereof. All work of this nature shall be let by contract under supervision of the Director of Public Works.  
Sec. 2-435. - Maps and records. 
The Village Engineer shall prepare maps showing the locations of all mains and service pipes ordered to be laid, with reference to the property lines of the street, court or alley in which the same are to be laid, and also with reference to the established grade of said street, court or alley. After sewer, stormwater or water mains and service pipes shall have been laid, the Village Engineer shall see to it that maps indicate the exact location of said sewer, stormwater and water mains and service pipes as actually laid. The Director of Public Works or designee shall cause a record of the exact location of said sewer, stormwater and water pipes and mains to be transcribed in record books, electronic maps or records kept on file for that purpose in the Village offices.  
Sec. 2-436. - Overall responsibility. 
In fulfillment of its duties, the Public Utilities Committee shall forward its recommendations relating thereto to the Village Board for final action. The Village Board may accept, reject or re-refer the recommendations of the Public Utilities Committee back to the Public Utilities Committee for further action.  
Sec. 2-437. - Management, operation and control. 
(a)  Management. The management, operation, and control of the public water system, sewer system, and storm water system for the Village shall be vested in the Village Board. All records, minutes and all written proceedings thereof shall be kept by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The Village Clerk-Treasurer or designee shall keep all the financial records thereof. 
(b)  Construction authority. Subject to the approval of the Village Board, the Public Utilities Committee shall have the power to construct water and sewer lines for public use, and shall have the power to lay water, stormwater and sewer pipes in and through the public alleys, streets, and public grounds located within the Village; and generally, to do all such work as may be found necessary or convenient in the management of the water, stormwater and sewer systems. The Public Utilities Committee shall have power by itself, its officers, agents and servants, to enter upon any land in the Village for the purpose of making examination or supervise in the performance of their duties under this Section, without liability therefor; and the Public Utilities Committee shall have the power to purchase and acquire for the Village subject to the approval of the Village Board all real and personal property which may be necessary for construction of the water, stormwater and sewer system, or for any repair, remodeling, or additions thereto. 
( Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 26, 6-26-2017)  
Secs. 2-438—2-447. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-448. - Jurisdiction. 
The Public Works Committee advises the Village Board on policies and programs involving the maintenance and construction of Village facilities, streets and sidewalks, solid waste management and recycling, and the maintenance and acquisition of public works vehicles and equipment.  
Secs. 2-449—2-458. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - SENIOR OUTREACH SERVICES COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-459. - Jurisdiction. 
The Senior Outreach Services Committee advises the Senior Outreach Services Department on the services that it provides to residents over the age of 60 and todisabled adults. These services include outreach, case management, congregate and home delivered meal programs, foot care clinics, and education/entertainment programming.  
Sec. 2-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - VOLUNTEER COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-461. - Jurisdiction. 
The Volunteer Committee advises the Village Board on policies relating to a formal program to encourage volunteer participation in activities for the benefit of the Village and its residents. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § 2, 9-9-2013)  
Sec. 2-462. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Volunteer Committee shall be persons with interest in volunteer programs for the Village and the ability to help implement and manage the Village volunteer programs. 
(b)  The Volunteer Committee shall provide general oversight concerning the administration, operations and programming of the Village's volunteer program. 
(c)  The Volunteer Committee shall nominate a volunteer coordinator subject to the Village Board's approval, who shall supervise and monitor volunteer work, training, leadership in volunteer activities and recognition for outstanding volunteer service to the Village. 
(d)  The Volunteer Committee shall recommend to the Village Board policies that will expand the variety of significant community service choices for volunteers and oversee recruiting of volunteers to fulfill these needs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § 2, 9-9-2013)  
Secs. 2-463—2-480. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 
Sec. 2-481. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Ad hoc committee. A special committee created for a limited duration to study a narrowly defined issue and make an advisory recommendation to the Village Board. 
(b)  Subcommittee. A special working committee created to advise an authority, board, commission, or standing committee on a narrow issue or range of issues.  
Sec. 2-482. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the policy regarding the establishment of and appointment of members to ad hoc committees and subcommittees is to ensure that the Village Board understands and agrees with the rationale for the establishment of ad hoc committees or subcommittees and reviews the recommended appointments of committee members to provide an appropriate representation of the community.  
Sec. 2-483. - Policy. 
The proposed creation of any ad hoc committee or subcommittee shall be subject to the approval of the Village Board. In approving the establishment of such a committee the Village Board shall identify the charge, duration and scope of authority of the committee; determine the number of committee members and designate any particular segments of the community to be represented on the committee. The appointment of members to the newly established committee shall be subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the Village Board. The existence of an ad hoc committee or subcommittee may be terminated at any time by majority vote of the Village Board.  
Sec. 2-484. - Responsibility and authority. 
Any member of the Village Board may recommend the establishment of an ad hoc committee or subcommittee. If the creation of the new committee is approved by the Village Board, the Village President shall recommend the appointment of a chair subject to confirmation by the Village Board. The appointed chair shall then recommend, subject to confirmation by the Village President, the appointment of individual members to the ad hoc committee or subcommittee.  
Secs. 2-485—2-507. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Village clerk, Wis. Stats. § 61.25; village treasurer, Wis. Stats. § 61.26; deputy village treasurer, Wis. Stats. § 61.261; assessor, Wis. Stats. § 61.27; peace officers, Wis. Stats. § 61.31. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-508. - Powers; duties; ethics. 
(a)  General powers. Officers shall have generally the powers and duties prescribed for like officers of villages, except as otherwise provided, and such powers and duties as are prescribed by law and except as to the Village President, shall perform such duties as shall be required of such officer by the Village Board. Officers whose powers and duties are not enumerated in Wis. Stats. Ch. 61, shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law for like officers or as are directed by the Village Board. 
(b)  Rules. All officers and departments may make the necessary rules for the conduct of their duties and incidental proceedings which shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Board. 
(c)  Applicability of ethics statutes. Wis. Stats. § 19.59 and the general laws for the punishment of bribery, misdemeanors and corruption in office, shall apply to Village officers and employees. 
(d)  Legal representation. Whenever a Village official in official capacity proceeded against or obliged to proceed before any civil court, board or commission, to defend or maintain such official position, or because of some act arising out of the performance of official duties, and such official has prevailed in such proceedings, or the Village Board has ordered the proceedings discontinued, the Village Board may provide for payment to such official such sum as it sees fit, to reimburse the Village official for the expenses reasonably incurred for costs and attorney's fees. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-1)  
Sec. 2-509. - Appointed officials. 
(a)  The Village officials hereinafter set forth shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the Village Board; and one or more of said offices may be held by the same person. Persons appointed to perform the duties of the following offices shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to removal as provided by Wis. Stats. § 17.12. 
(1)  Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(2)  Director of Public Works. 
(b)  The Village President shall not vote on the confirmation of such appointments, except in case of a tie. 
(c)  The Village has no limitations on where any employee or prospective employee may reside. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-2; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 8-26-2013; Ord. No. 2017-11 , §§ 1, 2, 5-8-2017) 
State Law reference— Selection of appointed officers, Wis. Stats. § 61.197; removal of village officers, Wis. Stats. § 17.12.  
Sec. 2-510. - Eligibility for office. 
(a)  No person shall be elected by the people to a Village office, who is not at the time of election, a citizen of the United States and of this state, and an elector of the Village, and in case of a ward office, of the ward, and actually residing therein. 
(b)  An appointee by the Village President, requiring to be confirmed by the Village Board, who shall be rejected by the Village Board, shall be ineligible for appointment to the same office for one year thereafter. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-17) 
State Law reference— Eligibility for office, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2).  
Sec. 2-511. - Oaths of office. 
(a)  Oath of office. Every officer of the Village, including members of statutorily authorized Village authorities, boards, committees, and commissions, shall, before entering upon their duties and within five days of their election or appointment or notice thereof, take the oath of office prescribed by law and file such oath in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer, provided that the Municipal Judge shall take the official oath within ten days after election and file it with the Dane County Clerk of Circuit Court prior to acting as Municipal Judge. Any person reelected or reappointed to the same office shall take and file an official oath for each term of service. 
(b)  Form; procedure. The form, filing and general procedure for the taking of oaths shall be governed by Wis. Stats. § 19.01 et seq. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-18; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 29, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Oaths and bonds, Wis. Stats. §§ 19.01 et seq., 62.09(4).  
Sec. 2-512. - Vacancies. 
(a)  How occurring. Except as provided in Section 2-509(a), vacancies in elective and appointive positions occur as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.03 and 17.035. 
(b)  How filled. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.23. 
(c)  Temporary incapacitation. If any officer is absent or temporarily incapacitated from any cause, the Village Board may appoint some person to discharge the officer's duties until such officer returns or until such disability is removed. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-19) 
State Law reference— Removal, Wis. Stats. § 17.13; vacancies in village offices, Wis. Stats. § 17.24; filling of vacancies, Wis. Stats. § 17.24; temporary vacancy, Wis. Stats. § 61.23.  
Sec. 2-513. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed by the Village Board as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.13(2). 
(b)  Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.12(1)(c). 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-20) 
State Law reference— Removal of village officers, Wis. Stats. § 17.13.  
Sec. 2-514. - Custody of official property. 
Village officers shall observe the standards of care imposed by Wis. Stats. § 19.21, with respect to the care and custody of official property. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-21) 
State Law reference— Custody and delivery of official property, etc., Wis. Stats. § 19.21.  
Sec. 2-515. - Village Clerk-Treasurer, Deputy Village Clerk and Deputy Village Treasurer. 
(a)  Appointment. The office of Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be filled by appointment by the Village President subject to confirmation by the Village Board. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall have the duties and responsibilities set forth in Wis. Stats. § 61.25 and § 61.26 in addition to any duties and responsibilities set forth in this Code. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to removal by a vote of the Village Board. 
(b)  Deputy Village Clerk. There shall be a Deputy Village Clerk. The Deputy Village Clerk shall assist the Village Clerk-Treasurer in performing the duties of that office under Wis. Stats. § 61.25 and clerk duties under this Code. 
(c)  Deputy Village Treasurer. There shall be a Deputy Village Treasurer. The Deputy Village Treasurer shall assist and work under the direction of the Village Clerk-Treasurer in performing the duties of that office. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-3; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 2, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 7, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-11 , §§ 3—5, 5-8-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11 , § 3, adopted May 8, 2017, changed the title of § 2-515 from "Village Clerk and Deputy Village Clerk" to "Village Clerk-Treasurer and Deputy Village Clerk. Subsequently, the title of § 2-515 was renamed at the request of the city to read as herein set out. 
Charter Ordinance reference—Powers and duties of the Village Clerk and Village Treasurer, Ord. of 7-11-1994. 
State Law reference— Village clerk, Wis. Stats. § 61.25.  
Sec. 2-516. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At the request of the city, § 2-516 has been removed. Former § 2-516 pertained to Village Treasurer and Deputy Village Treasurer, and derived from the 1998 Code, § 2-3-4; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 3, adopted Jan. 27, 2002; and Ord. No. 2017-11 , § 6, adopted May 8, 2017.  
Sec. 2-517. - Village Attorney. 
(a)  Appointment. The Village Attorney is an appointed position. The Village Attorney shall be appointed pursuant to Section 2-509, except the Village Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Board. 
(b)  Duties. The Village Attorney shall have the following duties: 
(1)  The Village Attorney shall conduct all of the legal business in which the Village is interested. 
(2)  The Village Attorney shall, when requested by Village officers, give written legal opinions, which shall be filed with the Village. 
(3)  The Village Attorney shall draft ordinances, bonds and other instruments as may be required by Village officers. 
(4)  The Village Attorney may appoint an assistant, who shall have power to perform the Village Attorney's duties and for whose acts the Village Attorney shall be responsible to the Village. 
(5)  The Village Board may employ and compensate special counsel to assist in or take charge of any matter in which the Village is interested. 
(6)  The Village Attorney shall perform such other duties as provided by state law and as designated by the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-5) 
State Law reference— City attorney, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(12); defense of officers by city attorney, Wis. Stats. § 62.115.  
Sec. 2-518. - Assessor. 
The Village Board elects to hire an assessing firm as an independent contractor as the Village Assessor pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.197(f). The Village Assessor shall serve such term as set forth in a contract between the Village and the assessing firm. The assessing firm so appointed shall designate the person responsible for the assessment. The designee shall file the official oath under Wis. Stats. § 19.01 and sign the affidavit of the Village Assessor attached to the assessment roll under Wis. Stats. § 70.49. No person may be designated by any corporation or independent contractor unless such person has been granted the appropriate certification under Wis. Stats. § 73.09. For purposes of this Section, the term "independent contractor" means a person who either is under contract to furnish appraisal and assessment services or is customarily engaged in an independently established trade, business or profession in which the services are offered to the general public. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-12; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 9, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Public official's oaths and bonds, Wis. Stats. § 19.01; corporation as assessor, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.197, 61.27; affidavit of assessor, Wis. Stats. § 70.49; assessor certification, Wis. Stats. § 73.02; assessors in cities, Wis. Stats. § 70.05.  
Sec. 2-519. - School crossing guards. 
The Chief of Police may hire adult school crossing guards for the protection of persons who are crossing a highway in the vicinity of a school. Such crossing guards shall be hired in sufficient numbers as the Village Board may authorize. The school crossing guards shall be provided with and wear insignia or uniforms which designate them as school crossing guards and shall be equipped with signals or signs to direct traffic to stop at school crossings. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-16)  
Secs. 2-520—2-546. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 2-547. - Appointment. 
The position of Village Administrator is hereby established. The Village Board shall appoint the Village Administrator on the basis of merit, with due regard to training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the office, by a two-thirds vote. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-22(a))  
Sec. 2-548. - Term of office. 
The Village Administrator shall enter into an employment contract with the Village. All terms and conditions of employment shall be set forth in the contract. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-31-2014)  
Sec. 2-549. - Duties and functions. 
The Village Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Village, responsible only to the Village Board for the proper administration of the Village's business affairs. Except as specifically limited by statute, ordinance or resolution, the Village Administrator shall have responsibility in the specific areas provided in this Division. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-22(d); Ord. No. 2014-05, §§ 1, 3, 3-31-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2014-05, adopted March 31, 2014, repealed former § 2-549 which pertained to term of office, and derived from the 1998 Code, § 2-3-22(c). Section 3 of said ordinance, renumbered former §§ 2-550—2-556 as §§ 2-549—2-555.  
Sec. 2-550. - Responsibilities. 
The following are the general responsibilities of the Village Administrator: 
(a)  Implement directives of the Village Board, reporting promptly to the Village Board any difficulties encountered in implementation; 
(b)  Be responsible for the administration of all day to day operations of Village government, including monitoring of all Wisconsin Statutes, Village ordinances, resolutions and minutes of the Village Board and its subunits; 
(c)  Prepare an administration plan, including an organizational chart, which defines authority and responsibility for all statutory officers and nonstatutory positions and submit the plan for the Village Board for adoption as the official organizational and administrative procedural plan for the Village; 
(d)  Establish when necessary administrative procedures to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of Village government according to the best current practices in local government administration, not inconsistent with Subsection (c) of this Section, or Village Board directives, by policy or by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board as deemed appropriate; 
(e)  Assist the Village Board in establishing long-range Village-wide goals and objectives; 
(f)  Serve as ex officio nonvoting member of all authorities, boards, commissions and committees of the Village, except as specifically directed otherwise by Wisconsin Statute or Village Board directive; 
(g)  Keep informed concerning current federal, state and county legislation and administrative rules affecting the Village, and submit appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the Village Board; 
(h)  Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state and county grants, matching funds and other funds for local programs, assisting department heads and the Village Board in seeking to obtain these funds under the overall direction of the Village Board; 
(i)  Represent the Village in matters involving legislative and intergovernmental affairs within the scope of the directions for such representation provided by the Village Board; 
(j)  Act as the Village's public information officer with the responsibility of assuring that the news media are informed about the operations of the Village and that all open meeting law and public records law rules and regulations are strictly followed; 
(k)  Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications between citizens and Village government to assure that complaints, grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt attention by the responsible Village official or officer, and to assure that all such matters are resolved as expeditiously as possible; 
(l)  Promote the economic well-being and growth of the Village through public and private sector cooperation. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-22(d)(1); Ord. No. 2014-05, § 3, 3-31-2014) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 2-549.  
Sec. 2-551. - Village Board responsibilities. 
The Village Administrator's responsibilities concerning the Village Board are as follows: 
(a)  Attend all meetings of the Village Board except as specifically excused by the Village President, assisting the Village Board as required in the performance of its duties; 
(b)  In coordination with the Village President and Village Board, ensure that appropriate agendas are prepared for all Village Board meetings, as well as the Village's other authorities, boards, commissions and committees, together with such supporting material as may be required; with nothing herein being construed to give the Village Administrator authority to limit or in any way prevent matters from being considered by the Village Board or the Village's other authorities, boards, committees and commissions; 
(c)  In consultation with the Village Attorney, assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as requested by individual Village Trustees or the Village Board, or as needed to bring Village ordinances or resolutions into compliance with federal or state law; 
(d)  Inform the Village Board regularly about the activities of the Village Administrator by oral or written report at Village Board meetings; 
(e)  Take action in consultation with the Village President without prior Village Board approval when necessary for emergency circumstances. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-22(d)(2); Ord. No. 2014-05, § 3, 3-31-2014) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 2-549.  
Sec. 2-552. - Personnel responsibilities. 
The Village Administrator's responsibilities with other Village personnel are as follows: 
(a)  Serve as Village personnel officer with responsibilities to ensure that complete and current personnel records, including specific job descriptions, are kept for all Village officers and employees; 
(b)  Evaluate in conjunction with department heads the performance of all employees on an annual basis; 
(c)  Evaluate in conjunction with the Village Board the performance of all department heads on an annual basis; 
(d)  Recommend salary and wage scales for Village employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements; 
(e)  Develop and enforce high standards of performance by Village employees; 
(f)  Ensure that Village employees have proper working conditions; 
(g)  Work closely with department heads to promptly resolve personnel problems or grievances; 
(h)  Be responsible for the administrative coordination and direction of all Village employees in conformity with the Village organizational and administrative procedure plan; 
(i)  Make recommendations to the Village Board regarding appointment, promotion or discipline of department heads when necessary for the good of the Village; 
(j)  In consultation with the appropriate department head, be responsible for the appointment, promotion or discipline of employees below the department head level; 
(k)  In consultation with the Village Board's designated bargaining team, participate in developing the Village's positions in collective bargaining and negotiating collective bargaining agreements; 
(l)  In consultation with department heads, ensure that employees receive adequate opportunities for training to maintain and improve their job-related knowledge and skills, as well as acting as the approving authority for requests by employees to attend conferences and training opportunities, provided that funds are budgeted and available for these activities. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-22(d)(3); Ord. No. 2014-05, § 3, 3-31-2014) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 2-549.  
Sec. 2-553. - Fiscal responsibilities. 
The fiscal responsibilities of the Village Administrator are as follows: 
(a)  Be responsible for the preparation of the annual Village budget for approval by the Village Board, in accordance with guidelines provided by the Village Board and any Budget Committee that may be established from time to time, as well as in coordination with department heads and in accordance with state law; 
(b)  Administer the budget adopted by the Village Board; 
(c)  Report regularly to the Village Board on the Village's current fiscal position and future financial needs; 
(d)  Supervise the Village accounting system to ensure that the system employs methods in accordance with current professional accounting practices; 
(e)  Serve as the Village purchasing agent, supervising all purchasing and contracting for supplies and services, subject to any purchasing procedures established by the Village Board and any limitations established by Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-22(d)(4); Ord. No. 2014-05, § 3, 3-31-2014) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 2-549.  
Sec. 2-554. - Fulfilling other responsibilities. 
If authorized by action of the Village Board, the Village Administrator shall fulfill the duties of one or more statutory public officials. In the event such combination of responsibilities occurs, the Village Board shall adopt an ordinance specifying the modifications of such statutory officials' appointment. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-22(e); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 4, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2014-05, § 3, 3-31-2014) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 2-549.  
Sec. 2-555. - Cooperation. 
All officials and employees of the Village shall cooperate with and assist the Village Administrator so that the Village government shall function effectively and efficiently. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-22(f); Ord. No. 2014-05, § 3, 3-31-2014) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 2-549.  
Secs. 2-556—2-575. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CHIEF OF POLICE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Chief of police, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.25(2), 62.09(1)(a), (4), (13), 62.13, 62.50(6). 
 
Sec. 2-576. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11 , § 7, adopted May 8, 2017, repealed former § 2-576 which pertained to appointment, and derived from the 1998 Code, § 2-3-6(a).  
Sec. 2-577. - Duties. 
In addition to the duties imposed upon the Chief of Police elsewhere in this Code, the Chief of Police shall: 
(a)  Have general supervisory control of the Police Department and shall be responsible for the Police Department's operations, efficiency and general good conduct. The Chief of Police shall perform all duties prescribed to such position by the laws of the state and the ordinances of the Village and shall obey all lawful written orders of the Village Board or appropriate standing committee thereof. 
(b)  Cause the public peace to be preserved and may arrest and with reasonable diligence take before the proper court every person found in the Village engaged in any disturbance of the peace or violating any law of the state or ordinance of the Village. The Chief of Police shall cooperate with other law enforcement officers in the arrest or apprehension of persons charged with a crime. The Chief of Police shall see that all laws and ordinances of the Village and state are enforced. Whenever any violation thereof shall come to the Chief of Police's knowledge, the Chief of Police shall cause the requisite complaint to be made and see that the evidence is procured for the successful prosecution of the offender. 
(c)  Have command of the Police Department on administrative matters, subject to the direction of the Village Board. 
(d)  Cause to be maintained accurate records of complaints, crimes, traffic accidents, ordinance violations, arrests, summons, incidents, and calls for police service and shall provide a system of periodic summary and analysis to ensure the most efficient and effective deployment and use of the Police Department's resources. The Chief of Police shall submit or cause to be submitted to the various agencies such reports and summaries as are required by Wisconsin Statutes or ordinances and shall participate in voluntary programs designed to improve law enforcement and public safety. 
(e)  Submit such reports and comply with such administrative procedures as may be prescribed by the Village Board relative to fiscal and administrative matters. 
(f)  Submit such reports and/or information and comply with such policies as may be prescribed by the Village Board. 
(g)  Have control of the assignment, hours of duty, and transfer of all police officers and other department personnel. 
(h)  Plan, organize, staff, direct, and control all of the human and material resources of the Police Department for the most effective and efficient discharge of its duty to protect persons and property, preserve the peace, protect the rights of citizens and enforce the Wisconsin Statutes and the ordinances of the Village as are within its jurisdiction. The Chief of Police shall supervise the preparation and presentation of annual reports and budgets for the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall be required to certify to the correctness of all bills incurred by the Police Department. 
(i)  Strive to maintain suitable, productive relationships with other Village departments and with other governmental agencies and private organizations concerned with law enforcement, crime prevention, administration of justice and public safety. The Chief of Police shall cooperate and exchange information with other Village departments in matters relating to their various functions. 
(j)  Plan and execute programs designed to prevent and repress crime, apprehend and prosecute offenders, recover property, and regulate noncriminal conduct, giving highest priority in the allocation of resources to crime and other offenses most hazardous to life and property. 
(k)  Custody of Police Department equipment. The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all Village property, equipment and supplies under the control of, or used by, the Police Department and shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, safeguarding and accurate records of such property, equipment, and supplies. 
(l)  Custody of Police Department property. The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all property and shall be responsible for the safekeeping, lawful disposition and accurate record of the same. The Chief of Police shall see that all property is returned to its lawful owner or otherwise disposed of according to the applicable statutes. 
(m)  Custody of Police Department records. The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all public records of the Police Department as provided in Section 2-874(b). 
(Code 1998, §§ 2-3-6(b), 5-1-4) 
State Law reference— Police department, Wis. Stats. § 61.65(1); response outside village limits, Wis. Stats. § 66.0513.  
Secs. 2-578—2-602. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FIRE/EMS CHIEF[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, changed the title of Div. 4 from "Fire Chief" to "Fire/EMS Chief." 
State Law reference— Fire chief, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.25(2), 62.09(1)(a), 101.976, 213.095. 
 
Sec. 2-603. - Appointment. 
The Fire/EMS Chief shall be appointed by the Police and Fire Commission for an indefinite term. The Fire/EMS Chief shall be hired on the basis of merit, training, experience, administrative ability, efficiency and general qualifications and fitness for performing the duties of the position. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-7(a); Ord. No. 2013-14, § 3, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 2-604. - Powers and duties of Fire/EMS Chief. 
In addition to the duties imposed upon the Fire/EMS Chief elsewhere in this Code: 
(a)  The Fire/EMS Chief shall have general supervision of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, subject to this Chapter and the policies and procedures of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department and shall be responsible for the personnel and general efficiency of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. 
(b)  The Fire/EMS Chief or ranking officer of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no persons, except Firefighters, Police Officers, Emergency Medical Technicians and those admitted by order of any officer of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, shall be permitted to come. 
(c)  The Fire/EMS Chief or ranking officer of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect the adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire the Fire/EMS Chief or ranking officer of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall have the power to cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the same impedes the work of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department during the progress of a fire. 
(d)  The Fire/EMS Chief shall have police powers granted by state law to protect the life and health of the public, determine the cause of fire and conduct emergency operations including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Inspection warrants as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0119; 
(2)  Arson investigation and information regarding fire loss as provided in Wis. Stats. § 165.55(14); 
(3)  Evacuation of areas and assistance for fire suppression as provided in Wis. Stats. § 213.095; 
(4)  Right-of-entry into property or premises for fire suppression or emergency medical assistance as provided in Wis. Stats. § 213.095; 
(5)  Declaration of hazardous materials, buildings and activities as provided in Wis. Stats. § 101.14. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the Fire/EMS Chief to preside at all meetings of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, to call special meetings, to preserve order, to decide all points of order that may arise and to enforce a rigid observance of this Section and the policies and procedures of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the Fire/EMS Chief or ranking officer of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department to be present at all fires, to have complete command of and entire responsibility for all firefighting operations, to plan the control of the same, to direct the action of the company when they arrive at a fire, to observe that the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department does its duty, to grant leaves of absence at a fire when the Fire/EMS Chief or ranking officer of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department may deem it proper and to see that the fire apparatus and ambulances are kept in proper condition at all times. 
(g)  The Fire/EMS Chief shall enforce all fire prevention ordinances of this Village and state laws and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and shall keep citizens informed on fire prevention methods and on the activities of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. 
(h)  The Fire/EMS Chief shall keep a record book of every fire to which the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department was called and shall enter in such book the locality of fire, time alarm was received, cause of fire, where fire started, cause of delay (if any) in responding, method of extinguishment and equipment used, amount of insurance carried on building and contents, estimated fire loss, time fire was extinguished, names of firefighters responding and general remarks. 
(i)  The Fire/EMS Chief shall have the power to discipline or terminate any career employee or paid-on-call volunteer member of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department for neglect or refusal to perform departmental duties. In the case of career firefighter employees only, such discipline or termination is subject to an appeal to the Police and Fire Commission. 
(j)  Not later than September 1 of each year, the Fire/EMS Chief shall prepare and submit to the Village Clerk-Treasurer a proposed budget for the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department for the next fiscal year. 
(k)  It shall be the duty of the Fire/EMS Chief to submit: 
(1)  A monthly report to the Village Board of all activities of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department during the preceding month; and 
(2)  An annual report to the Village Board concerning the previous year's activities of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department in a form as prescribed by the Village Board. 
(l)  The Fire/EMS Chief shall ensure compliance by the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department with the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code applicable to firefighting. 
(m)  The Fire/EMS Chief shall perform such other duties as are incumbent on the commanding officer of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. 
(n)  The Fire/EMS Chief or designee, shall be the Fire Inspector of the Village and shall have the power to appoint one or more deputy Fire Inspectors and shall perform all duties required of the Fire Inspectors by the laws of the state and rules of the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services particularly Wis. Stats. § 101.14. 
(o)  While acting as Fire Inspector pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 101.14(2), the Fire/EMS Chief, or any officer of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department designated by the Fire/EMS Chief, shall have the right and authority to enter any building or upon any premises in the Village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspections or investigations which, under the provisions of this Code, they may deem necessary. Should the Fire Inspector find that any provisions of this Code relating to fire hazards and prevention of fires are being violated, or that a fire hazard exists that should be eliminated, it shall be the Fire Inspector's duty to give such directions for the abatement of such conditions as the Fire Inspector shall deem necessary and, if such directions be not complied with, to report such noncompliance to the Village Board for further action. 
(p)  The Fire/EMS Chief or officers or members of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department designated by the Fire/EMS Chief as Fire Inspectors, shall inspect all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of any law or ordinance relating to the fire hazard or to the prevention of fires. Such inspections shall be made at least once in each nonoverlapping six-month period per calendar year in all of the territory served by the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, and not less than once in three months in such territory as the Village Board has designated or thereafter designates as within the Village or as a congested district subject to conflagration, and more often as the Fire/EMS Chief orders. 
(q)  Reports of inspections shall be made and kept on file in the office of the Fire/EMS Chief in the manner and form required by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services. A copy of such reports shall be filed with the Fire/EMS Chief. 
(r)  The Fire/EMS Chief, or any other officer of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department in command at any fire, is hereby vested with full and complete authority at fires, and may cause the arrest of any person failing to give the right-of-way to the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department in responding to a fire. 
(Code 1998, §§ 2-3-7(b), 5-2-3; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 4, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2013-20, § 1, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 32, 6-26-2017) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, changed the title of § 2-604 from "Powers and duties" to "Powers and duties of Fire/EMS Chief."  
Secs. 2-605—2-626. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, repealed Div. 5, §§ 2-627 and 2-628, which pertained to emergency medical services director, and derived from the 1998 Code, §§ 2-3-11(a), (c). 
 
Secs. 2-627—2-648. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2013-07, adopted Aug. 26, 2013, changed the title of Div. 6 from "Head of Emergency Management Services" to "Emergency Management Director." 
State Law reference— Emergency management personnel, Wis. Stats. § 66.0314; emergency management, Wis. Stats. § 166.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-649. - Appointment. 
There is created the office of Emergency Management Director for the Village, who shall be appointed as provided by Section 2-509 on the basis of merit, training, experience, administrative ability, efficiency and general qualifications and fitness for performing the duties of the position. The Emergency Management Director shall develop and implement an effective program of emergency management consistent with Wis. Stats. Ch. 166. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-10(a); Ord. No. 2013-07, § 4, 8-26-2013)  
Sec. 2-650. - Duties and authorities. 
(a)  The Emergency Management Director shall develop and promulgate emergency management plans consistent with state plans, direct the emergency management program and perform such other duties related to emergency management as are required by the Village Board and the Emergency Management Committee when applicable. The emergency management plans shall require the use of the incident command system by all emergency response agencies, including local health departments, during a state of emergency declared under Wis. Stats. § 166.03(1)(b)1. or 166.23(1) or in any other multijurisdictional or multiagency emergency response. 
(b)  The Emergency Management Director shall coordinate and assist in developing Village emergency management plans, integrate such plans with the county plan, advise the department of all emergency management planning in the county and submit to the Adjutant General such reports as required, direct and coordinate emergency management activities during a state of emergency, and direct emergency management training programs and exercises. 
(c)  The Emergency Management Director shall direct local emergency management training programs and exercises, direct participation in emergency management programs and exercises ordered by the Adjutant General and the County Emergency Management Director, and advise the County Emergency Management Director on Village emergency management programs and submit to the County Emergency Management Director such reports as the County Emergency Management Director requires. 
(d)  During the continuance of a state of emergency proclaimed by the Governor, the Emergency Management Director, on behalf of the Village, may contract with any person to provide equipment and services on a cost basis to be used in disaster relief. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-10(b); Ord. No. 2013-07, § 5, 8-26-2013) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of the head of emergency management services, Wis. Stats. § 166.03(5); emergency management plans, Wis. Stats. § 166.03(5)(a), (b).  
Secs. 2-651—2-674. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Board of public works described as officers, etc., Wis. Stats. § 62.14. 
 
Sec. 2-675. - Appointment. 
The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the Village Board, on the basis of merit, training, experience, administrative ability, efficiency and general qualifications and fitness for performing the duties of the position. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-9(a))  
Sec. 2-676. - Term. 
The Director of Public Works shall be appointed pursuant to Section 2-509. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-9(b))  
Sec. 2-677. - Duties and powers. 
The Director of Public Works shall have the following duties and powers: 
(a)  The Director of Public Works shall have general charge and supervision of all public works in the Village. 
(b)  The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and construction of streets, alleys, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, bridges, street signs, storm sewers, Village buildings and structures and all machinery, equipment and property used in any activity under the Director of Public Works' control. 
(c)  The Director of Public Works shall also be responsible for garbage and refuse collection and disposal, snow and ice removal, street cleaning and flushing, and rodent control. 
(d)  The Director of Public Works shall act as manager of the Village utilities identified in Chapter 47. 
(e)  The Assistant Director of Public Works/Parks Manager shall manage the Village parks. 
(f)  The Director of Public Works shall perform such other activities and duties as are imposed upon the Director of Public Works from time to time by the Village Board, by job description or by employment contract. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-9(c)) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of board of public works, Wis. Stats. § 62.14(6).  
Secs. 2-678—2-694. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - BUILDING INSPECTOR, PLUMBING INSPECTOR, HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING INSPECTOR, AND ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Building inspector review board, Wis. Stats. § 101.596. 
 
Sec. 2-695. - Qualifications. 
(a)  There are created the positions of Building Inspector; Plumbing Inspector; Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Inspector; and Electrical Inspector. One person may be appointed to serve in all capacities. 
(b)  Each inspector shall: 
(1)  Be of good moral character; 
(2)  Possess such executive ability as is requisite for the performance of duties and shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of equipment in the inspector's area of responsibility; 
(3)  Be well versed in approved methods of construction for safety to persons and property, the statutes of the State of Wisconsin relating to work in the inspector's area of responsibility, and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof; 
(4)  Have sufficient experience in the installation of equipment to enable the inspector to understand and apply the appropriate codes adopted by the Village. 
(c)  Each inspector shall have state certifications as follows: 
(1)  Each inspector shall be certified by the State of Wisconsin in the inspector's area of responsibility; 
(2)  The Building Inspector shall be certified by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce to administer and enforce all the provisions of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-15(a)) 
State Law reference— Enforcement of building codes, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.17, 62.23(9).  
Sec. 2-696. - Appointment and powers. 
(a)  The Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Inspector, and Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Community Development Director. 
(b)  Each inspector shall enforce the provisions of this Code and all other ordinances and laws and orders of the State of Wisconsin which relate to building construction, plumbing, HVAC and electrical installations, subject to the respective authority of each inspector as set forth in this Section and other Chapters of the Village Code. 
(c)  Inspectors may pass upon any questions arising under the provisions of this Code relating to their areas of responsibility. No person shall interfere with an inspector while in the performance of the inspector's official duties. 
(d)  Each inspector shall be subject to removal from office during the inspector's term for cause after a hearing by the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-15(b))  
Sec. 2-697. - May employ additional assistants. 
Each inspector may employ, subject to approval of the Village Board and the Community Development Director, any assistant inspectors and clerical assistants necessary for the proper conduct of the inspector's office and the inspection of installations in the inspector's area of responsibility. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-15(c))  
Sec. 2-698. - Inspectors or assistants not to be in business. 
The inspectors and assistant inspectors shall not engage in the sale, installation or maintenance of equipment, either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the Village at any time while holding such office as herein provided. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-15(d))  
Sec. 2-699. - Authority to enter premises. 
(a)  In the discharge of their respective duties, each inspector under this Section or authorized agent may enter any building, upon presentation of the proper credentials, during reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and may require the production of any permit or license required hereunder. No person shall interfere with the inspector or authorized agent while in the performance of their duties; and any person so interfering shall be in violation of this Section and subject to a penalty as provided by Section 1-16. 
(b)  If consent to entry to personal or real properties which are not public buildings or to portions of public buildings which are not open to the public for inspection purposes has been denied, the inspector shall obtain a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-15(e); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 11, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Inspection warrants, Wis. Stats. § 66.0119.  
Sec. 2-700. - Duties. 
The inspectors shall have such duties as are prescribed in this Section and Chapters 8 and 62. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-15(f))  
Sec. 2-701. - Stop work orders and revocations. 
Each inspector may order construction, installation, alteration or repair work stopped when such work is being done in violation of this Code. Work so stopped shall not be resumed, except with written permission of the inspector, provided if the stop work order is an oral one it shall be followed by a written order within a reasonable period of time. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-15(g))  
Secs. 2-702—2-727. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - MUNICIPAL COURT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal judge, Wis. Stats. § 755.01; municipal court, Wis. Stats. § 755.001 et seq.; municipal court procedure, Wis. Stats. § 800.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-728. - Established. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. Ch. 755, there is hereby established a municipal court for the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(a)) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish a municipal court, Wis. Stats. § 755.01.  
Sec. 2-729. - Procedure. 
(a)  The procedure in municipal court for the Village shall be as provided in this Section and state law, including, but not by way of limitation, Wis. Stats. Chs. 61, 66, 755 and 800. 
(b)  The municipal court shall be open as determined by the Municipal Judge and approved by the Village Board. 
(c)  The Municipal Judge shall keep office and hold court in the Municipal Center within facilities that shall be located in an area separate from the Village of McFarland Police Department by design or signage. 
(d)  If the Municipal Judge is temporarily absent, sick or disabled, the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 800.06(1), shall apply, and if the Municipal Judge becomes incompetent, unable or fails to act, or in the event of a vacancy, the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 800.06(2), shall apply. Any substitute Municipal Judge designated or assigned hereunder shall be compensated as determined by contract between the Village and Municipal Judge, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 755.04 and 800.065(3). The Municipal Judge may not serve until the contract is entered into, and no Municipal Judge may be compensated for any time during the term which the Municipal Judge has not executed and filed his or her official bond and official oath, as required by Wis. Stats. § 755.03. The Municipal Judge shall satisfy all continuing education requirements for municipal judges. 
(e)  Upon the proper and timely written request for substitution or disqualification of the Municipal Judge, the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 800.05, shall apply. 
(f)  The procedures of the municipal court shall be in accord with the applicable Wisconsin Statutes and Village ordinances. The municipal court shall abide by the Wisconsin Rules of Evidence and shall abide by the Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule, as required by Wis. Stats. §§ 345.26 and 800.037. In nontraffic matters, the Municipal Judge shall draft a bond schedule, which shall become effective upon approval by the Village Board. No bond shall exceed the maximum penalty established by the Village Board which could be imposed for the ordinance violation, plus costs, fees, and surcharges imposed under Wis. Stats. Ch. 814. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(f); Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 1-24-2011) 
State Law reference— Municipal court procedure, Wis. Stats. § 800.001 et seq.  
Sec. 2-730. - Fees. 
(a)  Bonds for appearance, partial payments and other funds collected by the municipal court shall be treated as escrow funds and deposited with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(b)  The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall collect all forfeitures, fees, surcharges, and costs in any action or proceeding before the Municipal Court and shall report and pay over such moneys to the Village Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days after receipt of such moneys by the Municipal Court, as provided under Wis. Stats. § 800.10(2). At the time of payment, the Municipal Court Clerk shall report to the Village Clerk-Treasurer the title of the action, the offense for which the forfeiture was imposed and the total amount of the forfeiture, fees, surcharges and costs, if any. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall disburse the fees as provided in Wis. Stats. Ch. 814, and disburse any surcharges in accordance with law. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(g); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 10, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 2, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 33, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Municipal court fees and costs, Wis. Stats. §§ 800.10, 814.65.  
Sec. 2-731. - Board may abolish municipal court. 
The Village Board may, by ordinance or by law, abolish the municipal court at the end of any term for which the Municipal Judge has been elected or appointed. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(h); Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3, 1-24-2011)  
Sec. 2-732. - Statutes adopted by reference. 
Wis. Stats. Chs. 755 and 800, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(i))  
Sec. 2-733. - Contempt of court. 
(a)  The Municipal Judge may punish for contempt of municipal court for the Village persons guilty of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Intentional misconduct in the presence of the court which interferes with a court proceeding or with the administration of justice, or which impairs the due respect for the municipal court. 
(2)  Refusal of a witness to appear without excuse. 
(b)  No person may be punished for contempt before a Municipal Judge until an opportunity has been given the person to be heard in such person's defense. If the contempt alleged involves disrespect or criticism of a Municipal Judge, that Municipal Judge is disqualified from presiding at the trial of contempt unless the person charged consents to the Municipal Judge presiding at the trial. For the purpose of hearing a person's defense, the Municipal Judge may, if the alleged defendant does not appear for trial, issue a warrant for the person to be brought before the Municipal Judge. 
(c)  The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture in an amount not to exceed $200.00 for a contempt of court. 
(d)  For a contempt of court described in Section 2-733(a)(1), the Municipal Judge may impose imprisonment in the county jail for not more than seven days and impose a forfeiture, as provided under Wis. Stats. § 800.12(3). 
(e)  For a contempt of court described in Section 2-733(a)(2), the Municipal Judge may do any of the following, pursuant Wis. Stats. § 800.12(4): 
(1)  Issue a warrant to bring the witness before the court for the contempt and to testify. 
(2)  In addition to ordering witness to pay a forfeiture, the judge may order the witness to pay all costs of the witness's apprehension. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(j); Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 1-24-2011) 
State Law reference— Municipal court contempt procedure, Wis. Stats. §§ 785.03, 800.12.  
Secs. 2-734—2-763. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal judge, election, Wis. Stats. §§ 5.58(1c), 5.60(1)(ag), (2), 7.10(6), 7.60(4)(a), 8.05(1)(j)1, 3—5, 8.05(5), 8.10(5), 8.50, 10.68(2), 11.02(3e), 134.24(1); municipal judge, Wis. Stats. § 755.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-764. - Qualifications. 
After the term of the current Municipal Judge, the Municipal Judge shall be a resident of the Village of McFarland, shall be licensed to practice law in the State of Wisconsin and have been so licensed for five years immediately prior to election or appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 2-28-2011)  
Sec. 2-765. - Office created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. Ch. 755, there is hereby created the office of Municipal Judge for the municipal court for the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(b)) 
State Law reference— Municipal judge, Wis. Stats. § 755.01.  
Sec. 2-766. - Election; term. 
The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large at the spring election on the even-numbered years for a term of four years commencing on May 1 succeeding the election. The Municipal Judge shall be subject to the Wisconsin Code of Judicial Ethics and shall file an annual financial statement. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(c); Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 10-22-2014) 
State Law reference— Term, Wis. Stats. § 755.02.  
Sec. 2-767. - Salary. 
The Village Board shall determine the salary of the Municipal Judge. The salary may be increased by the Village Board before the start of the second or subsequent year of service of the term of the Municipal Judge, but the salary shall not be decreased during the term of the Municipal Judge. Salaries may be paid annually or in equal installments as determined by the Village Board, but no Municipal Judge may be paid a salary for that portion of any term during which portion the Municipal Judge has not executed and filed the official bond and filed the official oath as required by Wis. Stats. § 755.03, and filed under Wis. Stats. § 19.01(4)(c), as amended. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(d); Ord. No. 99-14, 10-25-1999; Ord. No. 2003-14, 11-10-2003; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 5, 1-24-2011) 
State Law reference— Salary, Wis. Stats. § 755.04.  
Sec. 2-768. - Bond; oath. 
The Municipal Judge shall execute and file with the Clerk of the Circuit Court for Dane County the oath prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 755.03 and an official bond in such an amount as shall be fixed by the Village Board. The Village shall pay the costs of the bond. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-13(e); Ord. No. 2011-02, § 6, 1-24-2011) 
State Law reference— Oath and bond, Wis. Stats. § 755.03.  
Sec. 2-769. - Clerk of the Municipal Court. 
(a)  Appointment. The Municipal Judge shall, in writing, appoint a Clerk of the Municipal Court. The Clerk of the Municipal Court's salary shall be fixed by the Village Board. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall hold office for an indefinite term of office. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall, before entering upon the duties of office, take the oath provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.01, and give such bond as the Village Board may require. The oath and bond of the Clerk of Municipal Court shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the Village. 
(b)  Duties. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall: 
(1)  File and review citations and complaints, ensuring their correctness; 
(2)  Reply to departmental mail concerning routine matters as prescribed by the Municipal Judge; 
(3)  Assign docket numbers to citations and complaints, type the docket sheets and gather all material pertinent to cases; 
(4)  Determine and schedule court dates and facilities; 
(5)  Communicate with law officers, attorneys and defendants regarding court proceedings; 
(6)  Balance dockets at the conclusion of court proceedings; 
(7)  Prepare and mail warrants and summons; 
(8)  Prepare monthly report of financial activities; 
(9)  Collect traffic and ordinance forfeitures; 
(10)  Prepare necessary communications for jury trials and transfers to Circuit Court; 
(11)  Monitor compliance with all municipal court orders; 
(12)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the Municipal Judge and Village Board; 
(13)  Participate in a program of continuing education as required by the Wisconsin Supreme Court. 
(Code 1998, § 2-3-14; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 7, 1-24-2011) 
State Law reference— Municipal court clerk, Wis. Stats. § 755.10.  
Secs. 2-770—2-791. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ETHICS CODE[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, Wis. Stats. § 19.41 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-792. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and public employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established in this Chapter a Code of Ethics for all Village public officials and public employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of authorities, boards, committees and commissions of the Village, as well as any individuals who are candidates for elective office as soon as such individuals file nomination papers with the Village. 
(b)  The purpose of this Ethics Code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such public officials and public employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the Village and by directing disclosure by such public officials and public employees of private associational, financial, personal or other interests in matters affecting the Village. The Village Board believes that a Code of Ethics for the guidance of elected and appointed public officials and public employees will help them avoid conflicts between their personal interests and their public responsibilities, will improve standards of public service and will promote and strengthen the faith and confidence of the citizens of this Village in their elected and appointed public officials and public employees. The Village Board hereby reaffirms that each elected and appointed Village public official and public employee holds such position as a public trust, and any intentional effort to realize substantial personal gain through official conduct is a violation of that trust. The provisions and purpose of this Ethics Code and such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-1; Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-793. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Anything of value. Any money or property, favor, service, payment, advance, forbearance, loan, or promise of future employment, but does not include compensation or expense reimbursement paid by the Village, gifts of nominal value, honorariums, fees and expenses under the standards and reporting requirements set forth in Wis. Stats. § 19.56, political contributions as regulated by Section 2-827, or hospitality extended for a purpose unrelated to Village business by a person other than a business. 
(b)  Associational interest. An interest arising with reference to any organization in which a person or a member of the person's immediate family is a director, officer or trustee, or of which a person or a member of the person's immediate family is an authorized agent, spokesperson or representative; or an interest arising out of an issue of a political party in which a person or a member of the person's immediate family is a member. 
(c)  Business. Any corporation, partnership, limited liability company, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, joint venture, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual or any other legal entity which engages in profit-making activities. 
(d)  Confidential information. Any of the categories of information identified in Wis. Stats. § 19.36, of the Wisconsin Public Records Law, including, but not limited to, matters discussed by the Village Board or any Village Committee or Commission during portions of meetings during which the Village board, authority, committee or commission was in a duly convened closed session pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85. 
(e)  Conflict of interest. Any situation in which a public official or public employee has a real or apparent incompatibility between personal, financial, or associational interests and the discharge of professional or legal duties. 
(f)  Financial interest. Any interest that shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit or loss to the public official or public employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the public official or public employee. 
(g)  Gift of nominal value. A gift to a public official or public employee in an amount or of such character that cannot reasonably be expected to influence the actions of the public official or public employee. 
(h)  Immediate family. An individual's: 
(1)  Spouse; and 
(2)  Relative by marriage, lineal descent or adoption who receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of the relative's support from the individual or from whom the individual receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half the individual's support. 
(i)  Official action or official act. Any action taken by a public official or public employee acting within the scope of their authority, including, without limitation, making, seconding, or voting on motions, as well as participating in discussions or deliberations on matters before the Village Board or before any authority, board, committee, or commission established or appointed by the Village President or the Village Board pursuant to the Code. 
(j)  Personal interest. Any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or from close business, political or other associations, whether or not any financial interest is involved. 
(k)  Public employee. Any person excluded from the definition of a public official who is employed by, or is a compensated volunteer for, the Village. 
(l)  Public official. Those persons serving in statutory elected or appointed offices provided for in Wis. Stats. Ch. 61, and all members appointed to authorities, boards, committees and commissions established or appointed by the Village President and/or Village Board pursuant to this Code, whether paid or unpaid. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-2; Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 19.42.  
Sec. 2-794. - Statutory standards of conduct. 
There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes which should, while not set forth herein, be considered an integral part of any Code of Ethics. Accordingly, the provisions of the following Sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended, are made a part of this Code of Ethics and shall apply to public officials and public employees whenever applicable, to wit: 
(a)  Sec. 946.10. Bribery of Public Officials and Public Employees. 
(b)  Sec. 946.11. Special Privileges from Public Utilities. 
(c)  Sec. 946.12. Misconduct in Public Office. 
(d)  Sec. 946.13. Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-3; Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-795. - Responsibility of public office. 
Public officials and public employees are agents of public purpose and hold office or are employed for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this state and carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and municipality, to observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their offices or positions regardless of associational, financial or personal interest, recognizing that the public interest must be their prime concern. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-4; Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-796. - Dedicated service. 
(a)  Public officials and public employees shall carry out their responsibilities in a manner that is consistent with the work rules and performance standards established by the appropriate authority. 
(b)  Public officials and public employees shall not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and public employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(c)  Members of the Village staff shall follow their appropriate professional codes of ethics. Staff members shall file a copy of such professional ethics codes with the Village Administrator. The Village Board shall notify the appropriate professional ethics board of any ethics violations involving Village employees covered by such professional standards. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-5; Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-797. - Fair and equal treatment. 
(a)  Use of public property. No public official or public employee shall use or permit the unauthorized use of Village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as Village policy for the use of such public official or public employee in the conduct of official business, as authorized by the Village Board, or by any authorized board, authority, commission or committee, or by the Village Administrator. 
(b)  Use of Village stationery. No public official or public employee shall use Village stationery except for the conduct of official Village business. 
(c)  Obligations to citizens. No public official or public employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. No public official or public employee shall use or attempt to use their position with the Village, or taken any official action, to secure any advantage, preference or gain, over and above their rightful remuneration and benefits, or for their associational, financial or personal interest. 
(d)  Political contributions. 
(1)  No public official or supervisor shall personally solicit from any Village employee, other than an elected official, a contribution to a political campaign committee for which the person subject to this Chapter is a candidate or treasurer. 
(2)  No public official or public employee is precluded from engaging in political activity, provided the activity does not interfere with normal work performance, is not conducted during work hours, and does not involve the use of Village equipment, property, or other resources. 
(3)  Public officials and public employees are specifically prohibited from seeking contributions to political candidates during work hours and from directly or indirectly coercing any person to contribute monetary or other types of assistance to any political candidate, party, or purpose. 
(4)  Public employees who are principally employed in positions that are financed in whole or in part by federal loans or grants are subject to the provisions of the Hatch Act and may not become political candidates in partisan elections to the extent prohibited by the Hatch Act. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-6; Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Secs. 2-798—2-817. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
 
Sec. 2-818. - Conflict of interest. 
Conflicts of interest undermine the confidence of the public in the operations of Village government. Accordingly, public officials and public employees are expected to conduct themselves in a manner that avoids conflicts of interest, or the appearance of any impropriety in the discharge of their official responsibilities. The following specific responsibilities shall apply to all public officials and public employees: 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  No public official or public employee of the Village, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall take any official action in regard to associational, financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties in the public interest contrary to the provisions of this Chapter or which would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties. 
(2)  Any public official, or public employee who has an associational, financial or personal interest in any matter pending before the Village Board or any authority, board, commission or committee upon which the public official or public employee has any influence or input or of which the public official or public employee is a member that is to make a recommendation or decision on the pending matter shall disclose on the record, orally or in writing, the nature and extent of such interest. Such public official or public employee shall not 
participate in debate or discussion or vote for adoption or defeat of such matter. If the public official or public employee wishes to comment as a private citizen, the public official or public employee shall remove to the audience. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(a); Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-819. - Disclosure of confidential information. 
No public official or public employee shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the Village, nor shall such information be used to advance the financial or other private interests of the public official or public employee or others. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(b); Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-820. - Incompatible employment. 
No public official or public employee shall engage in or accept other employment or render service for any person or entity, when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of their official duties or would tend to impair such public official or public employee's independence of judgment or action in the performance of their official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is made as provided in Section 2-830. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(c); Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2009-24, § 3, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 2-821. - Gifts and favors. 
(a)  No public official or public employee shall accept or offer to accept anything of value from any person who, to their knowledge, is interested directly or indirectly, or is seeking an interest, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the Village, or from any person who conducts activities which are regulated by the Village, or from any person who has interests which may be substantially affected by actions of the Village. 
(b)  No public official or public employee shall accept or offer to accept anything of value or grant in the discharge of their duties any improper favor, service, or thing of value. 
(c)  Gifts received under unusual circumstances shall be referred to the Ethics Board within ten days for recommended disposition or advisory opinion. 
(d)  A public official or public employee shall not accept hospitality if, after consideration of the surrounding circumstances, it could reasonably be concluded that such hospitality would not be extended were it not for the fact that the guest, or a member of the guest's immediate family, was a Village public official or public employee. Participation in celebrations, grand openings, open houses, informational meetings and similar events that are open to the public are excluded from this prohibition. This Subsection shall not be construed to prevent candidates for elective office from accepting hospitality from citizens for the purpose of supporting the candidate's campaign. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(d); Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-822. - Representative private interests before Village agencies or courts. 
(a)  Nonelected Village public officials and public employees shall not appear as the representative of any private person (other than such person's self, such person's spouse or minor children) before any Village agency, authority, board, commission, committee or the Village Board if the public official or public employee or any authority, board, commission or committee of which the public official or public employee is a member, has any jurisdiction, discretion or control over the matter which is the subject of such representation. 
(b)  Elected Village public officials may appear before Village agencies on behalf of constituents in the course of their duties as representatives of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. However, the disclosure requirements of Section 2-818 shall be applicable to such appearances. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(e); Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-823. - Ad hoc committee exceptions. 
No violation of the conflict of interest restrictions of this Section shall exist, however, where an individual serves on a special ad hoc committee charged with the narrow responsibility of addressing a specific issue or topic in which that individual, or the employer or a client of that individual, has an interest so long as the individual discloses to the Village Board, orally or in writing, that such interest exists. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(f); Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-824. - Contracts with the Village. 
No public official or public employee who, in their capacity as such public official or public employee, participates in the making of a contract in which such public official or public employee has a financial interest, direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on the part of such public officer or public employee, shall enter into any contract with the Village unless: 
(a)  The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and competitive bidding; 
(b)  The contract or activity is exempt from or otherwise deemed appropriate by Wis. Stats. § 946.13; 
(c)  The Ethics Board waives this requirement after determining that it is in the best interest of the Village to do so. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(g); Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007)  
Sec. 2-825. - Disclosure of certain financial interests. 
(a)  All elected officials shall file an initial statement and annually amend such statement on or before May 1 if substantial changes have occurred in economic interests as defined and limited to Section 2-826 within a time period specified by the Ethics Board. 
(b)  Within seven days after a person becomes a candidate for any elective Village office, such person shall file a statement of economic interests with the Ethics Board. 
(c)  No person required to file a statement of economic interests under this Section who has not complied with Subsection (b) of this Section shall have such person's name appear on the ballot, take the oath of office, or receive salary or compensation until such person files such statement of economic interests. The Village Clerk-Treasurer is directed to strike from the ballot the name of any candidate who has not complied with Subsection (b) of this Section. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall withhold payment of salary or other compensation from any official who has not complied with Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(i); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 29, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 34, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Financial disclosure, Wis. Stats. § 19.43.  
Sec. 2-826. - Form of disclosure. 
A person filing any statement of interests shall file the statement on a form prescribed by the Ethics Board and shall supply the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the person filing and spouse (if any) of the person and all names used in business or any professional practice; 
(b)  The name of all business interests in which the person and/or spouse hold any office or directorship or own or control, directly or indirectly, more than two percent of the stock or other ownership interest or an interest of $10,000.00, whichever is less, and all names they use in business or any professional practice; 
(c)  The names of the person's and/or spouse's sources of income of $10,000.00 or more per year; 
(d)  A description of all parcels of real estate within the Village and adjoining municipalities in which the person filing and/or spouse own any interest, including options to purchase; 
(e)  The name of all persons or creditors to whom the person filing and/or spouse owe secured or unsecured debt of $10,000.00 or more, excluding debts in a personal residence or real property used primarily for personal recreation purposes, credit card debt, student loans and health-related debt; 
(f)  Any business licenses issued by the Village to the person filing and/or spouse, or to the employer or business interest of the person and/or spouse; 
(g)  The name and address of employers of the person filing and/or spouse during the ten years immediately preceding the filing of the statement of interests, and a brief description of the position held with the employer and the nature of the business of the employer; 
(h)  The name and address of all organizations of which the person filing and/or the person's immediate family are, or were, an officer or director. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(j); Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007) 
State Law reference— Financial disclosure, Wis. Stats. § 19.45; form of statement, Wis. Stats. § 19.44.  
Sec. 2-827. - Campaign contributions. 
Campaign contributions shall be reported by all candidates for Village office in strict conformity with the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes unless the candidate has applied for an exemption. Any campaign contribution tendered to or accepted by a candidate subsequent to filing a termination report with the Village Clerk-Treasurer must be returned immediately. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5-7(k); Ord. No. 2007-02, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 35, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-828. - Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements. 
In the event a public employee, covered under a provision of a collective bargaining agreement, is allegedly involved in an Ethics Code violation, the terms and conditions set forth in the applicable collective bargaining agreement shall prevail in the administration and interpretation of Article VIII of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-24, § 4, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 2-829. - Sanctions. 
(a)  A determination that a public employee's actions constitute improper conduct under the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a cause for the Village to pursue suspension, removal from office and/or employment or other disciplinary action pursuant to applicable law. Sanctions, including any disciplinary action, that may affect public employees covered under a collective bargaining agreement will be consistent with the terms and conditions set forth in the applicable collective bargaining agreement. In addition, the Ethics Board may seek forfeitures of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Forfeiture actions shall be processed through the McFarland Municipal Court. 
(b)  A determination that a public official's actions constitute improper conduct under the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a basis on which the possibility of removal proceedings pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 17.13(3) may be commenced, or a basis for censure of the public official. 
(Ord. No. 2009-24, § 5, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 2-830. - Outside employment. 
No full-time public official or public employee of the Village shall engage in other ongoing significant remunerative employment within or without the Village, provided that the Village Administrator may approve such outside employment or activity if the Village Administrator finds that it does not interfere or conflict with such public official's or public employee's ability to perform their duties in an efficient and unbiased manner. Violation of this provision shall be grounds for removal from office of any such officer or public employee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-24, § 6, 12-14-2009)  
Secs. 2-831—2-871. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC RECORDS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference— Public records, Wis. Stats. § 19.21 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-872. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Actual cost. The total cost of personnel including wages, fringe benefits and all other benefits and overhead related to the time spent in search of records. 
(b)  Authority. Any of the following Village entities having custody of a Village record: an office, elected official, agency, authority, board, commission, committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit of the foregoing. 
(c)  Legal custodian. That officer, department head, division head, or employee of the Village designated under Section 2-874 or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any Village records or file, deposit or keep such records in their office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is required to respond to requests for access to such records. 
(d)  Direct cost. The actual cost of personnel plus all expenses for paper, copier time, depreciation and supplies. 
(e)  Record. Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. The term includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed orprinted pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts and optical disks. The term does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to such person's office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library. 
(Code 1998, § 3-3-1; Ord. No. 2019-22 , § 1, 11-11-2019) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 19.32.  
Sec. 2-873. - Duty to maintain records. 
(a)  Except as provided under Section 2-878, each officer and employee of the Village shall safely keep and preserve all records received from their predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in their office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or employee or their deputies, or to the possession or control of which they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to their successor all records then in their custody and the successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt. 
(Code 1998, § 3-3-2; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 44, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 36, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 2-874. - Legal custodian. 
(a)  Each elected official is the legal custodian of their records and the records of their office, but the official may designate the Village Clerk-Treasurer to act as the legal custodian. 
(b)  Unless provided in Subsection (c) of this Section, the Village Clerk-Treasurer or the Village Clerk-Treasurer's designee shall act as legal custodian for the Village and for any statutorily authorized authorities, boards, committees, commissions, and standing committees created by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board. The following offices or authorities shall have as a legal custodian of records the individuals so named. 
Authority 	Designated Legal Custodian 
General Village Records (including 
Village Board records) 	Village Clerk-Treasurer 
Fire and Emergency Medical Services 
Department 	Fire/EMS Chief 
Library 	Library Director 
Police Department 	Chief of Police 
 
(c)  For every authority not specified in Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section, the authority's chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate an employee of such officer's staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(d)  Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in their absence or in the absence of a designee, and each legal custodian shall send notice of the designated deputy to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(e)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall establish criteria for establishing the records system and shall cause the department/office records system to be reviewed on an annual basis. 
(Code 1998, § 3-3-3; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 45—48, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 6, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 37, 38, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Custodian of records, Wis. Stats. § 19.21; legal custodians, Wis. Stats. § 19.33.  
Sec. 2-875. - Public access to records. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 2-877, any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record of provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(b)  Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours. 
(c)  If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy. 
(d)  A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to Village employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record. 
(e)  The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. 
(f)  The per-page fee for copies, certified or otherwise, of any document for which a specific fee has not been otherwise provided for herein, or for comparison and attestation of copies not provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and set forth in Appendix A to this Code. 
(1)  If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing shall be charged. 
(2)  The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audiotapes and videotapes, shall be charged. 
(3)  If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also be charged. 
(4)  There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefor exceeds $50.00, in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester. 
(5)  The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and shall require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such estimate exceeds $5.00. 
(6)  Elected and appointed officials of the Village shall not be required to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of their official duties. 
(7)  The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge where the legal custodian determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest. 
(g)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.34, and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. This Subsection does not apply to members of the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 3-3-4; Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 2, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 39, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Procedural information, Wis. Stats. § 19.34; access to records, fees, Wis. Stats. § 19.35.  
Sec. 2-876. - Access procedures. 
(a)  A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under Wis. Stats. § 19.37. Except as provided below, no request may be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under Section 2-875(f)(6). A requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so require. 
(b)  Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring with the Village Attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize the party's request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance. 
(c)  A request for a record may be denied as provided in Section 2-877. If a request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that, if the request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under Wis. Stats. § 19.37(1), or upon application to the Attorney General or a district attorney. 
(Code 1998, § 3-3-5) 
State Law reference— Compliance and procedures, Wis. Stats. § 19.35(4).  
Sec. 2-877. - Limitations on right to access. 
(a)  As provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.36, the following records are exempt from inspection under this Chapter. 
(1)  Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law; 
(2)  Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state; 
(3)  Computer programs and files, although the material used as input for a computer program/file or the material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to inspection; and 
(4)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 905.08, a record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a common law trade secret. The term "trade secrets" is defined as unpatented, secret, commercially valuable plans, appliances, formulas, or processes which are used for making, preparing, compounding, treating or processing articles, materials or information which are obtained from a person and which are generally recognized as confidential. 
(b)  As provided by Wis. Stats. § 43.30, public library circulation records are exempt from inspection under this Section. 
(c)  In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the Village Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if the legal custodian determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which were necessary and given in order to obtain the information contained in them. 
(2)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(a), records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing. 
(3)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(b) and (c), records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demolition, compensation, performance, or discipline of any Village officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a Village officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to such disclosure. 
(4)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(d), records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention. 
(5)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(e), records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of Village property, investing of Village funds, or other Village business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure. 
(6)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(f), financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to in such history or data. 
(7)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(g), communications between legal counsel for the Village and any officer, agent or employee of the Village, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the Village or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged under Wis. Stats. § 905.03. 
(8)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(h), requests for confidential written advice from an ethics board, and records of advice given by such ethics board on such requests. 
(d)  If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may be made public and redact the information that may not be made public from the record before release. The custodian shall confer with the Village Attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the Village Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If, in the judgment of the custodian and the Village Attorney, there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure. 
(Code 1998, § 3-3-6) 
State Law reference— Limitation upon access, Wis. Stats. § 19.36; exemptions from open meetings requirement, Wis. Stats. § 19.85.  
Sec. 2-878. - Retention periods. 
(a)  State records schedules adopted. The following schedules approved by the State of Wisconsin Public Records Board ("Records Board") are adopted: 
(1)  General Records Schedule—Wisconsin Municipal and Related Records. 
(2)  General Records Schedule—Payroll and Related Records. 
(3)  General Records Schedule—Human Resources and Related Records. 
(4)  General Records Schedule—Wisconsin's Public Libraries and Public Library Systems and Related Records. 
(5)  Records Series Title Patrol Division—Squad Car Video Recordings, from the County Records Retention/Disposition Schedule. 
(6)  Those provisions of the records retention regulations set forth by the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin, and approved by the Records Board, to the extent said regulations apply to Village records. 
(7)  Any future amendments to the above schedules approved by the Records Board. 
(b)  Records for which a retention period is not provided for in this Section shall be retained at least seven years unless a different retention period is approved by the Records Board or established by other applicable law or regulation, in which case the different retention period shall apply. 
(c)  At least 60 days' notice shall be given the State Historical Society prior to the destruction of any record as provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a), unless notice has been waived by the State Historical Society. 
(Ord. No. 2019-22 , § 2, 11-11-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-22 , § 2, adopted Nov. 11, 2019, amended § 2-878 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2-878 pertained to destruction of records, and derived from Code 1998, § 3-3-7.  
Sec. 2-879. - Preservation of records. 
Legal custodians may, subject to the approval of the Village Clerk-Treasurer, maintain and preserve public records by electronic or other approved formatting. Such records shall meet the applicable standards set forth under Wis. Stats. §§ 16.61(7) and 16.612, and Wis. Admin. Code Adm 12. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the legal custodian and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law and of Sections 2-875 through 2-877. 
(Ord. No. 2019-22 , § 3, 11-11-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-22 , § 3, adopted Nov. 11, 2019, amended § 2-879 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2-879 pertained to preservation through microfilm, and derived from Code 1998, § 3-3-8; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 49, adopted Jan. 27, 2002; and Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 40, adopted June 26, 2017. 
State Law reference— Preservation of public records, Wis. Stats. §§ 16.61, 16.611, 16.612, 19.35(5).  
Secs. 2-880—2-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - VILLAGE-OWNED PROPERTY; SURPLUS PROPERTY; LOST, SEIZED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY[18] 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2014-10, adopted June 19, 2014, changed the title of Art. X from "Lost, Seized, Abandoned and Surplus Property" to read as herein set out. 
 
DIVISION 1. - RECORDS OF VILLAGE-OWNED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 2-901. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Capital asset. An individual fixed asset with an estimated useful life of one or more years and an original value of $10,000.00 or more. 
(b)  Fixed asset. An individual asset with an estimated useful life of five or more years and an original value greater than $5,000.00 but less than $10,000.00, excluding office furniture and fixed building components. 
(c)  Intangible asset. Any asset lacking physical substance such as easements, water rights, timber rights, mineral rights, patents, trademarks, and computer software (either purchased or internally written) with an estimated useful life of one or more years and an original value of $50,000.00 or more. 
(d)  Infrastructure asset. Any immovable assets such as land, buildings and building improvements, streets, sidewalks, bridges, paths, street lights, park shelters, playground equipment, major utility system components, and similar items with an estimated useful life of one or more years and an original value of $25,000.00 or more. 
(e)  Utility asset. Any capital asset, infrastructure asset, or intangible asset owned by the Water Utility, Sewer Utility, or Stormwater Utility. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, § 2, 6-19-2014)  
Secs. 2-902—2-907. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-908. - Recording and reporting of fixed assets. 
(a)  All purchases of individual fixed assets shall be listed on a fixed asset inventory to be maintained by each department. The departmental fixed asset inventory list shall be reviewed and approved by the department head and submitted annually by February 1 to the Administrator and shall show all additions and deletions of fixed assets that have occurred during the period since the last physical inventory was taken. 
(b)  All purchases of capital assets shall be listed on a capital asset inventory list to be maintained by the Administrator. Upon physical delivery of a capital asset the department head shall submit to the Administrator a completed inventory description which shall include the following information: identification number; make and model; vendor purchased from; purchase price; estimated useful life; and replacement value if significantly different from the purchase price. A detailed listing of all additions and deletions of capital assets for all departments shall be compiled annually by the Administrator. 
(c)  All purchases or construction of infrastructure assets shall be listed as a sub-set on the capital asset inventory list to be maintained by the Administrator. Upon completion of installation or final acceptance of construction of an infrastructure asset the department head shall submit to the Administrator a completed inventory description which shall include the following information: vendor or contractor; quantity information; purchase or contract price; estimated useful life; if replacement infrastructure, pertinent information about the asset being retired. A separate listing of detailed additions and deletions of infrastructure assets for all departments shall be compiled annually by the Administrator. 
(d)  All acquisitions of intangible assets shall be listed as a sub-set on the capital asset inventory list to be maintained by the Administrator. Upon acquisition of an intangible asset the department head shall submit to the Administrator appropriate descriptive information. A separate listing of detailed additions and deletions of intangible assets for all departments shall be compiled annually by the Administrator. 
(e)  All purchases, construction, or acquisition of utility assets shall be reported and recorded in compliance with Public Service Commission of Wisconsin rules or applicable utility accounting standards. A separate listing of detailed additions and deletions of utility assets shall be compiled annually by the Administrator. 
(f)  As appropriate, department heads are also expected to maintain inventory lists of small equipment items having an original value greater than $500.00 that due to size or portability may be more susceptible to loss or theft. Examples of such items would include laptop computers, tablets, cameras, video cameras, portable radios, and weapons. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, § 2, 6-19-2014)  
Sec. 2-909. - Inventorying of fixed assets. 
(a)  An annual physical inventory of all fixed assets and capital assets shall be completed by February 1st by each department under the direction of the Administrator. Any discrepancies between reported assets and the physical inventory shall be reconciled by the department head and the Administrator. 
(b)  Infrastructure assets and intangible assets shall not be physically inventoried on an annual basis. 
(c)  Departments shall conduct an annual physical inventory of all small equipment items that they consider to be susceptible to loss or theft. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, § 2, 6-19-2014)  
Secs. 2-910—2-930. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SURPLUS VILLAGE PROPERTY[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2014-10, adopted June 19, 2014, repealed former Div. 2 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 2-931—2-935 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1998 Code, §§ 3-4-1(a)—(e). 
 
Sec. 2-931. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Surplus Village property. 
(1)  Property that is owned by the Village and which has no further usefulness to the Village. An item of property shall be considered to have no further usefulness when: 
a.  The item or its function has been totally replaced by other Village property and no probable future function exists for it; 
b.  The Village no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased and no other service can reasonably be provided by the item; or 
c.  The item is no longer able to reliably or economically perform the work required of it. 
(2)  The term shall not include land or buildings but shall include fixtures and such salvage as may be taken from a building without structural damage when such fixtures and salvage are not part of a demolition contract. Surplus Village property shall not include property that is obtained by the Village as a result of abandonment or loss by the property's original owner. (See Division 3 below) 
(3)  The term shall not include property that is utilized as a trade-in to reduce the cost of a newly purchased replacement item. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, § 3, 6-19-2014)  
Sec. 2-932. - Determination of surplus Village property. 
(a)  Initial determination. Before an item of Village property is determined to be surplus, the department head shall determine whether the property may reasonably be of use to another Village department. The department head shall submit a description of the item to the Administrator, who shall distribute a notice to all departments of the availability of the item. If the property is transferred to another department as a fixed asset or a capital asset, the receiving department shall so notify the Administrator in writing of the description of the item, identification number, the location where the item is to be used, and the date the item is put into service. If no other department claims the item within the time set forth in the notice, a final determination shall be made as provided in subsection (b). 
(b)  Final determination. 
(1)  Whenever any item is considered surplus on the basis that the Village no longer performs the service for which the item was originally purchased, the Village Board shall determine whether or not the item is surplus Village property regardless of value. 
(2)  Whenever the estimated fair market value of other items is $10,000.00 or more, the Village Board shall determine whether or not the item is surplus Village property. 
(3)  Whenever the estimated fair market value of other items is more than $5,000.00 but less than $10,000.00, the Administrator shall determine whether or not the item is surplus Village property. 
(4)  Whenever the estimated fair market value of other items is $5,000.00 or less, the department head shall determine whether or not the item is surplus Village property. 
(5)  If the purchase of a replacement item is specifically enumerated in the approved operating or capital budget, the item being replaced shall be automatically deemed surplus Village property unless the department requests and receives approval to retain the item. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, § 3, 6-19-2014)  
Sec. 2-933. - Disposal of surplus Village property. 
(a)  Disposal of surplus Village property shall be prohibited except as authorized in this section. 
(b)  Whenever a determination of the estimated fair market value is required for an item of surplus Village property, that determination shall be made by the department head responsible for the property, whose decision shall be final. If necessary and appropriate to determine the fair market value of an item, the department may hire an appraiser to help establish that value. 
(c)  If an item of surplus Village property is deemed to have potential net value, every reasonable effort shall be made to sell the item before it is donated or destroyed. 
(d)  Whenever the estimated fair market value of an item of surplus Village property is less than $500.00, the department head responsible for the item shall dispose of the property in the manner deemed most advantageous to the Village or by having it destroyed. Property need not be offered for sale if it appears the probable costs surrounding the sale would exceed the value of the property. 
(e)  Whenever the estimated fair market value of an item of surplus Village property is more than $500.00 and it has been determined that the item is not of use to another Village department, the department head responsible for the item shall dispose of the property by the following prioritized methods: 
(1)  Public auction (live or online); 
(2)  Sale by sealed bid; or 
(3)  Negotiated sale (prior Village Board authorization required); 
(4)  Donation to a nonprofit organization within the Village or to a governmental agency. 
(f)  Minimum bid or reserve amount. 
(1)  A minimum bid or reserve amount shall be established for disposal of any surplus property item having an estimated fair market value greater than $5,000.00. The department head shall determine the actual amount of the minimum bid or reserve amount that is established. 
(2)  In the event that the actual high bid for an item is less than the minimum bid or reserve amount established by the department head, the decision as to whether to sell the item for the lower amount will be made by: 
a.  The Administrator if the original minimum bid or reserve amount was $5,000.00—$10,000.00; 
b.  The Village board if the original minimum bid or reserve amount was greater than $10,000.00. 
(g)  No live public auction or awarding of bids shall occur under this Section unless a description of the item to be sold and an advance notice of the time and place for such auction or bid submission first published as a class 2 notice in the official Village newspaper. If the item to be sold is placed for sale through a bona fide surplus auction, however, the advance notice requirements shall not apply. When the surplus auction method is used the Village shall provide a link on its website to the auction site and shall provide a listing of available property in a suitable location on its website. Such auction shall be run for no less than seven days unless the nature of the property to be disposed of requires a shorter timeframe. 
(h)  In the event of a live public auction or sale by sealed bid, the item will be sold in as-is condition to the person submitting the highest bid provided, however, that a lower bid submitted by a nonprofit organization or governmental agency may be accepted by the Village. The department head responsible for the item shall determine the time in which the successful bidder must remove the item. In the event the item is not removed within that time, the item shall revert to the Village and the amount of the bid shall be forfeited to the Village. In the event no bids are received, the item shall be disposed of at the discretion of the department head in the manner deemed most advantageous to the Village. 
(i)  Whenever this Section provides for an auction or other disposition of any property, the Village Board shall be authorized to hire an auctioneer or take such other action as is necessary to properly dispose of the property; provided, however, that the fees of such auctioneer and all such costs, other than those for Village labor and the use of Village property, do not exceed the amount of revenue expected to be received by the Village from the auction or sale of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, § 3, 6-19-2014)  
Sec. 2-934. - Proceeds from disposal of Village property. 
All net proceeds realized from the sale of Village property shall be forwarded to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer for deposit and crediting to the fund which originally paid for the property item which was sold. An annual report shall be provided to the Finance Committee summarizing the items of surplus property disposed of in the prior year, the purchaser or receiver of the property, and the revenue generated from the sale. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10, § 3, 6-19-2014; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 41, 6-26-2017)  
Secs. 2-935—2-958. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LOST, SEIZED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned property, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139; uniform unclaimed property act, Wis. Stats. § 177.01 et seq.; disposal of property seized by law enforcement personnel, Wis. Stats. § 968.20. 
 
Sec. 2-959. - Village custody of lost, seized and abandoned property. 
(a)  Property that appears to be lost or abandoned, discovered by officers or turned in to the Chief of Police by citizens shall be disposed of according to this Section. 
(b)  Lost and abandoned property will be examined by the Chief of Police for identifying marks in an attempt to determine the owner. If identifying marks are present, they shall be used by the Chief of Police to attempt to contact the owner to return the property. If no identifying marks are present, the property shall be taken into custody by the Chief of Police. 
(c)  No Village employee shall keep for their own use property found in the course of duty, nor take possession of property during off-duty hours when the discovery was made while on duty. 
(d)  The Chief of Police shall permit citizens to claim lost property if they can provide sufficient proof that they are rightful owners. 
(e)  No Village employee shall receive any lost, stolen, abandoned, or other unclaimed property from the Chief of Police, unless that person receives a written receipt signed by the Chief of Police, a copy of which shall remain with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(Code 1998, § 3-4-2(a); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 50, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 16, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 42, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Deposit of funds in city treasury, Wis. Stats. § 62.12(7).  
Sec. 2-960. - Disposal after 30 days; exception. 
All property that has been abandoned, lost or remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days after the taking of possession of the property by the Village shall be disposed of as provided in this Division, except that if the property is usable for Village operations, the property need not be sold at auction, but may become the property of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 3-4-2(b)(1); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 16, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139(2).  
Sec. 2-961. - Procedure. 
(a)  Enumerated. Such property shall be disposed of in the following manner: 
(1)  Vehicles. Vehicles shall be disposed of as set forth in the applicable provisions of Chapter 35, Article X. 
(2)  Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages. Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages shall be destroyed. 
(3)  Firearms or ammunition. Firearms or ammunition shall be returned to their rightful owner, destroyed, or transferred to the State Crime Laboratory, the division of law enforcement services of the Wisconsin Department of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms bureau of the U.S. Department of Treasury. 
(4)  Other property with a fair market value of $500.00 or less. An item of property with a fair market value of $500.00 or less shall be destroyed, offered for sale to the general public, disposed of in an appropriate manner as solid waste, donated to a bonafide nonprofit and tax exempt organization, or sold at public auction. The Chief of Police shall determine the approximate fair market value in his or her reasonable discretion and determine the method of disposal after having given consideration to the time and expense of the method of disposal, the amount likely to be received in a sale, and any other factor relevant to the public interests served by Sections 2-959 through 2-964. The Chief of Police may delegate the duties under this paragraph to any other police officer and may enact policies to be followed in furtherance thereof. 
(5)  Other property with a fair market value of over $500.00. An item of property with a fair market value of more than $500.00 shall be sold at public auction or by sealed bid. 
(6)  Illegal property. Property that cannot be legally possessed shall be destroyed. 
(7)  Flammable, explosive or incendiary substances, materials or devices. Such items pose a danger to life or property in their storage, transportation, or use may be disposed of immediately after taking possession without a public auction. 
(b)  Chief of Police and Fire/EMS Chief responsible for disposal. The Chief of Police and the Fire/EMS Chief are hereby authorized to determine the disposal procedure; provided, however, that any such procedure will attempt to return to its rightful owner any such substance, material or devices that have a commercial value in normal business usage and do not pose an immediate threat to life or property. If the substance, material or device appears to be or is reported stolen, an attempt will be made to return the substance, material or device to the rightful owner. 
(c)  Any Village official selling property under this Section shall maintain as a public record for two years an inventory of any property not disposed of by auction or sale by sealed bid and shall include a record of the date and method of disposal, any payment received for the property, and the name and address of the person taking possession of the property. 
(d)  If the disposal is in the form of a sale, all receipts from the sale, after deducting the necessary expenses of keeping the property and conducting the sale, shall be paid into the treasury of the Village. 
(e)  Disposition of cash money. If any person shall find personal property consisting of cash money, the owner thereof being unknown, such person shall within five days after finding such money or property deliver the same to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall attempt to return to the rightful owner such items which have substantial value if the owner or likely owner can reasonably be determined at no later than 70 days after said property comes into the possession of the Chief of Police. If such money is not claimed within 90 days of delivery to the Police Department, said money shall be turned over to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and credited to the miscellaneous general revenues account of the general fund. 
(f)  Disposition of seized property. Abandoned or unclaimed personal property, including cash money, which has been seized as part of a narcotics arrest or investigation, may be returned to its rightful owner pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 968.20. Said property shall only be returned if it is not needed as evidence and all proceedings in which it might be required have been completed. Further, such property shall not be returned if said property constitutes contraband or is otherwise prohibited by law. Cash money which has been seized as part of a narcotics arrest or investigation shall be considered contraband and unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be placed in the Police Department's miscellaneous revenue account and shall solely be used for law enforcement activities by the Police Department as determined by the Chief of Police. 
(Code 1998, § 3-4-2(b)(1)a—f, (b)(2)b; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 16, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, §§ 3(3-4-2(b)(1)(g)), 4(3-4-2(b)(1)(h)), 3-9-2009; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 7, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 11-23-2015; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 43, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Means of disposal, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139(3); disposal of seized items and dangerous weapons or ammunition, Wis. Stats. § 968.20.  
Sec. 2-962. - Disposal by auction or sealed bid. 
(a)  Whenever it is determined to be in the best interest of the Village to dispose of property by auction or by sealed bid, or when required by Section 2-961, the Village may in its discretion utilize an online auction service, provided said auction service is available to the general public. When such a method is utilized for the disposal of abandoned or surplus property, the Village shall provide a link on its website to the auction site and shall provide a listing of available property in a suitable location on its website. Such auction shall be run for no less than seven days unless the nature of the property to be disposed requires a lesser timeframe. For property not disposed of via an online auction service, notice of such auction or the awarding of bids shall be preceded by a class 2 notice describing the property and arranging the time and place for the auction or bid submission; such notice shall be published in the official Village newspaper. The property auctioned or sold by sealed bid shall be sold in as-is condition to the highest bidder. No sale or auction shall occur until the Chief of Police has determined that the property has no value to any probable investigation or legal proceeding. The department head responsible for the property shall determine the time in which the successful bidder shall remove the property. In the event the property is not removed within that time, the property shall revert to the Village and the amount of the bid be forfeited to the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 3-4-2(b)(2)a; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 16, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Disposal procedure, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139(2), (3).  
Sec. 2-963. - Lost property. 
Property that is found by persons and delivered to the Chief of Police for the purpose of locating the former owner shall not be considered abandoned or unclaimed under this Section until 30 days after mailing to the person finding the property a notice that such person may claim ownership of said property. The Chief of Police shall determine what portion, if any, of the property or its value shall be given the finder. This provision shall not apply to any Village employee finding property in the regular course of employment nor shall it apply if the person finding the property has disclaimed or otherwise waived any right to obtain ownership of the property. 
(Code 1998, § 3-4-2(b)(3); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 16, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2015-11, § 2, 11-23-2015)  
Sec. 2-964. - Payment to Village Treasury. 
All sums received from the sale of property under this Section shall be paid to the Village Treasury. 
(Code 1998, § 3-4-2(b)(4); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 16, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— -Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 66.0139(2).  
Secs. 2-965—2-986. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURE[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Law reference— Administrative procedure act, Wis. Stats. § 68.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-987. - Review of administrative determinations. 
Any person having a substantial interest that is adversely affected by an administrative determination of the Village Board or an authority, board, commission, committee, agency, officer or employee of the Village or agent acting on its behalf may have such determination reviewed as provided in this Chapter. The remedies under this Chapter shall not be exclusive, but an election to proceed hereunder shall be an election of remedies. No department, authority, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the Village who is aggrieved may initiate review under this Chapter of a determination of any other department, authority, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the Village, but may respond or intervene in a review proceeding under this Chapter initiated by another. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.01.  
Sec. 2-988. - Determinations reviewable. 
The following determinations are reviewable under this Chapter: 
(a)  The grant or denial in whole or in part after application of an initial permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except a fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor license. 
(b)  The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit, license right, privilege or authority, except as provided in Section 2-989(d). 
(c)  The denial of a grant of money or other thing of value under a statute or ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a municipal employee or officer, other than by a court. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.02.  
Sec. 2-989. - Determinations not subject to review. 
The following determinations are not reviewable under this Chapter: 
(a)  A legislative enactment. (A legislative enactment is an ordinance, resolution or adopted motion of the Village Board.) 
(b)  Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures under Wisconsin Statutes or other provisions of this Code. 
(c)  The suspension, removal or disciplining or nonrenewal of a contract of a municipal employee or officer. 
(d)  The denial of a tort or contract claim for money required to be filed with the Village under Wis. Stats. § 61.54(4). 
(e)  The grant, denial, suspension or revocation of a fermented malt beverage license or intoxicating liquor license under Wis. Stats. § 125.12(1). 
(f)  Judgments and orders of a court. 
(g)  Determinations made during municipal labor negotiations. 
(h)  Determinations subject to grievance, arbitration or other procedures provided in collective bargaining agreements. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.03.  
Sec. 2-990. - Municipal authority defined. 
The term "municipal authority" includes the Village Board, authority, board, commission, standing committee, agency, officer, employee or agent of the Village making a determination under Section 2-987, and every person, committee or agency of the Village to make an independent review under Section 2-994(a). 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.05.  
Sec. 2-991. - Persons aggrieved. 
A person having a substantial interest that is adversely affected includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association, public or private organization, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, officer, department, authority, board, commission, committee or agency of the Village, whose rights, duties or privileges are adversely affected by a determination of a municipal authority. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. §§ 68.01, 68.06.  
Sec. 2-992. - Initial determination. 
If a determination subject to this Chapter is made orally or, if in writing, does not state the reasons therefore, the municipal authority making such determination shall, upon written request of any person aggrieved by such determination made within ten days of notice of such determination, reduce the determination and the reasons therefor to writing and mail or deliver such determination and reasons to the person making the request. The determination shall be dated, and shall advise such person of the person's right to have such determination reviewed, that such review may be obtained within 30 days, and the officer or person to whom a request for review shall be addressed. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.07.  
Sec. 2-993. - Request for review of initial determination. 
Any person allegedly aggrieved may have an initial determination reviewed by written request mailed or delivered to the municipal authority which made such determination within 30 days of notice to such person of such determination. The request for review shall state the grounds upon which the person allegedly aggrieved contends that the initial determination should be modified or reversed. A request for review shall be made to the officer, employee, agent, agency, committee, authority, board, commission or body who made the determination, but failure to make such request to the proper party shall not preclude the person aggrieved from review unless such failure has caused prejudice to the municipal authority. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.08.  
Sec. 2-994. - Review of initial determination. 
(a)  Who shall make review. A review under this Section may be made by the officer, employee, agent, agency, committee, authority, board, commission or body who made the initial determination. However, an independent review of such determination by another person, committee or agency of the Village, appointed by the Village President without confirmation, shall be provided if practicable. 
(b)  When to make review. The municipal authority shall review the initial determination within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. The time for review may be extended by agreement with the person allegedly aggrieved. 
(c)  Right to present evidence and argument. The person aggrieved may file with the request for review, or within the time agreed with the municipal authority, written evidence and argument in support of the person's position with respect to the initial determination. 
(d)  Decisions on review. The municipal authority may affirm, reverse or modify the initial determination and shall mail or deliver to the person aggrieved a copy of the municipal authority's decision on review which shall state the reasons for such decision. The decision shall advise the person aggrieved of the person's right to appeal the decision, that appeal may be taken within 30 days, and the office or person with whom notice of appeal shall be filed. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.09.  
Sec. 2-995. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  From initial determination or decision on review. 
(1)  If the person aggrieved had a hearing substantially in compliance with Section 2-996 when the initial determination was made, such person may elect to follow Sections 2-992—2-994, but is not entitled to a further hearing under Section 2-996 unless granted by the municipal authority. The person may, however, seek judicial review under Section 2-998. 
(2)  If the person aggrieved did not have a hearing substantially in compliance with Section 2-996 when the initial determination was made, such person shall follow Sections 2-992—2-994 and may appeal under this Section from the decision made under Section 2-994. 
(b)  Time with which appeal may be taken. Appeal from a decision on review under Section 2-994 may be taken within 30 days of notice of such decision. 
(c)  How appeal may be taken. An appeal under this Section may be taken by filing with or mailing to the office or person designated in the municipal authority's decision on review, written notice of appeal. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.10.  
Sec. 2-996. - Hearing of administrative appeal. 
(a)  Time of hearing. The Village shall provide the appellant a hearing on an appeal under Section 2-995 within 15 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall serve the appellant with notice of such hearing by mail or personal service at least ten days before such hearing. The office or person with whom a notice of appeal is filed shall immediately notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer, who shall forthwith advise the Village President of such appeal. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. At the hearing the appellant and the municipal authority may be represented by an attorney and may present evidence and call and examine witnesses and cross examine witnesses of the other party. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the person conducting the hearing. The Village President shall appoint, with the Village Board confirmation, an impartial decision maker who may be an officer, committee, authority, board or commission of the Village or the Village Board who did not participate in making or reviewing the initial determination, who shall make the decision on administrative appeal. The decision maker may issue subpoenas. An appellant's attorney of record may issue a subpoena to compel the attendance of a witness or the production of evidence. A subpoena issued by an attorney must be in substantially the same form as provided in Wis. Stats. § 805.07(4) and must be served in the manner provided in Wis. Stats. § 805.07(5). The attorney shall, at the time of issuance, send a copy of the subpoena to the decision maker. The hearing may, however, be conducted by an impartial person, committee, board or commission designated by the Village President to conduct the hearing and report to the decision maker. 
(c)  Record of hearing. The person conducting the hearing or a person employed for that purpose shall take notes of the testimony and shall mark and preserve all exhibits. The person conducting the hearing may, and upon request of the appellant, shall, cause the proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a recording device, the expense thereof to be paid by the Village. 
(d)  Hearing on initial determination. Where substantial existing rights are affected by an initial determination, the municipal authority making such determination shall, when practicable, give any person directly affected an opportunity to be heard in accordance with this Section before making such determination. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-10; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 44, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.11.  
Sec. 2-997. - Final determination. 
(a)  Within 20 days of completion of the hearing conducted under Section 2-996 and the filing of briefs, if any, the decision maker shall mail or deliver to the appellant its written determination stating the reasons therefor. Such determination shall be a final determination. 
(b)  A determination following a hearing substantially meeting the requirements of Section 2-996 or a decision on review under Section 2-994 following such hearing shall be a final determination, judicial review of which may be obtained under Section 2-998. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.12.  
Sec. 2-998. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek review thereof by certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the final determination. The court may affirm or reverse the final determination, or remand to the decision maker for further proceedings consistent with the court's decision. 
(b)  If review is sought of a final determination, the record of the proceedings shall be transcribed at the expense of the person seeking review. A transcript shall be supplied to anyone requesting the same at such person's expense. If the person seeking review establishes impecuniousness to the satisfaction of the reviewing court, the court may order the proceedings transcribed at the expense of the Village and the person seeking review shall be furnished a free copy of the transcript. By stipulation, the court may order a synopsis of the proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The court may otherwise limit the requirement for a transcript. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.13.  
Sec. 2-999. - Legislative review. 
(a)  The seeking of a review pursuant to this Chapter does not preclude a person aggrieved from seeking relief from the Village Board or any of its authorities, boards, commissions, committees or agencies which may have jurisdiction. 
(b)  If in the course of legislative review under this Section a determination is modified, such modification and any evidence adduced before the Village Board, commissions, committee or agency shall be made part of the record on review under Section 2-998. 
(c)  The Village Board, authority, board, commission, committee or agency conducting a legislative review under this Section need not conduct the type of hearing required under Section 2-996. 
(Code 1998, § 4-1-13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.14.  
Sec. 2-1000. - Availability of methods of resolving disputes. 
This Chapter does not preclude the Village and any person aggrieved from employing arbitration, mediation or other methods of resolving disputes, and does not supersede contractual provisions for that purpose. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.15.  
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animal health, Wis. Stats. § 95.001 et seq.; dogs, Wis. Stats. § 174.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Animal. Mammals, reptiles and birds. 
(b)  Animal control officer. Any law enforcement officer including a humane officer. 
(c)  At large. To be off the premises of the owner and not under the control of some person either by leash or otherwise, but a dog or cat within an automobile of its owner, or in an automobile of any other person with the consent of the owner of said dog or cat, shall be deemed to be upon the owner's premises. 
(d)  Cat. An animal of the species Felis silvestris, regardless of age or sex. 
(e)  Cruel. Causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or unjustifiable injury or death. 
(f)  Dog. An animal of the species Canis familiaris. 
(g)  Farm animal. Any warm-blooded animal normally raised on farms in the United States and used for food or fiber. 
(h)  Humane officer. As provided in Wis. Stats. § 173.01 et seq. 
(i)  Law enforcement officer. As provided in Wis. Stats. § 967.02(5), and including a humane officer appointed pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 173.03, with powers and duties as provided under Wis. Stats. § 173.07, but does not include a conservation warden appointed under Wis. Stats. § 23.10. 
(j)  Neutered. A dog or cat having nonfunctional reproductive organs. 
(k)  Owner. Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog or cat and the occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to which it customarily returns daily for a period of ten days; such person is presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog or cat within the meaning of this Section. 
(l)  Pet. An animal kept and treated as a pet. 
(m)  Residential lot. A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a dwelling, platted or unplatted. For the purpose of this Section, any vacant parcel or parcels adjoining a dwelling and under the same ownership shall constitute one lot. 
(n)  Service animal. A guide dog, signal dog, or other animal that is individually trained or is being trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability, including the work or task of guiding a person with impaired vision, alerting a person with impaired hearing to intruders or sound, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-1(b); Ord. No. 2018-19 , § 1, 1-14-2019) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 174.001.  
Sec. 5-2. - Injury to property by animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing an animal, dog or cat to permit such animal, dog or cat to go upon any parkway or private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of such premises and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-12)  
Sec. 5-3. - Trapping of animals. 
(a)  In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be unlawful for any person, in or on land within the Village, to set, place, or tend any trap for the purpose of trapping, killing, catching, wounding, worrying, or molesting any animal on public lands, except by use of live box-type traps only. Live box-type traps shall be defined as those traps which capture and hold an animal in an alive and unharmed condition. 
(b)  This Section shall prohibit the use of all traps other than live box-type traps as described above, including, but not limited to, traps commonly known as leg traps, pan-type traps, or other traps designed to kill, wound, or close upon a portion of the body of an animal. 
(c)  All such traps set, placed, or tended shall comply with Wis. Stats. Ch. 29 as it relates to trapping. 
(d)  This Section shall not apply to trapping within the confines of buildings or homes. 
(e)  Nothing in this Section shall prohibit or hinder the Village or its employees or agents from performing their official duties. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-16)  
Sec. 5-4. - Keeping of bees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any hive, stand or box where bees are kept or keep any bees in or upon any premises within the corporate limits of the Village unless the bees are kept in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  No hive, stand or box where bees are kept shall be located closer than 20 feet to any property boundary. 
(2)  If bee colonies are kept within 50 feet of any exterior boundary of the property on which the hive, stand or box is located, a barrier that will prevent bees from flying through it, no less than five feet high, shall be installed and maintained along said exterior boundary. Said barrier may be either a natural planting or artificial. 
(3)  Fresh, clean watering facilities for bees shall be provided on the said premises. 
(4)  The bees and equipment shall be kept in accordance with the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(b)  Nothing in this Section shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the keeping of bees in a hive, stand or box located within a school or university building for the purpose of study or observation. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-17)  
Sec. 5-5. - Service animals permitted. 
Nothing in this Chapter will be construed to prohibit the possession of a service animal. Dogs that are service animals are still subject to all other regulations in this Chapter applicable to dogs. 
( Ord. No. 2018-19 , § 2, 1-14-2019)  
Secs. 5-6—5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 5-31. - Dogs and cats restricted in cemetery property. 
No dog or cat shall be permitted in any public cemetery. Every dog specially trained to lead blind persons or deaf persons or to provide support for mobility-impaired persons shall be exempt from this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-9) 
State Law reference— Exemption, Wis. Stats. § 174.055.  
Sec. 5-32. - Animal feces. 
The owner or person in charge of any dog or other animal shall not permit solid fecal matter of such animal to be deposited on any street, alley or other public or private property, unless such matter is immediately removed therefrom by said owner or person in charge. This Section shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically handicapped. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-11)  
Sec. 5-33. - Barking dogs or crying cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. A dog or cat is considered to be in violation of this Section when two formal, written complaints are filed with the Police Department within a four-week period or when the situation is observed by an officer. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-13)  
Sec. 5-34. - Limitation on number of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Purpose. The keeping of a large number of dogs and cats within the Village for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many instances, is detrimental to, healthful and comfortable life in such areas. The keeping of a large number of dogs and cats is, therefore, declared a public nuisance. 
(b)  Number limited. No person shall own, harbor or keep in his or her possession more than three dogs and three cats, nor shall more than three dogs and three cats be owned, harbored or kept on any urban residential district except that a litter of pups or kittens or a portion of a litter may be kept for not more than 12 weeks from birth. If a residential lot contains more than one dwelling unit, then only a total of three dogs and three cats shall be allowed in each dwelling unit. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-15; Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 5-35. - Rabies vaccination. 
The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian within 30 days after the dog or cat reaches four months of age and revaccinated within one year after the initial vaccination. If the owner obtains the dog or cat or brings the dog or cat into the Village after the dog or cat has reached four months of age, the owner shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies within 30 days after the dog or cat is brought into the Village unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies vaccination. The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat revaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian before the date of that immunization expires as stated on the certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within two years after the previous vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall meet the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2). 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-2(a)) 
State Law reference— Rabies control program, Wis. Stats. § 95.21.  
Sec. 5-36. - Certificate of rabies vaccination—Issuance. 
A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a certificate of rabies vaccination bearing a serial number and in the form approved by the Village stating the owner's name and address, the name, sex, spayed or unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and color of the dog or cat, the date of the vaccination, the type of rabies vaccination administered and the manufacturer's serial number, the date that the immunization expires as specified for that type of vaccine by the Center for Disease Control of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-2(b)) 
State Law reference— Certificate of rabies vaccination, Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2)(b).  
Sec. 5-37. - Veterinarian copies of vaccination records. 
The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each certificate of rabies vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose until the date that the immunization expires or until the dog or cat is revaccinated, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-2(c)) 
State Law reference— Copies of certificate, Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2)(c).  
Sec. 5-38. - Rabies tag—Vaccination. 
After issuing the certificate of rabies vaccination, the veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the certificate, the year the vaccination was given and the name, address and telephone number of the veterinarian. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-2(d)) 
State Law reference— Rabies tag, Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2)(e).  
Sec. 5-39. - Tag to be attached. 
The owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or a substitute tag to a collar and a collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat at all times, but this requirement does not apply to a dog or cat during competition or training, to a dog while hunting, to a dog or cat securely confined indoors or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. The substitute tag shall be of a durable material and contain the same information as the rabies vaccination tag. The requirements of this Section do not apply to a dog or cat which is not required to be vaccinated under Section 5-35. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-2(e)) 
State Law reference— Tag attached to collar, Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2)(f).  
Sec. 5-40. - Duplicate tags. 
The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination tag with a new serial number to an owner in place of the original tag upon presentation of the certificate of rabies vaccination. The veterinarian shall then indicate the new tag number on the certificate and keep a record in the file. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-2(f)) 
State Law reference— Duplicate tag, Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2)(g).  
Sec. 5-41. - Cost. 
The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost associated with the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and the delivery of a rabies vaccination tag. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-2(g)) 
State Law reference— Cost, Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2)(h).  
Sec. 5-42. - Dog and cat licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village to own, harbor or keep any dog or cat more than five months of age without complying with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 174.05—174.10, relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of the dog or cat. 
(b)  The owner of any dog or cat more than five months of age on January 1 of any year, or five months of age within the license year, shall annually, or on or before the date the dog or cat becomes five months of age, pay a license tax and obtain a license. 
(Code 1998, §§ 7-1-1(a), 7-1-3(a)(1), (2)) 
State Law reference— License due dates, Wis. Stats. § 174.05.  
Sec. 5-43. - License tax. 
The license tax shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The applicant shall pay an additional amount established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code if an existing license is not renewed prior to March 31 of the next succeeding license year. The license year shall commence on January 1, and end on December 31. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-3(a)(3); Ord. No. 99-02, § 3, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 2008-20, § 1, 11-24-2008) 
State Law reference— Minimum license tax, Wis. Stats. § 174.05(2).  
Sec. 5-44. - Issuance; delivery. 
Upon payment of the required license tax and upon presentation of evidence that the dog or cat is currently immunized against rabies, as required by Sections 5-35—5-41, the Village Clerk-[Treasurer] shall complete and issue to the owner a license for such dog or cat containing all information required by state law. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall also deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the license, the name of the county in which issued and the license year. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-3(a)(4); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 69, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 45, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 5-45. - Tag to be kept on animal at all times. 
The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar and the collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat for which the license is issued at all times, except as provided in Section 5-39. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-3(a)(5))  
Sec. 5-46. - Animals without attached tag. 
The fact that a dog or cat is without a tag attached to the dog or cat by means of a collar shall be presumptive evidence that the dog or cat is unlicensed. Any Village Police or Humane Officer shall seize, impound or restrain any dog or cat for which a dog or cat license is required which is found without such tag attached. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-3(a)(6))  
Sec. 5-47. - Exemption from dog license tax for guide dogs. 
Every dog specifically trained to lead blind or deaf persons or to provide support for mobility-impaired persons is exempt from the dog license tax, and every person owning such a dog shall receive annually a free dog license from the Village Clerk-Treasurer upon application therefor. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-3(a)(7); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 70, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 46, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Exemption, Wis. Stats. § 174.055.  
Sec. 5-48. - Multiple dog or cat license. 
(a)  Any person who owns, harbors or keeps more than three dogs or more than three cats may, instead of the license tax for each dog or cat required by this Chapter, apply for a multiple dog or cat license for the keeping of the dogs or cats. Such person shall pay for the license year a license tax as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for 12 or fewer dogs or cats and an additional amount as provided in Appendix A to this Code for each dog or cat in excess of 12. Upon payment of the required license tax and, upon presentation of evidence that all dogs and cats over five months of age are currently immunized against rabies, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the license and a number of tags equal to the number of dogs and cats authorized to be kept. 
(b)  The owner or keeper shall keep at all times a license tag attached to the collar of each dog or cat over five months old kept by the owner or keeper under a multiple dog or cat license, but this requirement does not apply to a show dog or cat during competition, to a dog or cat securely confined indoors or to a dog or cat securely confined in a fenced area. These tags may be transferred from one dog or cat to another within the kennel whenever any dog or cat is removed from the kennel. The rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag shall remain attached to the dog or cat for which it is issued at all times, but this requirement does not apply to a show dog or cat during competition, to a dog or cat securely confined indoors or to a dog or cat securely confined in a fenced area. No dog or cat bearing a kennel tag shall be permitted to stray or to be taken anywhere outside the limits of the kennel unless the dog or cat is in leash or temporarily for the purposes of hunting, breeding, trial, training or competition. 
(c)  The term "kennel" means any establishment wherein or whereon three or more dogs or three or more cats are kept. 
(d)  No multiple dog license shall be issued to the keeper who fails to provide proper food and drink and proper shelter for the dogs or who neglects or abandons said dogs. Village police officers or other designated officials shall investigate any complaints regarding the failure to maintain proper standards or investigate any premises upon their own initiative. Expressly incorporated by reference in this Section as minimum standards for keepers or operators are the relevant provisions of Wis. Stats. § 951.01 et seq. 
(e)  A person wishing to operate a kennel shall do so only where the property is zoned to permit operation of kennels. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-3(b); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 71, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 47, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Multiple dog licenses, Wis. Stats. § 174.053.  
Sec. 5-49. - Late fees. 
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall assess and collect a late fee in the amount established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code from every owner of a dog or cat five months of age or over if the owner failed to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year, or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or cat or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog or cat reached licensable age. Said late fee shall be charged in addition to the required license fee. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-4; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 72, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 48, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Late fees, Wis. Stats. § 174.05(5).  
Sec. 5-50. - Rabies quarantine. 
(a)  Dogs and cats confined. If a district is quarantined for rabies, all dogs and cats within the Village shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or muzzled. Any dog or cat not confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is declared a public nuisance and may be impounded. All officers shall cooperate in the enforcement of the quarantine. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall promptly post in at least three public places in the Village notices of quarantine. 
(b)  Exemption of vaccinated dog or cat from Village quarantine. A dog or cat which is immunized currently against rabies, as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence, is exempt from the Village quarantine provisions of Subsection (a) of this Section if a rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag is attached to the dog's or cat's collar. 
(c)  Quarantine or sacrifice of an animal suspected of biting a person or being infected or exposed to rabies. 
(1)  Quarantine or sacrifice of dog or cat. An officer shall order a dog or cat quarantined if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person, is infected with rabies or has been in contact with a rabid animal. If a quarantine cannot be imposed because the dog or cat cannot be captured, the officer may kill the animal. The officer shall attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. 
(2)  Sacrifice of other animals. An officer may order killed or may kill an animal other than a dog or cat if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person or is infected with rabies. 
(d)  Quarantine of dog or cat. 
(1)  Delivery to isolation facility or quarantine on premises of owner. An officer who orders a dog or cat to be quarantined shall deliver the animal or shall order the animal delivered to an isolation facility as soon as possible but no later than 24 hours after the original order is issued or the officer may order the animal to be quarantined on the premises of the owner if the animal is immunized currently against rabies as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence. 
(2)  Health risk to humans. If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the animal bit a person, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal under strict isolation under the supervision of a veterinarian for at least ten days after the incident occurred. In this Subsection, the term "supervision of a veterinarian" includes, at a minimum, examination of the animal on the first day of isolation, on the last day of isolation and on one intervening day. If the observation period is not extended and if the veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat has not exhibited any signs of rabies, the animal may be released from quarantine at the end of the observation period. 
(3)  Risk to animal health. 
a.  If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid animal and if the dog or cat is not currently immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal leashed or confined for 180 days. The owner shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies between 155 and 165 days after the exposure to a rabid animal. 
b.  If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid animal but if the dog or cat is immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal leashed or confined for 60 days. The owner shall have the animal revaccinated against rabies as soon as possible after exposure to a rabid animal. 
(4)  Destruction of a dog or cat exhibiting symptoms of rabies. If a veterinarian determines that a dog or cat exhibits symptoms of rabies during the original or extended observation period, the veterinarian shall notify the owner and the officer who ordered the animal quarantined and the officer or veterinarian shall kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. If the dog or cat is suspected to have bitten a person, the veterinarian shall notify the person or the person's physician. 
(e)  Delivery of carcass; preparation; examination by laboratory of hygiene. An officer who kills an animal shall deliver the carcass to a veterinarian or local health department. The veterinarian or local health department shall prepare the carcass, properly prepare and package the head of the animal in a manner to minimize deterioration, arrange for delivery by the most expeditious means feasible of the head of the animal to the State Laboratory of Hygiene and dispose of or arrange for the disposal of the remainder of the carcass in a manner which minimizes the risk or exposure to any rabies virus. The Laboratory of Hygiene shall examine the specimen and determine if the animal was infected with rabies. The State Laboratory of Hygiene shall notify the Village, the veterinarian or local health department which prepared the carcass and, if the animal is suspected to have bitten a person, that person or the person's physician. 
(f)  Cooperation of veterinarian. Any practicing veterinarian who is requested to be involved in the rabies control program by an officer is encouraged to cooperate in a professional capacity with the Village, the Laboratory of Hygiene, the local health department, the officer involved and, if the animal is suspected to have bitten a person, the person's physician. 
(g)  Responsibility for quarantine and laboratory expenses. The owner of an animal is responsible for any expenses incurred in connection with keeping the animal in an isolation facility, supervision and examination of the animal by a veterinarian, preparation of the carcass for laboratory examination and the fee for the laboratory examination. If the owner is unknown, the county is responsible for these expenses. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-5; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 73, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 49, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 95.21(3)—(8).  
Sec. 5-51. - Duty of owner in case of dog or cat bite. 
Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog or cat who knows that such dog or cat has bitten any person shall immediately, but not more than 24 hours later, report such fact to the Police Department and shall keep such dog or cat confined for not less than ten days or for such period of time as the Police Department shall direct. The owner or keeper of any such dog or cat shall surrender the dog or cat to a Law Enforcement or Humane Officer upon demand for examination. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-10)  
Secs. 5-52—5-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CONTROL AND CARE 
 
Sec. 5-76. - Restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to own, harbor or keep any dog or cat that: 
(a)  Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in the Village. 
(b)  Assaults or attacks any person or destroys property. 
(c)  Is at large within the limits of the Village. 
(d)  Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person. (See Section 5-33.) 
(e)  Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal. 
(f)  Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten by an animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
(g)  In the case of a dog or cat, is unlicensed. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-6(a)) 
State Law reference— Dogs running at large, Wis. Stats. § 60.23(30); authority to impound animals running at large, Wis. Stats. § 61.29(1)(e); animals running at large, Wis. Stats. § 172.01.  
Sec. 5-77. - Animals running at large. 
(a)  No person having possession or ownership of any animal or fowl shall allow the same to run at large within the Village. The owner of any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall keep such animal tied or enclosed in a proper enclosure so as not to allow said animal to interfere with the passing public or neighbors. Any animal running at large unlicensed and required by state law or Village ordinance to be licensed shall be seized and impounded by a humane or law enforcement officer. 
(b)  A dog or cat shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a leash not to exceed ten feet in length and under control of a person physically able to control it. A dog shall not be considered to be running at large if it is within the fenced enclosure of a designated dog exercise area and under the direct observation and voice control of its owner or other person in lawful custody and control. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-6(b); Ord. No. 2009-14, § 1, 7-13-2009) 
State Law reference— Dogs running at large, Wis. Stats. § 60.23(30); authority to impound animals running at large, Wis. Stats. § 61.29(1)(e); animals running at large, Wis. Stats. § 172.01.  
Sec. 5-78. - Owner's liability for damage caused by dogs; penalties. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 174.02, relating to the owner's liability for damage caused by dogs together with the penalties therein set forth are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-6(c)) 
State Law reference— Owner's liability for damage, Wis. Stats. § 174.02; animals doing damage, Wis. Stats. § 172.51 et seq.  
Secs. 5-79—5-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous animals, Wis. Stats. § 173.23(4). 
 
Sec. 5-100. - Determination. 
The Village animal control officer or any law enforcement officer including Humane Officers shall investigate situations in which reasonable grounds exist to believe that an animal is dangerous. Among the grounds deemed reasonable to believe that an animal is dangerous are that the animal: 
(a)  Has attacked, bitten, or injured another animal or a human being engaged in a lawful activity. 
(b)  Has, without provocation and off the property of its owner, chased, confronted, or approached a person in a menacing fashion that would put a reasonable person in fear of attack. 
(c)  Has been trained for fighting or attack and is being handled, kept, or maintained in a manner that ought reasonably to provide notice to the owner or custodian of the animal of the potential threat to public health and safety. 
(d)  Has acted in any manner that causes or should cause the owner to know that the animal is a threat to public health and safety. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-7(a))  
Sec. 5-101. - Declaration. 
Upon determining that an animal is dangerous, the animal control officer shall attempt to personally deliver a written declaration of such determination to the owner. If personal delivery is unsuccessful, mailing a copy of the declaration to the owner's last known address shall satisfy this requirement. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-7(b))  
Sec. 5-102. - Keeping of dangerous animals prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor, or keep any animal declared to be dangerous, except as permitted under restrictions established by the animal control officer. 
(b)  Any animal declared dangerous by the animal control officer shall be humanely destroyed, removed from the Village, or placed under restrictions established by the animal control officer. 
(c)  Any animal declared dangerous shall be immediately surrendered to the animal control officer and impounded. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-7(c))  
Sec. 5-103. - Summary impoundment. 
(a)  If the animal control officer learns that an animal has bitten a human being or other animal causing injury or that the animal has displayed a vicious or dangerous nature, the animal control officer shall have the power to summarily and immediately impound the animal, pending the results of further investigation. Any law enforcement officer and the animal control officer may enter and inspect private property to enforce this Section. The animal's owner shall be liable to the Village for the expenses of impounding and keeping the animal, unless a determination that the animal is dangerous is subsequently reversed. 
(b)  An impounded animal shall be returned to its owner upon payment of all outstanding Village impoundment expenses after completion of the investigation. 
(c)  In lieu of impoundment, if the animal is currently immunized against rabies, or if the animal species is at low risk for transmitting rabies or other diseases, the animal control officer may permit the animal to be confined at the owner's residence if the owner complies with the animal control officer's conditions of confinement. The confined animal's owner or custodian shall immediately notify the Police Department or the animal control officer if the confined animal is loose or unconfined, has attacked or bitten or injured another person or animal, or has died. The animal shall not be sold or given away during the impoundment period. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-7(d))  
Sec. 5-104. - Subsequent violations. 
If a confined animal's owner fails to comply with the terms and conditions established by the animal control officer, this shall constitute a violation of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-7(e))  
Sec. 5-105. - Review of determination. 
Any person aggrieved by a determination that an animal is dangerous may appeal to the Public Safety Committee within seven days of the date on the written determination by the animal control officer. The Public Safety Committee shall schedule a public hearing within 25 days and shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner, bite or attack victims, witnesses and other interested parties of the hearing. The Public Safety Committee shall issue its written decision after the hearing and serve a copy of the same upon the owner. The filing of an appeal shall automatically stay any order of the animal control officer to humanely destroy or remove from the Village the dangerous animal. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-7(f))  
Sec. 5-106. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this Section or failing to comply with any lawful order of the animal control officer or the Public Safety Committee relating to a dangerous animal shall be subject to a forfeiture under Section 1-16. Each day that such violation or noncompliance continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-7(g))  
Secs. 5-107—5-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Impoundment of animals running at large, Wis. Stats. § 174.042(3). 
 
Sec. 5-126. - Animal control agency. 
(a)  The Village may contract with or enter into an agreement with such person, organization or corporation to provide for the operation of an animal shelter, impoundment of stray animals, confinement of certain animals, disposition of impoundment animals and for assisting in the administration of rabies vaccination programs. 
(b)  The Village does hereby delegate to any such animal control agency the authority to act pursuant to the provisions of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-8(a))  
Sec. 5-127. - Impounding of animals. 
In addition to any penalty hereinafter provided for a violation of this Chapter, any Law Enforcement or Humane Officer may impound any dog, cat or other animal which habitually pursues any vehicle upon any street, alley or highway of this Village, assaults or attacks any person, is at large within the Village, habitually barks, cries or howls, kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal or is infected with rabies. In order for an animal to be impounded, the impounding officer must see or hear the violation of this Section or have in its possession a signed statement of a complaining witness made under oath alleging the facts regarding the violation and containing an agreement to reimburse the Village for any damages it sustains for improper or illegal seizure. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-8(b))  
Sec. 5-128. - Claiming animal; disposal of unclaimed animals. 
After seizure of animals under this Section by a Law Enforcement or Humane Officer, the animal shall be impounded. The officer shall notify the owner, personally or through the U.S. Mail, if such owner is known to the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort, but if such owner is unknown or unascertainable, the officer shall post written notice in three public places in the Village, giving a description of the animal, stating where it is impounded and the conditions for its release, after the officer has taken such animal into possession. If within seven days after such notice the owner does not claim such animal, the officer may dispose of the animal in a proper and humane manner; provided, if an animal before being impounded has bitten a person, the animal shall be retained in the animal shelter for ten days for observation purposes. Within such times, the owner may reclaim the animal upon payment of impoundment fees, such fees to be established by resolution of the Village Board. No animal shall be released from the pound without being properly licensed if so required by state law or Village ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-8(c))  
Sec. 5-129. - Sale of impounded animals. 
If the owner fails to reclaim the animal within seven days, the Humane Officer may sell the animal to any willing buyer. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-8(d))  
Sec. 5-130. - Village not liable for impounding animals. 
The Village and/or its animal control agency shall not be liable for the death of any animal that has been impounded or disposed of pursuant to this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-8(e))  
Secs. 5-131—5-158. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PROHIBITED AND PROTECTED ANIMALS, FOWL, REPTILES AND INSECTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-159. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Circus. A scheduled event staged by a traveling company with mobile facilities in which entertainment consisting of a variety of performances by acrobats, clowns or trained animals is the primary attraction or principle business. 
(b)  Exotic animal. Any animal that is not normally domesticated in the United States or is wild by nature. 
(c)  Possess. To own, control, restrain, transport, or keep. 
(d)  Public zoo or aquarium. A zoo or aquarium that is operated by the state or a municipality or that is an accredited member of the American Zoo and Aquarium Association. 
(e)  Veterinarian. A person who is licensed in this state to practice veterinary medicine under Wis. Stats. Ch. 453 and who is certified under rules promulgated by the department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection. 
(f)  Wild animal. Any of the animals listed in this definition, whether bred in the wild or in captivity, and also any of their hybrids with domestic species. The animals listed in parentheses are intended to act as examples and are not to be construed as an exhaustive list or limit the generality of each group of animals, unless otherwise specified of the following: 
(1)  Nonhuman primates and prosimians (chimpanzees, monkeys); 
(2)  Felids, except domesticated cats; 
(3)  Canids (wolf, coyotes, foxes), except domesticated dogs; 
(4)  Prairie dogs; 
(5)  Elephants; 
(6)  Cocodilians (alligators, crocodiles); 
(7)  Marsupials (kangaroos, opossums); 
(8)  Ungulates (hippopotamus, rhinoceros); 
(9)  Hyenas; 
(10)  Mustelids (skunks, otters, badgers), except ferrets; 
(11)  Procyonids (raccoons, coatis); 
(12)  Dasypodidae (anteaters, sloth, armadillos); 
(13)  Viverrids (mongooses, civets, genets); 
(14)  Reptilia over ten feet in length (boa constrictors, pythons, etc.); 
(15)  Venomous reptilians; 
(16)  Deer including elk, antelope, moose; 
(17)  Poisonous insects.  
Sec. 5-160. - Protected animals. 
(a)  Possession and sale of protected animals. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to possess with intent to sell or offer for sale, or buy or attempt to buy, within the Village any of the following animals, alive or dead, or any part or product thereof: all wild cats of the family felidae, polar bear (thalarctos maritimus), red wolf (canis niger), vicuna (vicugna vicugna), gray or timber wolf (canis lupus), sea otter (enhydra lutris), Pacific ridley turtle (lepidochelys olivacea), Atlantic green turtle (chelonia mydas), Mexican ridley turtle (lepidochelys kempi). 
(b)  Compliance with federal regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to buy, sell or offer for sale a native or foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird, amphibian or reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on the endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of the Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1969 (Public Law 135, 91st Congress). 
(c)  Regulating the importation of certain birds. No person, firm or corporation shall import or cause to be imported into this Village any part of the plumage, skin or dead body of any species of hawk, owl or eagle. This Subsection shall not be construed to forbid or restrict the importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any part thereof legally collected for use by the American Indians for ceremonial purposes or in the preservation of their tribal customs and heritage. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-14(a))  
Sec. 5-161. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 5-160 shall not be deemed to prevent the lawful importation, possession, purchase or sale of any species by any public agency, institute of higher learning, persons holding federal permits, or by a person holding a scientific collectors permit issued by the Secretary of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, or to any person or organization licensed to present a circus. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-14(b))  
Secs. 5-162—5-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 5-191. - Wild animals; prohibition on keeping. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have possession of or control of within the Village any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, insect or reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities. 
(b)  For the purposes of this Section, the term "wild animal" means any of the following animals, whether bred in the wild or in captivity, and also any of their hybrids with domestic species. The animals listed in parentheses are intended to act as examples and are not to be construed as an exhaustive list or limit the generality of each group of animals, unless otherwise specified. 
(1)  Nonhuman primates and prosimians (chimpanzees, monkeys). 
(2)  Felids, except domesticated cats. 
(3)  Canids (wolves, coyotes, foxes) except domesticated dogs. 
(4)  Prairie dogs. 
(5)  Elephants. 
(6)  Crocodilians (alligators, crocodiles). 
(7)  Marsupials (kangaroos, opossums). 
(8)  Ungulates (hippopotamus, rhinoceros). 
(9)  Hyenas. 
(10)  Mustelids (skunks, otters, badgers) except ferrets. 
(11)  Procyonids (raccoons, coatis). 
(12)  Dasypodidae (anteaters, sloth, amadillos). 
(13)  Viverrids (mongooses, civets, genets). 
(14)  Reptilia over ten feet in length (boa constrictors, pythons). 
(15)  Venomous reptilian. 
(16)  Ursids (bears). 
(17)  Game cocks and other fighting birds. 
(18)  Ostriches and emus. 
(19)  Sharks. 
(20)  Except on farms, horses, mules, ponies, donkeys, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, chickens or any animal raised for fur-bearing purposes unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-14(c))  
Sec. 5-192. - Poisonous insects; exceptions; pet shops. 
The prohibitions of Section 5-191 shall not apply where the creatures are in the care, custody or control of: a state-licensed game farm; a veterinarian for treatment; agricultural fairs; shows or projects of the 4-H clubs; a display for judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival, circus or other show; dog or cat shows or trials; public or private educational institutions; licensed pet shops; zoological gardens; if: 
(a)  Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the Village. 
(b)  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors. 
(c)  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape. 
(d)  No person lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(Code 1998, § 7-1-14(d))  
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, Wis. Stats. § 101.60 et seq.; deteriorated, dilapidated buildings, Wis. Stats. § 66.0413; housing codes, Wis. Stats. § 66.1019. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, Wis. Stats. § 101.60 et seq.; deteriorated, dilapidated buildings, Wis. Stats. § 66.0413; housing codes, Wis. Stats. § 66.1019. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-19. - Title. 
This Article shall be known as the "Building Code of the Village of McFarland" and will be referred to in this Article as "this building code." 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-1(a))  
Sec. 8-20. - Purpose. 
This Article provides certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses of materials in buildings and/or structures hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, converted to other uses or demolished and regulates the equipment, maintenance, use and occupancy of all such buildings and/or structures. Its purpose is to protect and foster the health, safety and well-being of persons occupying or using such buildings and the general public. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-1(b))  
Sec. 8-21. - Scope. 
New buildings hereafter erected in, or any building hereafter moved within or into the Village, shall conform to all the requirements of this Article except as they are herein specifically exempted from part or all of its provisions. Any alteration, enlargement or demolition of an existing building and any installation therein of electrical, gas, heating, plumbing or ventilating equipment which affects the health or safety of the users thereof or any other persons is a new building to the extent of such change. Any existing building shall be considered a new building for the purposes of this Article whenever it is used for dwelling, commercial or industrial purposes, unless it was being used for such purpose at the time the ordinance from which this Article was derived was enacted. The provisions of this Article supplement the laws of the state pertaining to construction and use and the Zoning Code of the Village and amendments thereto to the date the ordinance from which this Article is derived was adopted and in no way supersede or nullify such laws and the said Zoning Code. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-1(c))  
Sec. 8-22. - Exclusions. 
This Article does not pertain to, and no permit is required, for all construction relating to agricultural outbuildings such as, but not limited to, barns, sheds and corn cribs, with the exception that outdoor privies are governed by this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-1(d))  
Secs. 8-23—8-47. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 8-48. - Permit required. 
(a)  General permit requirement. No building of any kind shall be moved within or into the Village and no new building or structure, or any part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, or ground broken for the same, or enlarged, altered, moved, demolished, razed or used within the Village, except as herein provided, until a permit therefor shall first have been obtained by the owner or authorized agent from the Building Inspector. 
(b)  Alterations and repairs. The following provisions shall apply to buildings altered or repaired: 
(1)  Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations to any existing building or structure accommodating a legal occupancy and use but of substandard type of construction, which involves either beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, room, heating and air condition systems, arrangement, light and ventilation, changes in location of exit stairways or exits, or any or all of the above, then such existing construction shall be made to conform to the minimum requirements of this Article applicable to such occupancy and use and given type of construction. 
(2)  Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance, or replacements in any existing building or structure which do not involve the structural portions of the building or structure or which do not affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exist stairways, or exits, fire protection, or exterior aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a given occupancy or use, shall be deemed minor repairs. 
(3)  Alterations when not permitted. When any existing building or structure, which, for any reason whatsoever, does not conform to the regulations of this Article, has deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to an extent greater than 50 percent of the equalized value of the building or structure, no alterations or moving of such building or structure shall be permitted. Any such building or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and welfare and shall be ordered vacated and thereafter demolished and debris removed from the premises. 
(4)  Alterations and repairs required. When any of the structural members of any building or structure have deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the owner of such a building or structure shall cause such structural members to be restored to their required strength; failing in which the building or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and shall be vacated and thereafter no further occupancy or use of the same shall be permitted until the regulations of this Article are complied with. 
(5)  Extent of deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of any existing building or structure shall be determined by the Building Inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(a))  
Sec. 8-49. - Application. 
Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the Building Inspector or designee and shall state the name and address of the owner of the land and also the owner of the building if different, the legal description of the land upon which the building is to be located, the name and address of the designer, the use to which said building is to be put and such other information as the Building Inspector may require. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(b))  
Sec. 8-50. - Site/design plan review and approval. 
All applications for building permits for any construction, reconstruction, expansion or conversion, except for one- and two-family residences in residentially zoned districts, shall require site/design review and approval in accordance with the requirements of Section 62-310. The applicant shall submit a site/design plan and sufficient plans and specifications of proposed buildings, machinery and operations to enable the Village officials or expert consultants to determine whether the proposed application meets all the requirements applicable thereto in this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(c))  
Sec. 8-51. - Dedicated street and approved Subdivision required. 
No building permit shall be issued unless the property on which the building is proposed to be built abuts an existing street. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(d))  
Sec. 8-52. - Utilities required. 
(a)  Residential buildings. Unless an exception is granted by the Village Board, no building permit shall be issued for the construction of any residential building until public sewer and water are installed in the streets necessary to service the property for which the permit is required. 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. Unless an exception is granted by the Village Board, no building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building other than residential until contracts have been let for the installation of sewer, water, grading and graveling in the streets necessary to service the property for which the permit is requested. 
(c)  Occupancy. No person shall occupy any building until sewer, water, grading and graveling are installed in the streets necessary to service the property and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such utilities are available to service the property. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(e); Ord. No. 2018-01 , §§ 2, 3, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 8-53. - Plans. 
With such application, there shall be submitted two complete sets of plans and specifications, including a plot plan showing the location and dimensions of all buildings and improvements on the lot, both existing and proposed, dimensions of the lot, dimensions showing all setbacks of all buildings on the lot, proposed grade of proposed structure (to Village datum), grade of lot and of the street abutting lot, grade and setback of adjacent buildings (if adjacent lot is vacant, submit elevation of nearest buildings on same side of street), type of monuments at each corner of lot, watercourses or existing drainage ditches, easements or other restrictions affecting such property, landscaping and outdoor lighting plans, off-street parking, hydrant locations and Fire Department connection, seal and signature of surveyor or a certificate signed by the applicant and a construction erosion control plan setting forth proposed information and procedures needed for control of soil erosion, surface water runoff and sediment disposition at the building site. Plans, specifications and plot plans shall be drawn to a minimum scale of one-quarter-inch to one foot (fireplace details to three-quarters-inch to one foot). One set of plans shall be returned after approval as provided in this Article. The second set shall be filed in the office of the Building Inspector. Plans for buildings involving the Wisconsin Building Code shall bear the stamp of approval of the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services. One plan shall be submitted that shall remain on file in the office of the Building Inspector. All plans and specifications shall be signed by the designer. Plans for all new one and two-family dwellings shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code § SPS 320.09(4). 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(f); Ord. No. 2013-14, § 8, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 8-54. - Approval of plans. 
(a)  Unless Section 62-310 applies, if the Building Inspector determines that the building will comply in every respect with all ordinances and orders of the Village and all applicable laws and orders of the state, the Building Inspector shall issue a building permit which shall state the use to which said building is to be put, which shall be kept and displayed at the site of the proposed building. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which involves any of the above-mentioned ordinances, laws or orders, or which involves the safety of the building or the occupants, except with the written consent of the Building Inspector. 
(b)  In case adequate plans are presented for part of the building only, the Building Inspector, at the Building Inspector's discretion, may issue a permit for that part of the building before receiving the plans and specifications for the entire building. No work is to be started unless a proper grade has been established by the Village Engineer. This would include sidewalks, curb and gutter, driveways and general construction. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(g))  
Sec. 8-55. - Inspection of work. 
(a)  The owner or agent shall have all lot corners and bends visibly staked prior to requesting the initial footings inspection. The owner or agent shall contact the Building Inspector to check stakes before digging can commence. 
(b)  The builder shall notify the Building Inspector, and the Building Inspector shall inspect all buildings upon the completion of the foundation forms or before the foundation is laid. The builder shall notify the Building Inspector and the Building Inspector shall inspect again when the structure is ready for lath and plaster or before paneling is applied. 
(c)  After completion, the Building Inspector shall make a final inspection of all new buildings, alterations and existing buildings put to new uses. If the Building Inspector finds that the work conforms to the provisions of this Article, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of compliance which shall contain the date and outline of the result of such inspection and a statement of the use contemplated, a duplicate of which shall be filed by location in the office of the Building Inspector. The issuance of a certificate of compliance shall not authorize a use of the building different from that stated therein unless the building is adaptable to such use under the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(h))  
Sec. 8-56. - Permit lapses. 
A building permit shall lapse and be void unless building operations are commenced within six months or if construction has not been completed within 12 months from the date of issuance thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(i))  
Sec. 8-57. - Issuance of occupancy permit and revocation of permit. 
No new building shall be occupied or otherwise used prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. After the issuance of an occupancy permit, but before the issuance of a certificate of compliance, such building may be occupied or used only with the permission of the Building Inspector. Such permit shall be in writing and shall state the type of use which is permitted. The permit may be revoked at the discretion of the Building Inspector, upon 30 days' notice to the user or occupant of the building. The revocation of a building permit or a permit to use shall not prevent such use of the building as was permissible prior to the issuance of such permit unless alterations have been made therein which increase the fire hazard or impair the safety or health conditions pertaining to such building. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(j))  
Sec. 8-58. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  The Building, Plumbing, Electrical or Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning (HVAC) Inspector may revoke any building, plumbing, HVAC or electrical permit, certificate of occupancy, or approval issued under the regulations of this Article and may stop construction or use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Whenever the inspector shall find at any time that applicable ordinances, laws, orders, plans and specifications are not being complied with and that the holder of the permit refused to conform after written warning or construction has been issued to the holder of the permit. 
(2)  Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to life or property. 
(3)  Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions of the application for permit or of the permit. 
(4)  Whenever, in the opinion of the inspector, there is inadequate supervision provided on the job site. 
(5)  Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data specifications or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based. 
(6)  Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an approval or occupancy given by the inspector for the use of all new materials, equipment, methods or construction devices or appliances. 
(b)  The notice revoking a building, plumbing or electrical certificate of occupancy or approval shall be in writing and may be served upon the applicant of the permit, owner of the premises and agent, if any, and on the person having charge of construction. 
(c)  A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building, structure, equipment or premises in question by the inspector. 
(d)  After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit which has been so revoked shall be null and void, and before any construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as required by this Article, shall be procured and fees paid therefor, and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation shall be in compliance with the regulation of this Article. However, such work as the Building Inspector may order as a condition precedent to the reissuance of the building permit may be performed, or such work as the Building Inspector may require for the preservation of life and safety. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(k))  
Sec. 8-59. - Report of violations. 
Village officers shall report at once to the Building Inspector any building activity that is being carried on without a permit as required by this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(l))  
Sec. 8-60. - Display of permit. 
Building permits shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where the authorized building or work is in progress at all times during construction or work thereon. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(m))  
Sec. 8-61. - Payment of claims and taxes. 
The Village shall not issue or renew any building permit: 
(a)  For any purposes for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the Village are delinquent and unpaid. 
(b)  For any person who is delinquent in payment: 
(1)  Of any taxes, assessment or other claims owed the Village; or 
(2)  Of any forfeiture resulting from a violation of any Village ordinance. 
(c)  For any property that has not previously dedicated land or paid fees in lieu of land pursuant to the Subdivision regulations of the Village or the Zoning Code of the Village. 
(d)  The Village's refusal to issue or renew a building permit may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-2(n))  
Secs. 8-62—8-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STATE UNIFORM DWELLING CODE 
 
Sec. 8-81. - State Code adopted. 
The Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to one- and two-family dwellings in Wis. Admin. Code Chs. Comm. 20—25 are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this Article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by Wisconsin Administrative Code provision incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Article. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this Article to secure uniform statewide regulation of one- and two-family dwellings in this Village. A copy of these Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions and any future amendment shall be kept on file in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-3(a); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 182, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 50, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 8-82. - Existing buildings. 
The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code shall also apply to buildings and conditions where: 
(a)  An existing building to be occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling, which building was not previously so occupied. 
(b)  An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of such alteration or repair during the life of the structure exceeds 50 percent of the equalized value of the structure, said value to be determined by the Village Assessor. 
(c)  Additions and alterations, regardless of cost, made to an existing building when deemed necessary in the opinion of the Building Inspector shall comply with the requirements of this Article for new buildings. The provisions of Article II, Division 2 of this Chapter shall also apply. 
(d)  Whenever more than 25 percent of the roof covering of a building is replaced in any 12-month period, all roof covering shall be in conformity with applicable Sections of this Article. 
(e)  Any addition or alteration, regardless of cost, made to a building shall be made in conformity with applicable Sections of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-3(b))  
Sec. 8-83. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Addition. New construction performed on a dwelling that increases the outside dimensions of the dwelling. 
(b)  Alteration. A substantial change or modification other than an addition or minor repair to a dwelling or to systems involved within a dwelling. 
(c)  Department. The Wisconsin Department of Commerce. 
(d)  Dwelling. 
(1)  Any building, the initial construction of which is commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived, which contains one- or two-family dwelling units; or 
(2)  An existing structure, or that part of an existing structure, which is used or intended to be used as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
(e)  Minor repair. Repair performed for maintenance or replacement purposes on any existing one- or two-family dwelling, which does not affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection or exterior aesthetic appearance and which does not increase a given occupancy and use. No building permit is required for work to be performed which is deemed minor repair. 
(f)  One-family or two-family dwelling. A building structure that contains one or separate households intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by an individual or by two or more individuals maintaining a common household to the exclusion of all others. 
(g)  Person. An individual, partnership, firm or corporation. 
(h)  Uniform Dwelling Code. Those Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions and any future amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, contained in the following Chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code: 
(1)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 20, Administrative and Enforcement. 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 21, Construction Standards. 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 22, Energy Conservation Standards. 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 23, Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning. 
(5)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 24, Electrical Standards. 
(6)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 25, Plumbing and Potable Water Standards. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-3(c))  
Sec. 8-84. - Method of enforcement. 
(a)  Certified inspector to enforce. The Building Inspector and delegated representatives are hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of the Uniform Dwelling Code. The Building Inspector shall be certified for inspection purposes by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce in each of the categories specified under Wis. Admin. Code § Comm. 5.63. 
(b)  Subordinates. The Building Inspector may appoint, as necessary, subordinates as authorized by the Village Board. 
(c)  Duties. The Building Inspector shall administer and enforce all provisions of this Article and the Uniform Dwelling Code. 
(d)  Inspection powers. The Building Inspector or an authorized certified agent may at all reasonable hours enter upon any public or private premises for inspection purposes and may require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating work. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to the Building Inspector or agent while in performance of the Building Inspector's duties. 
(e)  Records. The Building Inspector shall perform all administrative tasks required by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce under the Uniform Dwelling Code. In addition, the Building Inspector shall keep a record of all applications for building permits in a book for such purpose and shall regularly number each permit in the order of its issue. Also, a record showing the number, description and size of all buildings erected indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of each building and aggregate cost of all one- and two-family dwellings shall be kept. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-3(d))  
Secs. 8-85—8-111. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS, CODES ADOPTED 
 
Sec. 8-112. - Portions of Wisconsin Building Code adopted. 
Wis. Admin. Code §§ Comm. 60—66, 70, and 75—79 are hereby adopted and made a part of this Article with respect to those classes of buildings to which this Building Code specifically applies. Any future amendments, revisions and modifications of said Chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this Code. A copy of said Chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code incorporated herein and amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-4(a); Ord. No. 2000-10, § 1, 8-14-2000)  
Sec. 8-113. - Definitions. 
The building terms used in this Article shall have the meaning given them in the Wisconsin Building Code. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-4(b))  
Sec. 8-114. - Building Inspector. 
The Building Inspector and authorized representatives thereof are hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of the adopted codes. The Building Inspector shall be a commercial building inspector certified for by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce, Division of Safety and Buildings in each of the categories specified, referenced in Section 8-112. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-4(c); Ord. No. 2000-10, § 2, 8-14-2000)  
Sec. 8-115. - Workmanship. 
Workmanship in the fabrication, preparation and installation of materials shall conform to generally accepted good practice. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-4(e); Ord. No. 2000-10, § 2, 8-14-2000)  
Sec. 8-116. - Conflicts. 
If, in the opinion of the Building Inspector and the Village Board, the provisions of the Wisconsin Building Code adopted by Section 8-112 shall conflict with the provisions of the Federal Housing Administration standards in their application to any proposed building or structure, the Building Inspector and/or the Village shall apply the most stringent provisions in determining whether or not the proposed building meets the requirements of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-4(f))  
Sec. 8-117. - New methods and materials. 
(a)  All materials, methods of construction and devices designed for use in buildings or structures covered by this Section and not specifically mentioned in or permitted by this Section shall not be so used until approved in writing by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce for use in buildings or structures covered by the Wisconsin Building Code, except sanitary appliances, which shall be approved in accordance with the Wisconsin Plumbing Code. 
(b)  Such materials, methods of construction and devices, when approved, must be installed or used in strict compliance with the manufacturer's specifications and any rules or conditions of use established by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce. The data, test and other evidence necessary to prove the merits of such material, method of construction or device shall be determined by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-5)  
Secs. 8-118—8-149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 8-150. - Proceedings to raze structure. 
Whenever the Building Inspector or Village Board find any building or part thereof within the Village to be, in their judgment, so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human occupancy or use and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, an order shall be issued to the owner to raze and remove such building or part thereof, or if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to raze and remove at the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0413. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-7(a))  
Sec. 8-151. - Need for immediate action. 
Where the public safety requires immediate action, the Building Inspector shall enter upon the premises with such assistance as may be necessary and cause the building or structure to be made safe or to be removed, and the expenses of such work may be recovered by the Village in an action against the owner or tenant. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-7(b))  
Sec. 8-152. - Disclaimer on inspections. 
The purpose of the inspections under this Article is to improve the quality of housing in the Village. The inspections and the reports and findings issued after the inspections are not intended as, nor are they to be construed as, a guarantee. In order to so advise owners and other interested persons, the following disclaimer shall be applicable to inspection reports: 
"These findings of inspection contained herein are intended to report conditions of noncompliance with code standards that are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not involve a detailed examination of the mechanical systems or the closed structural and nonstructural elements of the building and premises. No warranty of the operation, use or durability of equipment and materials not specifically cited herein is expressed or implied." 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-8)  
Secs. 8-153—8-172. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE GARAGES 
 
Sec. 8-173. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Attached private garage. A private garage attached directly to the principal building, or attached by means of an enclosed or open breezeway, porch, terrace, or vestibule, or private garage so constructed as to form an integral part of the principal building. 
(b)  Detached private garage. A private garage entirely separated from the principal building. 
(c)  Fire protected. 
(1)  Four-inch brick or stone. 
(2)  Metal lath or perforated lath and three-quarter-inch plaster for one vertical side or the under side of the ceiling. 
(3)  Five-eighths-inch fire-rated sheetrock for one vertical side or the under side of the ceiling. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-9(a))  
Sec. 8-174. - Footings and foundations. 
Footings and foundations as regulated in this Article shall be provided for all private garages, except that private detached garages of frame or noncombustible frame construction may be provided with foundation walls of concrete or masonry not less than three feet six inches below the adjoining grade, including overhead door openings, or with an approved continuous floating foundation slab of concrete not less than four inches in thickness for detached garages. Such walls and exterior wall curbs shall be not less than eight inches above the adjoining grade and eight inches in thickness. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-9(b))  
Sec. 8-175. - Floor surface. 
The floor in all private garages shall be of approved noncombustible material. No openings or pits in the floor shall be permitted, except for drainage. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-9(c))  
Sec. 8-176. - Construction. 
Private garages shall be constructed as follows: 
(a)  Load-bearing foundation walls, masonry walls and partitions shall be constructed as regulated herein, except as stated in Section 8-174. 
(b)  Detached private garages of wood frame construction shall be constructed as regulated in this Article, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Studs may have a maximum spacing of 24 inches on centers. Doubling of studs shall not be required at jambs of openings less than 40 inches. 
(2)  Diagonal corner bracing may be applied on the inside surface of studs. 
(3)  Corner posts may consist of either two two-by-four studs or a single four-by-four stud. 
(4)  Top plates may be single, provided the rafters are placed over the studs and plates are lapped to provide ties. 
(5)  Horizontal bracing and collar beams may be two-by-four with a maximum spacing of six foot on centers. 
(6)  All framing walls shall be securely anchored to the foundation of one-half-inch by six-inch bolts placed four feet on center. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-9(d))  
Sec. 8-177. - Attached private garages. 
Attached private garages shall comply with the requirements of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-9(e))  
Secs. 8-178—8-207. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - REGULATION AND PERMIT FOR RAZING BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 8-208. - Permit required. 
No building within the Village shall be razed without a permit from the Building Inspector. The fee for this permit shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. A snow fence or other approved barricade shall be provided as soon as any portion of the building is removed and shall remain during razing operations. After all razing operations have been completed, the foundation shall be filled at least one foot above the adjacent grade, the property raked clean, and all debris hauled away. Razing permits shall lapse and be void unless the work authorized thereby is commenced within six months from the date thereof or completed within 30 days from the date of commencement of said work. Any unfinished portion of work remaining beyond the required 30 days must have special approval from the Building Inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-14(a); Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 5-27-2014)  
Sec. 8-209. - Debris from demolition. 
All debris must be hauled away at the end of each day for the work that was done on that day. No combustible material shall be used for backfill, but shall be hauled away. There shall not be any burning of materials on the site of the razed building. If any razing or removal operation under this Section results in, or would likely result in, an excessive amount of dust particles in the air creating a nuisance in the vicinity thereof, the permittee shall take all necessary steps, by use of water spraying or other appropriate means, to eliminate such nuisance. The permittee shall take all necessary steps, prior to the razing of a building, through the employment of a qualified person in the field of pest control or by other appropriate means, to treat the building as to prevent the spread and migration of rodents and insects therefrom during and after the razing operations. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-14(b))  
Sec. 8-210. - Bond. 
Before a permit to raze any building is granted by the Building Inspector, the party applying therefor shall give a bond or other security in a form approved by the Village Attorney in the sum equal to at least 125 percent of the estimated cost of razing the building and restoring the site to ensure completion of the razing and site restoration. This section shall not apply to the razing of any residential accessory structure with a gross floor area of 750 square feet or less. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 2, 5-27-2014)  
Sec. 8-211. - Insurance. 
The Building Inspector shall require, in addition to the said bond above indicated, proof of liability insurance coverage for injuries or death in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 per person and in a sum not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence, together with property damage insurance in a sum not less than $100,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 3, 5-27-2014)  
Sec. 8-212. - Abandoned water and sewer laterals. 
If, in conjunction with the razing of any building water or sewer laterals are to be abandoned the permittee shall be required to remove and plug any water or sewer laterals at the main as directed by the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works may waive or modify this requirement if compliance would cause undue disruption to traffic, damage to public facilities or if removal and plugging at the main is otherwise impractical due to unique circumstances at the location. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 4, 5-27-2014)  
Secs. 8-213—8-226. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - SMOKE ALARMS AND/OR HEAT DETECTORS REQUIRED IN DWELLING UNITS 
 
Sec. 8-227. - Smoke detector devices required. 
The owner of every residential building shall install smoke detection devices in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 101.145. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-15(a))  
Secs. 8-228—8-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - BALCONIES, DECKS AND PORCHES 
 
Sec. 8-231. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to regulate the construction of balconies, decks and porches to protect and foster the health, safety and well-being of persons occupying or using such structures and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2020-04 , § 1, 1-27-2020) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-04 , § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2020, set out provisions intended for use as 8-248. For purposes to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 8-231.  
Sec. 8-232. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Balcony. An unenclosed exterior platform open to the sky projecting from a structure and supported by that structure with no additional independent supports. 
(b)  Deck. An unenclosed exterior platform open to the sky, either freestanding or attached to a building, that is supported by pillars or posts. 
(c)  Minor repairs. Repairs for the purposes of maintenance which do not involve the structural portions of a balcony, deck or porch and which do not increase a given occupancy, size or use. 
(d)  Porch. An exterior platform with a roof-like structure attached to the exterior walls of a building and open on one or more sides so constructed as to form an integral part of the principal building. Stoops are not considered porches. 
(e)  Stoop. An exterior platform that is less than nine square feet in area, three or fewer steps, and used primarily as an access platform to a building. 
(Ord. No. 2020-04 , § 1, 1-27-2020) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-04 , § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2020, set out provisions intended for use as 8-249. For purposes to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 8-232.  
Sec. 8-233. - Permit required. 
No person shall construct, reconstruct, or make structural alterations, to any balcony, deck, or porch unless such person has first obtained a building permit from the Building Inspector. The fee for such permit shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The applicant shall provide the Building Inspector with information on location, size and construction materials. Minor repairs to existing balconies, decks, and porches shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2020-04 , § 1, 1-27-2020) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-04 , § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2020, set out provisions intended for use as 8-250. For purposes to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 8-233.  
Secs. 8-234—8-247. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONMENT AND PROTECTION OF PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 8-248. - Abandoned foundations. 
Subflooring shall be constructed over basements within 90 days of the start of basement construction. Any foundation which exists for 90 days or more where floor framing has not been commenced thereon shall be filled, securely covered, or fenced in such a manner as to prevent injury to any person. Any cover shall be of a design, size and weight that it cannot be easily removed. Any fence used to enclose such places shall be chainlink, a minimum of four feet in height, and be so constructed as not to have voids, holes or openings larger than four inches in any dimension. The continued existence of all abandoned foundations shall be reviewed annually by the Plan Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(a); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 37, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 3-23-2009)  
Sec. 8-249. - Vacant buildings. 
Whenever any building or structure is vacant and the doors and windows or any part thereof have been removed or opened, leaving the interior of such building or structure exposed to the elements and accessible to trespassers, then such building or structure shall be deemed to be dangerous, unsafe and a menace to public safety. The Building Inspector shall give the owner thereof written notice to secure said building or structure and comply with Village Code requirements within 30 days of the date of said notice. Failure to comply with said written notice shall be sufficient grounds for the Building Inspector to condemn and raze said building or structure in accordance with the applicable provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0413(1)(f), (j). 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(b); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 38, 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 8-250. - Protection of adjoining property. 
When the owner of any lot or plot of land, or the Village, in making improvements, is about to excavate or cause an excavation to be made, which excavation in any way affects any building or structure on any adjoining lot, a notice shall be given to all owners of adjoining lots at least ten days prior to commencing the excavation in order to give the adjoining owners a reasonable opportunity to protect their property at their own expense according to law. Such notice shall describe the extent and character of the excavation work about to be done. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(c))  
Secs. 8-251—8-278. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID FILL 
 
Sec. 8-279. - Transfer. 
No person, firm or corporation shall transfer to, dump or place upon lands, public or private, solid fill within the Village without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(d))  
Sec. 8-280. - Application. 
Application for a permit to transfer, place or dump solid fill within the Village shall be made by the owner of the lands to be filled or designated agent in writing to the Building Inspector upon an application furnished by the Village. A separate permit shall be obtained for each truck or vehicle hauling the fill material. The applicant shall set forth upon the application form the following information: 
(a)  Location of filling operation; 
(b)  Proposed route for hauling fill; 
(c)  Number, type, size and license number of trucks to be used; 
(d)  Proposed trucking schedule, number of days and time of day; 
(e)  Other equipment involved in fill operation; 
(f)  Descriptions and source of fill material; 
(g)  Grading plan indicating final limits and finished grade of fill area. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(d)(1))  
Sec. 8-281. - Fee. 
A fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code shall accompany the application for permit, which shall be retained if the permit is not issued. An additional fee per truck shall be paid for each truck hauling to the fill area. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(d)(2))  
Sec. 8-282. - Fill material. 
Fill material shall be clean, inert material fee from organic material, brush, garbage and material subject to organic decomposition. Where necessary, to avoid dust or similar litter, all material shall be wetted down before transporting. Fill containing items such as hollow containers, appliances and equipment subject to subsequent collapse or settlement is prohibited. Generally, material such as earth fill and broken concrete of a size approved by the Building Inspector or designee will be classified as acceptable fill subject to other permit requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(d)(3))  
Sec. 8-283. - Permits. 
The Building Inspector or designee is authorized to issue a filling permit to each applicant when the Building Inspector is satisfied that the fill material meets the requirements in Section 8-282 and that the filling operation will not create noise, traffic or other problems detrimental to the residents of the area of the community in which said filling is taking place. The Building Inspector or designee shall not authorize any filling between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays, nor at any time on Saturday, Sunday or on a statutory holiday. The Building Inspector shall further restrict the hours of filling or the number of trucks involved based upon the location of the filling operation and the traffic conditions of the area where the filling is being placed. The permit shall be for a period not to exceed three consecutive months in a calendar year. Permit applications for subsequent years, when filling operations span a period of several years, will be subject to conditions and fees governing initial applications. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(d)(4))  
Sec. 8-284. - Other regulations. 
Filling operations also shall be subject to all applicable county, state or federal license or permit regulations. Filling operations shall not block a natural drainage course. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(d)(5))  
Sec. 8-285. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this Section relating to the transfer of solid fill shall not apply to customary top dressing or fertilizing of lawns and gardens nor shall they apply to the construction of block or concrete patios, driveways or platforms permitted under Village ordinances. Filling involved in an operation requiring a building permit or a wrecking permit is exempt from this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(d)(6))  
Sec. 8-286. - Appeal. 
Any person, firm or corporation who is denied a filling permit or whose filling operation is restricted due to noise, traffic or other conditions may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing written notice of appeal as required by the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-16(d)(7))  
Secs. 8-287—8-305. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DISCHARGE OF CLEAR WATERS 
 
Sec. 8-306. - Discharge. 
No person shall cause, allow or permit any roof drain, surface drain, subsoil drain, drain from any mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe, conduit, sump pump or any other object or thing used for the purposes of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging clear water from any part of any private premises owned or occupied by said person to discharge into a sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-17(a))  
Sec. 8-307. - Nuisance. 
The discharge into a sanitary sewer from any roof drain, surface drain, subsoil drain, drain from any mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe, conduit, sump pump or any other object or thing used for the purposes of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging clear water from any part of any private premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a hazard to the health, safety and well-being of the residents of the Village and to the protection of the property. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-17(b))  
Sec. 8-308. - Groundwater. 
Where deemed necessary by the Building Inspector, every house shall have a sump pump installed for the purpose of discharging clear waters from foundation drains and ground infiltration and where the building is not serviced by a storm sewer shall either discharge into an underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch, gutter, dry well or shall discharge onto the ground surface in such other manner as will not constitute a nuisance as defined herein. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-17(c))  
Sec. 8-309. - Stormwater. 
All roof drains, surface drains, drains from any mechanical device, gutters, pipes, conduits or any other objects or things used for the purpose of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging stormwaters shall be discharged either to a storm sewer, a dry well, an underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch or onto the ground surface in such other manner as will not constitute a nuisance as defined herein. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-17(d))  
Sec. 8-310. - Storm sewer lateral. 
Where municipal storm sewers are provided and it is deemed necessary by the property owner and/or the Village to discharge clear waters from a parcel of land, a storm sewer lateral shall be installed and connected to the storm sewer main at the expense of the owner. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-17(e))  
Sec. 8-311. - Conducting tests. 
If the Building Inspector or designated agent suspects an illegal clear water discharge as defined by this Article or by any other applicable provision of the Wisconsin Administrative Code as it may, from time to time, be amended, the Building Inspector may, upon reasonable notice and at reasonable times, enter the private premises where such illegal clear water discharge is suspected and conduct appropriate tests to determine whether such suspected illegal clear water discharge actually exists. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-17(f))  
Secs. 8-312—8-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATIONS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 8-341. - General requirements. 
(a)  No person shall move any building or structure upon any of the public ways of the Village without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works and upon payment of the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Every such permit issued by the Director of Public Works for the moving of a building shall designate the route to be taken, the conditions to be complied with and shall limit the time during which said moving operations shall be continued. An additional fee shall be paid for each day or fraction thereof that the building is on a public highway after the first day. 
(b)  A report shall be made by Village employees with regard to possible damage to trees. The estimated cost of trimming, removal and replacement of public trees, as determined by the Village, shall be paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer prior to issuance of the moving permit. 
(c)  Issuance of moving permit shall further be conditioned on approval of the moving route by the Chief of Police. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-18(a); Ord. No. 99-02, § 10, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 51, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 8-342. - Continuous movement. 
The movement of buildings shall be a continuous operation during all the hours of the day and at night, until such movement is fully completed. All such operations shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lights shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-18(b))  
Sec. 8-343. - Street repair. 
Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one day after said building reaches its destination, report that fact to the Building Inspector, inspect the streets, highways and curbs and gutters over which said building has been moved and ascertain their condition. If the removal of said building has caused any damage to any street or highway, the person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were before the permit was granted. On the failure of the said permittee to do so within ten days thereafter to the satisfaction of the Village Board, the Village shall repair the damage done to such streets and hold the person obtaining such permit and the sureties on the person's bond responsible for the payment of the same. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-18(c))  
Sec. 8-344. - Conformance with Code. 
No permit shall be issued to move a building within or into the Village and to establish it upon a location within the said Village until the Building Inspector has made an investigation of such building at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied from such investigation that said building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of this Building Code in all respects. A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with reference to such building shall be submitted to the Building Inspector, and the Building Inspector shall make a finding of fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of this Building Code and that, when the same are completed, the building as such will so comply with said Building Code. In the event a building is to be moved from the Village to some point outside the boundaries thereof, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed alterations to such building may be disregarded. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-18(d))  
Sec. 8-345. - Bond. 
(a)  Before a permit to move any building is granted by the Building Inspector, the party applying therefor shall give a bond in the sum of $100,000.00 with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the Village Attorney conditioned, among other things, that said party will save and indemnify judgments, costs and expenses which may, in any way, accrue against the Village and will save the Village harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expense in consequence of granting of such permit. 
(b)  Unless the Building Inspector, upon investigation, shall find it to be a fact that the excavation exposed by the removal of such building from its foundation shall not be so close to a public thoroughfare as to permit the accidental falling therein of travelers or the location, nature and physical characteristics of the premises and the exposed excavation, such as to make intrusion upon the premises and the falling into such excavation of children under 12 years of age unlikely, the bond required by Subsection (a) of this Section shall be further conditioned upon the permittee erecting adequate barriers and within 48 hours, filling in such excavation or adopting and employing such other means, devices or methods approved by the Building Inspector and reasonably adopted or calculated to prevent the occurrences set forth herein. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-18(e))  
Sec. 8-346. - Insurance. 
The Building Inspector shall require, in addition to the said bond above indicated, public liability insurance covering injury to one person in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 and for one accident in a sum not less than $500,000.00, together with property damage insurance in a sum not less than $100,000.00, or such other coverage as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-18(f))  
Secs. 8-347—8-365. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FENCES AND HEDGES 
 
Sec. 8-366. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to regulate the materials, location, height, and maintenance of fencing in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-19(a); Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 4-24-2006)  
Sec. 8-367. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Decorative fence. A fence in which 50 percent of the bulk thereof consists of air space constructed of wood, stone, brick, wrought iron, or similar materials or materials designed to mimic such materials constructed in a manner intended to be aesthetically pleasing. Chainlink, mesh or wood snow fences or other similar fences that are designed solely for functionality do not constitute decorative fences. 
(b)  Fence. Any continuous enclosed barrier 30 inches in height at any point consisting of vegetation, wood, stone, plastic or metal intended or functionally acting to prevent ingress or egress. For the purpose of this Section, the term "fence" shall include plantings, such as hedges and shrubbery. No fence shall be constructed of unsightly or dangerous materials which would constitute a nuisance. 
(c)  Hedge. A row of bushes of small trees planted close together, which may form a barrier, enclosure or boundary. 
(d)  Security fence. A fence constructed to enclose a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Temporary fence. A fence generally constructed for purely functional purposes erected to serve as a barrier to entry onto property by persons, animals, or substances such as construction site fences and snow fences. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-19(b); Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 4-24-2006)  
Sec. 8-368. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall construct any fence that will remain in place for a period of 30 days or more within any 12-month period, whether consecutive or not, unless such person has first obtained a fence permit from the Building Inspector. The fee for such permit shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The applicant shall provide the Building Inspector with information on fence location, design and construction materials. 
(b)  Temporary fences that would require a permit under this Subsection may be allowed without a fence permit if specifically approved and limited as to time under a building permit issued by the Building Inspector. In any event, temporary fences shall be allowed only for such period of time as necessary as determined by the Building Inspector to accomplish the specific purpose for the fence. 
(c)  Any fence that does not require a permit shall nonetheless comply with all other applicable provisions of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-19(c); Ord. No. 98-20, § 12, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1(d), 4-24-2006)  
Sec. 8-369. - Standards. 
(a)  Materials. 
(1)  Residential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing fencing include wood, plastic, stone, brick, wrought iron, and chainlink, except that only decorative fences are permitted within required front yard or street side yard set back areas. 
(2)  A-1, RH-1 zoned properties with livestock and nonresidential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing fencing include wood, plastic, stone, brick, wrought iron, and chainlink. Barbed wire fencing is permitted on security fences at heights equal to ten feet and projecting toward the fenced property and away from any public area. 
(3)  Temporary fencing. Temporary fencing may be constructed of wood, wire or plastic, however, materials shall be used uniformly except to the extent different materials are required for functional reasons. 
(b)  Location. On all properties, no fence shall be located closer than two feet to the front yard or street yard property line. Fences may be located on any property line abutting a side or rear yard. 
(c)  Maximum height. The maximum height of any fence in an urban residential district shall be the following: 
(1)  Three feet when located in a required front yard. 
(2)  Four feet when located within a required street side yard or rear yard of a through lot on any residentially zoned property. 
(3)  Six feet when located on any residentially zoned property, but not within a required front yard or a required street yard. 
(cr)  Maximum height in A-1, RH-1 or commercially zoned districts. The maximum height of any fence in these districts shall be the following: 
(1)  Eight feet, except that security fences may not exceed ten feet in height and shall be of an open type similar to woven wire or chainlink. Residential uses allowed in the C-G zoning district shall comply with the standards of Section 8-369(c) of this Code. 
(d)  Orientation. Any and all fences shall be erected so as to locate visible supports and other structural components toward the subject property. 
(e)  Maintenance. Any and all fences shall be maintained in a structurally sound and attractive manner. 
(f)  Prohibited fences. No fence shall be constructed that is in a dangerous condition, or which conducts electricity or is designed to electrically shock or which uses barbed wire; provided, however, that barbed wire is permitted on security fences per Subsection (a)(2) of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-19(d)—(i); Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1(e), 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2018-01 , §§ 4—7, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 8-370. - Nonconforming fences and hedges. 
Any fence or hedge existing on the effective date of this Code and not in conformance with this Article may be maintained, but any alteration, modification or improvement of said fence shall comply with this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-19(j); Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1(f), 4-24-2006)  
Secs. 8-371—8-398. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 8-399. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private or residential swimming pool. An outdoor structure containing a body of water in a receptacle or other container having a depth for water at any point greater than 1½ feet located above or below the surface of ground elevation, used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator or lessee thereof and family, and by friends invited to use it, and includes all structural facilities, appliances and appurtenances, equipment and other items used and intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of a private or residential swimming pool. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(a))  
Sec. 8-400. - Exemptions. 
Storable children's swimming or wading pools, with a maximum dimension of 15 feet and a maximum wall height of 15 inches and which are so constructed that it may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its original integrity are exempt from the provisions of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(b))  
Sec. 8-401. - Permit required. 
Before work is commenced on the construction or erection of private or residential swimming pools or on any alterations, additions, remodeling or other improvements, an application for a swimming pool building permit to construct, erect, alter, remodel or add must be submitted in writing to the Building Inspector. Plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data should be submitted to the Building Inspector at the time of application. No work or any part of the work shall be commenced until a written permit for such work is obtained by the applicant. The minimum building permit fee pursuant to the Village Building Code as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code shall accompany such application. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(c))  
Sec. 8-402. - Construction requirements. 
In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably imposed by the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector shall not issue a permit for construction as provided for in Section 8-401, unless the following construction requirements are observed: 
(a)  All materials and methods of construction in the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvements and pool installation shall be in accord with all state regulations and codes and with any and all ordinances of the Village now in effect or hereafter enacted. 
(b)  All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the Village and all state codes. Every private or residential swimming pool shall be provided with a suitable draining method and in no case shall waters from any pool be drained into the sanitary sewer system, onto lands of other property owners adjacent to that on which the pool is located on in the general vicinity. 
(c)  All electrical installations, including lighting and heating but not limited thereto, which are provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a private swimming pool shall be in conformance with the state laws and Village ordinances regulating electrical installations. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(d))  
Sec. 8-403. - Setbacks and other requirements. 
(a)  Private swimming pools shall be erected or constructed on rear or side lots only and only on a lot occupied by a principal building. No swimming pool shall be erected or constructed on an otherwise vacant lot. A lot shall be not be considered vacant if the owner owns the contiguous lot and said lot is occupied by a principal building. 
(b)  No swimming pool shall be located, constructed or maintained closer to any side or rear lot line than is permitted in the Zoning Code for an accessory building, and in no case shall the water line of any pool be less than five feet from any lot line. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(e))  
Sec. 8-404. - Fence. 
(a)  Pools within the scope of this Section that are not enclosed with a permanent building shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient strength to prevent access to the pool, or shall have a cover or other protective device over such swimming pool of such a design and material that the same can be securely fastened in place and when in place shall be capable of sustaining a person weighing 250 pounds. Such cover or protective device shall be securely fastened in place at all times when the swimming pool is not in actual use for swimming or bathing purposes. Such fence or wall shall not be less than four feet in height and so constructed as not to have voids, holes or openings larger than four inches in one dimension. Gates or doors shall be kept locked while the pool is not in actual use. 
(b)  The pool enclosure may be omitted where portable pools are installed above ground and have a sidewalk around the entire pool perimeter a minimum of 48 inches high and access by ladders and stairs is restricted. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(f))  
Sec. 8-405. - Compliance. 
All swimming pools existing at the time of passage of this Code of Ordinances not satisfactorily fenced shall comply with the fencing requirements of this Article or when water is placed in the pool. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(g))  
Sec. 8-406. - Draining and approval thereof. 
No private swimming pool shall be constructed so as to allow water therefrom to drain into any sanitary sewer or septic tank nor to overflow upon or cause damage to any adjoining property. Provisions may be made for draining the contents of any swimming pool into a storm sewer, but such installation shall be subject to prior approval by the Plumbing Inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(h))  
Sec. 8-407. - Filter system required. 
All private swimming pools within the meaning of this Chapter must have, in connection therewith, some filtration system to assure proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(i))  
Sec. 8-408. - Dirt bottoms prohibited. 
All swimming pools of a permanent nature shall have the sides and bottom of a smooth finish, and no sand or dirt bottom shall be permitted. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-20(j))  
Secs. 8-409—8-429. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - NUMBERS AND NUMBERING SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 8-430. - Buildings to have street numbers. 
The Building Inspector shall assign an official street number to each principal building in the Village. All lots and parts of lots in the Village shall be numbered in accordance with a street numbering map on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Plats shall be numbered to conform as nearly as possible to the general scheme of numbering as outlined on the map. The Building Inspector shall notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer, Police Department, Director of Public Works, Fire/EMS Chief, Village Assessor, public and private utility providers, Dane County Communications Center and Dane County Property Lister of the numbers assigned. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-14(a); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 67, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 9, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 52, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 8-431. - Street numbers to be displayed. 
(a)  Requirements. The owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the premises shall cause to be affixed and to be maintained when so affixed to each principal building controlled by such owner, occupant, or agent the official street number assigned to that building as provided in Section 8-430. The physical numbers provided herein shall be not less than 3¾ inches high in a color contrasting with that of the building to which affixed. Each required number shall be affixed on the particular building as close as practicable to the front entrance to the building so that it may be easily and readily seen by a person of ordinary eyesight on the public street or highway upon which the building abuts. For buildings abutting also on a public alley, the street number shall also be affixed in such location that it may be seen in like manner from such alley. Street numbers shall also be displayed on mailboxes or on mailbox posts in the right-of-way. The physical numbers on the mailboxes or on mailbox posts shall be not less than 1 1/8 inches high and composed of reflective material or a color contrasting with that of the surface to which affixed. Numbers shall be displayed on both sides of each mailbox/mailbox post, unless either side is two feet or less from the nearest mailbox or mailbox post. In such case, the mailbox/mailbox post number shall be on the end of the mailbox or the surface of the mailbox post facing the street. 
(b)  Compliance. Owners shall comply with Subsection (a) of this Section as follows: 
(1)  Existing principal buildings shall comply immediately. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of occupancy permits, all newly constructed principal buildings shall display official street numbers. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-14(b); Ord. No. 2009-17, § 1, 8-24-2009)  
Sec. 8-432. - Noncompliance. 
If the owner or occupant of any building neglects for 20 days to duly attach and maintain the proper numbers on the building, the Chief of Police or designee shall serve such owner or occupant a notice by certified mail requiring such owner or occupant to properly number the same, and if the owner or occupant neglects to do so for ten days after service, the owner or occupant shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Section 1-16. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-14(c))  
Secs. 8-433—8-461. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - IMPACT FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Impact fees, Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. 
 
Sec. 8-462. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, multifamily residential units and multifamily residential dwelling units include duplexes and group quarters dwelling units. A group quarters dwelling unit is a dwelling unit where individuals live or stay that is owned or managed by an entity or organization providing housing and/or services for the residents. The services may include, but are not limited to, custodial or medical care and other types of assistance. Residency is restricted to the individuals receiving the services, and the individuals typically do not participate in the labor force while a resident. Typically, a group quarters dwelling unit has one resident per unit. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 1, 2-24-2020)  
Sec. 8-463. - Public water. 
(a)  At the time a building permit is issued for construction of new single-family or multifamily residential units, commercial developments or industrial developments, or for an addition of an existing building in which a larger water meter is installed, a fee shall be collected. 
(b)  The public water impact fees established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code shall be based upon the size of the water meter installed to service the development. 
(c)  The amount of the public water impact fees established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code shall be implemented on a phased schedule. The applicable fees and dates are declared in Appendix A to this Code. 
(d)  The following shall be fully or partially exempt from payment of a public water impact fee: 
(1)  Additions to existing buildings where no additional or larger water meters are requested; 
(2)  Additions to existing buildings where a larger meter replaces a smaller meter shall have a credit against the impact fee in the amount of the impact fee based upon the size of the meter replaced, regardless of whether or not the replaced meter was subject to a public water impact fee when it was installed. 
(3)  Tear-downs of existing single-family or multi-family residential dwelling units and replacement with new single-family or multi-family residential dwelling units with the same number of dwelling unit(s) and the same size water meter. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 3(15-1-22), 2-23-1998; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 2, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 3-31-2014)  
Sec. 8-464. - Park impact fees. 
(a)  No building permit for a residential development shall be issued unless the impact fees provided in this Section have been paid. 
(b)  Park improvement impact fee. A park improvement impact fee shall be collected at the time a building permit is issued for construction of all new single-family and multifamily residential dwelling units, condominium units, and additions that increase the number of dwelling units on a lot. 
(c)  Park-land impact fee. A park-land impact fee shall be collected for construction of all new single-family and multifamily residential dwelling units, condominium units, and additions that increase the number of dwelling units on a lot. If the Village accepts dedication of parkland from the developer, the fee required under this paragraph shall apply only with respect to the number and type of dwelling units in excess for which the land dedication was made. 
The park-land impact fee shall be payable upon execution of a development agreement required by ordinance by the developer, unless otherwise provided in such agreement, or as otherwise provided by law. In developments in which the improvements will be constructed, or sales will occur in phases, the Plan Commission may establish an alternate time schedule for payment of the park-land impact fee. In cases where no development agreement is required by ordinance, the fee shall be tendered with a building permit application. The fee may be paid at other times as may be required by the Village and permitted by law. 
(d)  The following shall be exempt from any park impact fee: 
(1)  Additions that do not increase the number of dwelling units; 
(2)  Tear-downs and replacement of dwelling units with the same number of dwelling units, for which the park impact fee has already been paid. 
(3)  Developments for which the park impact fee has already been paid, and in the case of the park-land impact fee, a sufficient land dedication has been made by the developer acceptable to the Village. 
(4)  Those developments determined by the Village Board to warrant a waiver or partial waiver of a park impact fee for the purpose of developing affordable housing. 
(e)  The park improvement impact fee and the park-land impact fee shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Unless modified further by the Village Board, the fee shall be adjusted annually on January 1 st by the Community Development Director utilizing the Consumer Price Index—All Urban Consumers-Midwest Region prepared by the United States Department of Labor. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 2, 2-24-2020) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 2, adopted Feb. 24, 2020, amended § 8-464 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-464, pertained to park improvement impact fee, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-07, § 4(15-1-23), adopted April 26, 2004; and Ord. No. 2014-02, §§ 2, 3, adopted March 31, 2014.  
Sec. 8-465. - Public library impact fee. 
(a)  At the time a building permit is issued for construction of new single-family, two-family or multifamily residential dwelling units for lots or condominium units, an impact fee shall be collected. 
(b)  The fee shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  The following shall be exempt from paying a public library impact fee: 
(1)  Additions to new single-family or multi-family residential dwelling units; 
(2)  Tear-downs of existing single-family or multi-family residential dwelling units and replacement with new single-family or multi-family residential dwelling units with the same number of dwelling unit(s). 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 4(15-1-24), 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 4, 3-31-2014)  
Secs. 8-466—8-483. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SIGN AND BILLBOARD REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-484. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to establish minimum standards to safeguard life and property and promote public welfare and community aesthetics by regulating the appearance, construction, location and maintenance of all signs and billboards. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-30)  
Sec. 8-485. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Advertising sign. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not exclusively related to a premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. 
(b)  Awning. A temporary hood or cover that projects from the wall of the building, which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting structure. 
(c)  Billboard. A sign that advertises goods, products or facilities, or services not necessarily on the premises where the sign is located or directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located. 
(d)  Blanketing. The unreasonable obstruction of view of a sign caused by the placement of another sign. 
(e)  Business sign. A sign that directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to one principal commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. 
(f)  Combination business-advertising sign. A sign that indicates the name of the establishment where such sign is located or to which it is affixed and which also directs attention to a product not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed and which also directs attention to a product not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed, but sold or offered upon such premises. 
(g)  Directly illuminated sign. Any sign designed to give any artificial light directly through any transparent or translucent material from a source of light originating within or on such sign. 
(h)  Directory sign. Any sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building is given. This shall include offices and houses of worship directories. 
(i)  Electronic message unit sign. Any sign whose message may be changed by electronic process, including such messages as copy, art, graphics, time, date, temperature, weather or information concerning civic, charitable or the advertising of products or services for sale on the premises. This also includes traveling or segmented message displays. 
(j)  Face sign. The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message of the sign is exhibited. 
(k)  Flashing sign. Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign on which artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
(l)  Ground and/or pole sign. Any sign that is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. (Also referred to as a freestanding sign.) 
(m)  Identification sign. Any sign that carries only the name of the firm, major enterprise, institution or principal products offered for sale on the premises or combination of these. 
(n)  Indirectly illuminated sign. A sign that is illuminated from a source outside of the actual sign. 
(o)  Marquee sign. Any sign attached to and made part of a marquee. A marquee is defined as a permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building's wall and generally designed and constructed to provide protection against weather. 
(p)  Nonconforming sign. Any sign that does not conform to the regulations of this Article. 
(q)  Portable sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground that is designed to be easily moved from one location to another. 
(r)  Projecting sign. A sign that is attached to a wall of a building and projects more than 15 inches beyond such wall. 
(s)  Real estate sign. Any sign that is used to offer for sale, lease or rent the property upon which the sign is placed. 
(t)  Roof sign. Any sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any building. 
(u)  Sign. An emblem, name, identification, description or illustration that is affixed to or appears directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. Neither official court or public notices, nor the flag, emblem or insignia of a national, political unit, school or religious group, nor during election campaigns, posters on behalf of candidates for public offices or on behalf of a particular political belief shall be considered a sign under this Chapter. 
(v)  Sign, gross area of. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of the same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. 
(w)  Temporary sign. Any sign intended to be displayed for a short period of time, including real estate, political or construction site signs, and banners, decorative-type displays or anything similar to the aforementioned. 
(x)  Wall sign. A sign that is attached to a wall of a building and projects not more than 15 inches from such a wall. 
(y)  Window sign. Any sign located completely within an enclosed building and visible from a public way. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-31; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 8-486. - Sign permit required; exemptions. 
(a)  No sign may be constructed, erected, remodeled, relocated, or expanded until a sign permit is obtained in accordance with the McFarland Building Code. No sign permit shall be issued for any sign unless the sign is accessory to a permitted use and the sign is permitted by, and complies with the regulations of this Article; provided, however, that the following types of signs are exempt from the permit requirement and from the regulations of this Section. 
(1)  Flags or emblems of a government or of a political, civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization, displayed on private property. Political campaign signs must be removed within one week after election. 
(2)  Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal notices and warnings at railroad crossings. 
(3)  Memorial signs and tablets displayed on private property. 
(4)  Address numerals and other signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule or regulation, provided that the content and size of the sign do not exceed the requirements of such law, order, rule or regulation. 
(5)  Small signs, not exceeding two square feet in area, displayed on private property for the convenience of the public, including signs to identify restrooms, freight entrances and the like. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(b)  Provided further that the following types of signs are exempt from the permit requirement, but must comply with all of the other regulations of this Article: 
(1)  Signs permitted by Sections 8-494(a) and (b) and 8-497(h). 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-32; Ord. No. 2010-04, §§ 2, 3, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 8-487. - Sign permit requirements. 
(a)  Application. Application for a sign permit shall be filed with the Building Inspector upon forms provided by the Building Inspector and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the sign owner, the property owner where the sign is or will be located, and the sign contractor of the proposed sign. 
(2)  Clear and legible scale drawings with description and nominal dimensions of the proposed sign, the construction, size and dimensions, kind of materials to be used in such structure. The site plan shall show the buildings on the premises upon which the structure is to be erected and maintained together with location, size, and types of existing signs on the premises where the proposed sign is to be located. 
(3)  If required by the Building Inspector, calculations showing that the structure and design meets the requirements of this Article for wind speed. 
(4)  Insurance policy or bond as required herein. 
(5)  Such other information as the Building Inspector may require to show full compliance with this and all other applicable laws of the Village. 
(6)  Signature of the applicant. 
(b)  Permit fees. 
(1)  The applicant shall pay the permit fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  Permit fees may be waived for any nonconforming sign that is reconstructed in conformity with this Article within one year of the original effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived. 
(c)  Permit issuance or denial. The Building Inspector shall issue a permit for the erection, structural alteration, enlargement, or relocation of a sign within the Village when the permit application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid, and the sign complies with the appropriate Village laws and regulations. If the sign permit is denied by the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector shall give written notice of the denial to the applicant, together with a brief written statement of the reasons for the denial. 
(d)  Permit denial appeals. 
(1)  Appeal from denial of a sign permit may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such an appeal can be made at a regularly scheduled Board of Zoning Appeals meeting, provided a request for hearing is made in writing to the Building Inspector no less than 15 calendar days before a scheduled meeting. The Building Inspector shall comply with and enforce the Board of Zoning Appeals decision. 
(2)  The Building Inspector's failure to either formally grant or deny a sign permit within five days of the date an application meeting the requirements of this Chapter is filed shall be cause for appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-33; Ord. No. 98-20, § 13, 12-14-1998)  
Sec. 8-488. - Indemnification of Village. 
All persons engaged in the erection, alteration, relocation or maintenance of a sign or other sign work in the Village shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the Village, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all claims of negligence resulting from the erection, alteration, relocation or maintenance of this sign or any other sign work insofar as this Chapter has not specifically directed the placement of the sign. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-34)  
Sec. 8-489. - Contractor's insurance. 
Every sign contractor shall file with the Building Inspector a certificate of insurance indicating the applicant holds a public liability insurance policy, including worker's compensation, public liability and property damage specifically to include the hold harmless clause with bodily injury limits of at least $300,000.00 per occurrence and $300,000.00 aggregate and property damage insurance of at least $100,000.00 per occurrence and $100,000.00 aggregate. Such insurance shall not be cancelled or reduced without the insured first giving 30 days' notice in writing to the Village of such cancellation or reduction. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-35)  
Sec. 8-490. - Abatement of violations. 
(a)  Violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this Article shall be and hereby is declared to be unlawful. 
(b)  Any sign erected, altered, moved or structurally modified without a permit, or altered with a permit but in violation with the provisions of this Article, shall be removed at the owner's expense or brought into compliance within 30 days of written notification by the Building Inspector. If the violation is failure to obtain a permit, a permit fee shall be required, and the permit fee shall be doubled. In the event that the owner does not remove or bring into compliance, the Building Inspector may order removal or compliance with this Code. 
(c)  This Section shall not preclude the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-36)  
Sec. 8-491. - Construction specifications. 
(a)  All signs shall comply with the provisions of the Village Building Code, as amended, and the additional construction standards hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  All ground and roof sign structures shall be self-supporting structures and permanently attached to sufficient foundations. 
(c)  Electric service to ground signs shall be concealed. 
(d)  All signs, except those attached flat against the wall of a building, shall be constructed to withstand wind speeds as follows, with correct engineering adjustments for the height of the sign above grade. 
(1)  For solid signs, 90 miles per hour on the largest face of the sign and structure. 
(2)  For skeleton signs, 90 miles per hour of the total face cover of the letters and other sign surfaces, or 90 miles per hour on the gross area of the sign as determined by the overall dimensions of the sign, whichever is greater. 
(e)  No sign shall be suspended by chains or other devices that will allow the sign to swing due to wind action. Signs shall be anchored to prevent any lateral movement that could cause wear on supporting members or connections. 
(f)  Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign design. Angle irons, chains, or wires used for supports or braces shall be hidden from public view to the extent technically feasible. 
(g)  All signs shall be marked with a manufacturer's name in a size that is easily visible from the ground. All electric signs shall also include: for incandescent lamp signs, the number of lamp holders; and for electric discharge-lamp signs, the input amperes at full load and the input voltage. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-37)  
Sec. 8-492. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  All signs shall be installed and maintained in a workmanlike manner using equipment that is adequate and safe for the task. This Article recognizes that one of the greatest perils to public safety is improper performance of sign contractors in the use of inadequate equipment. As such, the Building Inspector may deny a sign permit if the sign contractor does not have or does not arrange for use of adequate equipment. The Building Inspector may also cite the sign contractor for a violation of this Chapter if the contractor fails to use proper equipment in the maintenance of signs. 
(b)  This Article recognizes that electric signs are controlled under the special equipment provisions of the National Electrical Code (Article 600) and the Village Electrical Code. It also recognizes that electric sign contractors have developed a specialized trade of high voltage discharge electric sign installation and maintenance to properly install and service high voltage electric signs. Electric sign contractors and their employees are herein authorized to perform the following specific tasks: 
(1)  Install exterior electric signs, ballasts, or high voltage transformers to sockets or outline lighting tubes, and may connect said signs to primary branch circuit, if said circuit already exists outside of the building. 
(2)  Install interior electric signs, but may not connect said signs to the primary branch circuit. 
(3)  Maintain and replace any electric component within the sign, on its surface, or between the sign and building for exterior signs only. This Article prohibits the electric sign contractor or its employees from performing work on electric signs in contradiction to the National Electrical Code or the Village Electrical Code. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-38)  
Sec. 8-493. - General construction standards. 
All signs hereafter constructed, erected, remodeled, relocated or expanded shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Banners, pennants, streamers, strings of lights. No banner, pennant, streamer, string of lights or any other similar sign shall be permitted, except for special promotions allowed twice a year, not to exceed 30 days for each event by permit issued by the Building Inspector. 
(b)  Illuminated signs. Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any Residential District or upon any public street or park. Any illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from any Residential District, which sign is visible from such Residential District, shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except that businesses may illuminate their signs during hours they remain open after 11:00 p.m. 
(c)  Flashing or moving signs. No flashing signs, rotating or moving signs, animated signs, signs with moving lights, or creating the illusion of movement shall be permitted. An electronic message unit sign shall not be deemed to be a flashing sign if the message changes are limited to not more frequently than every 30 seconds. 
(d)  Projecting signs. A projecting sign is any sign that is attached to a building and projects more than 12 inches beyond the wall surface of said building. Such signs located beneath a permanent canopy attached to a building shall not project from the building any further than the canopy. No projecting signs shall extend into the street right-of-way. The total area of a projecting sign shall not exceed 16 square feet on one side or 32 square feet on both sides. 
(e)  Accessway or window. No sign shall block any required accessway or the outside of any window. 
(f)  Signs on vacant property. No sign shall be located on vacant property except a sign advertising the premises for sale or lease which meets the standards of Section 8-494(b). 
(g)  Signs on trees or utility poles. No sign shall be attached to a tree or utility pole whether on public or private property. 
(h)  Building and Electrical Code applicable. All signs must conform to the regulations and design standards of the Village Building Code. Wiring of all electrical signs must conform to the Electrical Code of the Village and the National Electrical Code. 
(i)  Traffic safety. No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its position, size, shape or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any traffic control sign, signal or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(j)  Obsolete signs. No sign shall be permitted that advertises a business that is not being presently conducted. Obsolete signs shall be removed within 30 days of termination of business advertised. 
(k)  Signs on parkways; garage sale signs. No sign shall be permitted on any public street, sidewalk, alley or parkway or other public property, except that a sign advertising "Garage Sale," not to exceed nine square feet in area, may be placed in the parkway in front of the residence for a period not to exceed three days in length. If the residence does not front on a major thoroughfare, a second sign may be placed in the parkway of the closest thoroughfare for the day of the sale. 
(l)  Billboards. [Billboards] are prohibited. 
(m)  Reserved. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-39; Ord. No. 2010-04, §§ 4—10, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1, 6-14-2010)  
Sec. 8-494. - Signs accessory to residential uses. 
Each sign accessory to residential uses, except as provided in Section 8-493(a), shall be set back from the street line a distance of at least one-half of the required minimum setback specified in the district regulations, except for signs permitted under Subsection (b)(3) of this Section, which shall fully comply with the minimum setback requirements for that district. No sign accessory to any residential use shall be permitted except in compliance with the following regulations: 
(a)  Nameplates and identification signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  For each single-family and two-family dwelling there shall be permitted one nameplate not exceeding one square foot in area indicating the name and/or address of the occupant and, where applicable, a professional status, but not to indicate a product or business. 
(2)  For each multifamily dwelling or single-family and two-family Subdivision, there shall be permitted one identification sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area located near the main entrance to the building or Subdivision and indicating only the name of the building or Subdivision and name of the owner, manager or developer thereof. 
(3)  In connection with the construction or remodeling of a building, there shall be permitted one nonilluminated sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area indicating the names of any or all professional offices; on corner lots two such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. Any signs permitted under this Subsection shall be removed by the person erecting the same not longer than two weeks after completion of the structure indicated. 
(b)  "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  For sale or rental of single-family dwellings (or lots for dwelling purposes), for each lot there shall be no more than one such sign installed in such yard adjoining an existing or dedicated street. No such sign shall exceed nine square feet in area, and no such sign shall be illuminated. Each sign must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of the property being offered and must be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the property. Each sign must be placed only upon the property offered for sale or rent and positioned in accordance with this Section. 
(2)  Where multifamily dwelling units are offered for sale or rental by individual owners, there shall be no more than one such sign installed in each yard adjoining an existing or dedicated street, not to exceed 12 square feet in area and placed in accordance with this Section, and no more than one such sign per unit installed within ten feet of the front door of said unit, not to exceed three square feet in area. No such sign shall be illuminated. Each such sign must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of the unit being offered and must be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the unit. 
(3)  Where more than six dwelling units (or lots for dwelling purposes) are offered for sale or rental by the same party, there shall be permitted one sign facing each public street providing access to the property being offered. Each such sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area and must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of the property being offered and must be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the last property offered at that location. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-40; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 11, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 8-495. - Signs accessory to parking areas. 
No signs accessory to any parking area shall be permitted except in compliance with the following regulations: 
(a)  One sign may be erected to designate each entrance to or exit from a parking area; each such sign shall be no more than two square feet in area; such signs are exempt from minimum setback requirements, but shall be located at least one foot behind the lot line. Such signs shall not contain nondirectory content such as advertising messages or business logos. 
(b)  One sign designating the conditions of use shall be permitted for each parking area; each such sign shall be limited to a maximum area of nine square feet; such signs are exempt from minimum setback requirements, but shall be screened from adjoining property. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-41)  
Sec. 8-496. - Signs accessory to houses of worship, schools or nonprofit institutions. 
No signs accessory to any house of worship, school or nonprofit institution shall be permitted except in compliance with the following regulations: 
(a)  There shall be not more than one freestanding sign per lot, except that on a corner lot two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. The total area of such sign shall not exceed 40 square feet. The maximum height shall not exceed eight feet. 
(b)  An identification sign shall be permitted on the front wall of the building. The total area of the sign shall not exceed one-tenth of the area of the front facade of the building. 
(c)  Temporary signs, banners and displays for houses of worship, schools, institutional or civic events are permitted, but must be located on property owned or controlled by the house of worship, school, institution, or civic organization or on public lands approved by the Building Inspector, and may be displayed only during a period commencing 30 days prior to the scheduled event and ending three days after closing date of said scheduled event. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-42; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 12, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 8-497. - Signs accessory to business, commercial or industrial uses. 
No sign accessory to any business, commercial or industrial use shall be permitted, except in compliance with the following regulations: 
(a)  Front wall signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  A sign shall be permitted on the front wall of any principal building. For the purpose of this Chapter, large petroleum storage tanks will be considered as a principal building. The 90 degrees of the tank circumference facing the access street shall be the front wall. The total area of such sign shall not exceed one-tenth of the area of the front face, including doors and windows, of the principal building. If a building has direct access to a road or street, the speed limit upon which is 35 miles per hour or more, the allowable maximum area of a front wall sign hereunder shall be increased by 50 percent. Twelve square feet wall signs are permitted for building faces under 120 square feet. Front wall signs shall not project above the roof of the building. 
(2)  Where a single principal building is devoted to two or more businesses, commercial or industrial uses, the operator of each such use may install a front wall sign. The maximum area of each such sign shall be determined by determining the proportionate share of the front face (including doors and windows) of the principal building occupied by each such use and applying such proportion to the total sign area permitted for the front wall of the building. 
(3)  Front wall signs that do not violate Section 8-493(d) may project not more than 12 inches beyond the minimum setback. 
(4)  Signs constructed of metal and illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring or electrically wired accessory fixtures attached to a metal sign shall maintain a free clearance to grade of nine feet. Accessory lighting fixtures attached to a nonmetal frame sign shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to ground. 
(5)  Front wall signs may be gaseous tube type or may be illuminated by interior means of lighting of an intensity to prevent excessive glare, or by indirect lighting designed to flood only the area of the sign with light and to prevent excessive glare, or by indirect lighting designed to flood only the area of the sign with light and to prevent light from being directed on surrounding property. 
(6)  Front wall signs that meet the following characteristics may be increased by 25 percent of the allowable sign area permitted in Subsection (a)(1) of this Section except that the total area of such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet: front wall signs that consist only of individual, outlined alphabetic, numeric, and symbolic characters without background except that provided by the building surface to which they are affixed. If illuminated, such illumination shall be by internal shielded illumination, shielded silhouette lighting or shielded spot lighting but not any lighting where the light source itself is visible or exposed on the face or sides of the characters. 
(b)  Side wall signs be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The total area of such sign shall not exceed one-tenth of the area of the side wall (including doors and windows) of the principal building, provided that the total area of such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet. Side wall signs shall not project above the roof of the building. 
(2)  The sign must be located on a side wall facing a side yard complying with the side yard setback of the district in which it is located, or on a side wall facing a side street. 
(3)  Side wall signs that do not violate Section 8-493(d) may project not more than 12 inches into required side yards. 
(4)  Signs constructed of metal and illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring or electrically wired accessory fixtures attached to a metal sign shall maintain a free clearance to grade of nine feet. Accessory lighting fixtures attached to a nonmetal frame sign shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to ground. 
(5)  Side wall signs may be gaseous tube type or may be illuminated by interior means of lighting of an intensity to prevent excessive glare, or by indirect lighting designed to flood only the area of the sign with light and to prevent light from being directed on surrounding property. 
(6)  Side wall signs that meet the following characteristics may be increased by 25 percent of the allowable sign area permitted in Subsection (b)(1) of this Section except that the total area of such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet; side wall signs that consist only of individual outlined alphabetic, numeric, and symbolic characters without background except that provided by the building surface to which they are affixed. If illuminated, such illumination shall be by internal shielded illumination, shielded silhouette lighting or shielded spot lighting, but not any lighting where the light source itself is visible or exposed on the face or sides of the characters. 
(c)  A sign shall be permitted on the rear wall of any principal building subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The maximum area of such rear wall sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the maximum area permitted for a front wall sign of the same building. Rear wall signs shall not project above the roof of the building. 
(2)  Rear wall signs that do not violate Section 8-493(d) may project not more than 12 inches into the required rear yards. 
(3)  Signs constructed of metal and illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring or electrically wired accessory fixtures attached to a metal sign shall maintain a free clearance to grade of nine feet. Accessory lighting fixtures attached to a nonmetal frame sign shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to ground. 
(4)  Rear wall signs may be gaseous tube type or may be illuminated by interior means of lighting of an intensity to prevent excessive glare, or by indirect lighting designed to flood only the area of the sign with light and to prevent light from being directed on surrounding property. 
(d)  Two ground signs shall be permitted for any building. The total area and maximum height of each individual permitted ground sign shall comply with criteria set forth in the following table. If only one ground sign is erected, the maximum area may be increased by 25 percent and no further ground signs shall be permitted: 
Setback from R.O.W. 	Maximum Area 	Maximum Height 
1'—9' 	40 square feet 	8' 
9'—17' 	70 square feet 	16' 
17'—25' 	100 square feet 	25' 
 
(e)  No part of any sign shall extend above the crest of the roof of any building or structure. No sign, considered a wall sign by virtue of its attachment to the wall of a building, shall be allowed to extend above the top edge of the wall. Roof signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in area. 
(f)  Letters may be painted or otherwise affixed to any permissible awning or canopy subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Lettering or letters shall not project above, below or beyond the physical dimensions of the awning or canopy. 
(2)  Lettering or letters shall not be larger from top to bottom than eight inches. 
(3)  Lettering or letters shall not denote other than the name and address of the business conducted therein and/or a product produced or sold or service rendered therein. 
(g)  Nameplates indicating the name and corporate insignia of the building owner or occupant, address and/or product may be located on gates, gate posts and/or gate houses, provided that in the case of multiple occupancy, one name be utilized for identification purposes. 
(h)  "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  For sale or rental of business, commercial or industrial real property, for each lot there shall be no more than one such sign installed in each yard adjoining an existing or dedicated street. No such sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area and no such sign shall be illuminated. Each sign must be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the property offered for sale or rent and positioned from the street line a distance of at least one-half of the setback required within the particular zoning district in which the property is located. 
(2)  Where a commercial or industrial plat is offered for sale or rental there shall be permitted one sign facing each public street providing access to the property being offered. Each sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in area and must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of the property being offered and must be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of all the property within the plat and shall be located in accordance with Subsection (d)(1) of this Section. 
(i)  The total area of all on-premises signs for any individual business shall not exceed 300 square feet. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-43; Ord. No. 2010-04, § § 13—18, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 8-498. - Nonconforming signs. 
Lawful nonconforming signs may be maintained subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  A nonconforming sign existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived may be continued, except that if its use, the purpose for which it was intended, or the business to which it relates is sold, or is discontinued for a period of 30 days or more, or if the individual or business owning such nonconforming sign moves from the premises where such sign is located, it shall be deemed abandoned and any further use of said sign, either on the premises where located or on new premises, will not be allowed unless the sign conforms with this Article. It is the intent of this Article that a nonconforming sign, maintained by virtue of the rights conferred by this Section, shall not be continued after the sale or other disposition of the business to which it relates. 
(b)  Normal maintenance, such as painting, repairing without removal, cleaning, maintaining electrical wiring and appurtenances on site and changing or repairing fasteners or guy wires or chains shall be permitted on any lawful nonconforming sign. 
(c)  Any nonconforming sign existing at the time this Article takes effect, which is destroyed by fire or the elements, may be reconstructed only in conformity with this Article. 
(d)  A lawful nonconforming sign may not be enlarged or altered, except as allowed under Subsection (b) of this Section for normal maintenance or to make such sign conform to this Article. 
(e)  Any lawful nonconforming sign under this Article, which is altered or changed so as to conform with this Article, shall not thereafter be changed so as to again become nonconforming. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-44)  
Sec. 8-499. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  General requirements: All temporary signs shall comply with the requirements of this Code. Except for those signs listed in this Section, Section 8-496(c) or defined as "Exempt signs" in Section 8-486, no temporary sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area, be displayed for a period of more than 30 consecutive days, be displayed more than twice per calendar year, [or] be displayed without a sign permit. A parcel may display one such sign per street frontage. 
(b)  Sandwich board signs: 
(1)  Location. Portable sandwich board-type signs displaying messages associated with a commercial activity are permitted on private property in all commercial, industrial, and mixed-use areas subject to the standards defined in this Sign Code. 
(2)  Number of signs. There shall only be one sandwich board sign allowed per premise per street frontage. 
(3)  Size and design regulations. A sandwich board sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area, measuring no more than three feet at the base and no more than four feet in height (measured vertically). 
(4)  Duration of display. A sandwich board sign may be displayed only during business hours, but not for a period exceeding 18 consecutive hours. 
(5)  Placement of sign. A sandwich board sign may be placed only in front of the business in a way that does not obstruct normal pedestrian movement, and must be placed on private property. 
(6)  [Anchoring.] All sandwich board signs shall be anchored or weighted to withstand the wind speeds per Section 8-491(d)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 19, 1-11-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-04, § 19, adopted Jan. 11, 2010, repealed the former § 8-499 and enacted a new § 8-499 as set out herein. The former § 8-499 pertained to licensing of erectors of temporary greeting signs, and derived from Code 1998.  
Secs. 8-500—8-521. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - FEES AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 8-522. - Fees. 
Before issuing a building permit, the Building Inspector shall collect the fees established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for the items therein. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-60; Ord. No. 98-20, § 14, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 2000-10, § 2, 8-14-2000; Ord. No. 2002-02, §§ 10—15, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 2003-01, § 2, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2004-26, §§ 10—15, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 6, 2-23-2006; Ord. No. 2007-03, §§ 4—6, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2008-04, §§ 3, 4, 3-10-2008; Ord. No. 2008-20, § 2, 11-24-2008)  
Sec. 8-523. - Severability. 
If any Section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter, or of the Wisconsin Administrative Code adopted by reference, is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-61)  
Sec. 8-524. - Violations. 
(a)  Scope of provision. Any building or structure hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, demolished or repaired, any use hereafter established in violation of the provisions of Articles I—XVI of this Chapter (the Village Building Code, Village Electrical Code, Plumbing Code and Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code, all included within the definition of "this Chapter" for purposes of this Section), or any other action taken contrary to this Chapter or a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use or otherwise a violation of this Chapter. 
(b)  Penalties. The Building Inspector shall promptly report all such violations to the Village Board and Village Attorney. The Village Attorney may bring an action to enjoin the unlawful building, structure, use or condition in violation of this Chapter. The Village Attorney, Building Inspector or any other Village officer or employee authorized to issue citations for violations of Village ordinances may also seek a penalty as provided in general penalty provisions in Section 1-16. Any person who fails to obtain a building permit before starting construction shall be charged double the regular rate for this late filing violation. In any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Building Inspector or other Village officials constitute a defense. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter may also be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the owner of any real estate within the jurisdiction of this Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-62(a); Ord. No. 2014-03, § 5, 5-27-2014)  
Sec. 8-525. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice to correct. If an inspection reveals a noncompliance with this Chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code, the Building Inspector shall notify the applicant and the owner, in writing, of the violation to be corrected. All cited violations shall be corrected within 30 days after written notification unless an extension of time is granted pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § 20.10(1)(c). 
(b)  Stop work order. If, after written notification, the violation is not corrected within 30 days, a stop-work order may be served on the owner or the owner's representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the construction site. Such stop-work order shall not be removed except by written notice of the Building Inspector after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the cited violation has been corrected. 
(c)  Separate violations; other remedies. Each day each violation continues after the 30-day written notice period has run shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code. 
(d)  Double fees. If any construction or work governed by the provisions of Articles I—XVI of this Chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit, double fees shall be charged. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-62(b))  
Sec. 8-526. - Appeals. 
Any person feeling aggrieved by an order or a determination of the Building Inspector may appeal from such order or determination to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Those procedures customarily used to effectuate an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall apply. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-62(c))  
Sec. 8-527. - Village liability. 
Except as may otherwise be provided by the statute or ordinance, no officer, agent, or employee of the Village charged with the enforcement of this Chapter shall be rendered personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of the officer, agent or employee's duties under this Chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the Village as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this Chapter shall be defended by the legal representative of the Village until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-62(d))  
Sec. 8-528. - Payment of claims. 
The Village shall not issue or renew any building, plumbing, electrical or HVAC permit: 
(a)  For any purposes for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the Village are delinquent and unpaid. 
(b)  For any person who is delinquent in payment of: 
(1)  Any taxes, assessments or other claims owed the Village; or 
(2)  Any forfeiture resulting from a violation of any Village ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-62(e))  
Secs. 8-529—8-549. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR REAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 8-550. - Applicability. 
This Article shall apply to all dwellings, dwelling units, roominghouses and premises including single-family owner-occupied dwellings. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-90)  
Sec. 8-551. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Basement. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground. 
(2)  Boat. Every description of watercraft capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
(3)  Dwelling. Any building that is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing as herein defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
(4)  Dwelling unit. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
(5)  Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Building Inspector. 
(6)  Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
(7)  Habitable room. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, operating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, kitchens, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces. 
(8)  Infestation. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
(9)  Junk or Junked. When used in reference to a motor vehicle means a vehicle which is incapable of lawful operation or use upon a highway, has no resale value except as a source of parts or scrap. When used in reference to other property means property in such a state of deterioration, disrepair or corrosion that it is not reasonably functional or retains no resale value except as scrap. 
(10)  Multiple dwelling. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
(11)  Occupant. Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
(12)  Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
(13)  Ordinary minimum winter conditions. Minus 15 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(14)  Owner. Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others: 
a.  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling units with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
b.  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or a personal representative, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Article and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if such person were the owner. 
(15)  Person. Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership. 
(16)  Plumbing. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, hot tubs, whirlpools, installed clothes-washing machines, catchbasins, drains, vents and any similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines. 
(17)  Recreational vehicles. Any of the following: 
a.  Boat or snowmobile trailer. A vehicle on which a boat or snowmobile may be transported and is towable by a motor vehicle. When removed from the trailer, a boat or snowmobile, for purposes of this Article, is termed an unmounted boat or snowmobile. 
b.  Camping trailer. A canvas or folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses. 
c.  Chassis mounts, motor homes and mini-motor homes. Recreational structures constructed integrally with a truck or motor-van chassis and incapable of being separated therefrom. 
d.  Converted and chopped van. Recreational structures that are created by altering or changing an existing auto van to make it a recreational vehicle. 
e.  Motor home. A portable temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, vacation, or other uses, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
f.  Pickup coach. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses. 
g.  Travel trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and on wheels; that is, between ten and 36 feet long, including the hitch, and eight feet or less in width; designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses and towed by a car, station wagon or truck. It includes so-called fifth-wheel units. 
(18)  Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
(19)  Roominghouse. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
(20)  Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust. 
(21)  Supplied. Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
(22)  Temporary housing. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(b)  Meaning of certain words. 
(1)  Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit," "premises," are used in this Section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(2)  Whenever the word "yard" is used in this Article relating to real property which abuts on a body of water on one side, the side of the "yard" abutting on the body of water shall be deemed to be the "front yard" of the property. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-91; Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 1, 6-12-2017)  
Sec. 8-552. - Inspections. 
Upon written complaint of any adult to the Village President, any Village Trustee, Police Department, Director of Public Works or Building Inspector, the Building Inspector may seek issuance of a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.0119, from the Municipal Judge to make an inspection to determine the condition of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises complained about so that the Building Inspector may perform the duty of eliminating the problem consistent with the purpose of this Article. For the purpose of making such inspection, every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or the owner's agent, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at any reasonable time for making such repairs or alterations that are necessary to comply with this Article or any lawful order issued by the Building Inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-92; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 39, 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 8-553. - Enforcement and appeals. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the Building Inspector determines that reasonable grounds exist to believe that a violation has occurred of any provision of this Article except as provided in subsections (g) and (h), the Building Inspector shall notify the owner. 
(b)  Contents of notice. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  State the reason for its issuance; 
(3)  Allow 30 days for the performance of any act it requires; 
(4)  Be served on the owner; 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will comply with this Article; 
(6)  Provide notice of the appeal procedure and deadlines under subsection (d). 
(c)  Service of notice. Service of such notice upon the owner shall be deemed proper if served personally, or by registered mail to the owner's last known address, or by posting it in a conspicuous place in or upon the premises affected by such notice and sending it by regular mail to the owner's last known address. Service shall be deemed complete upon personal service, upon the date received for registered mail, or passage of three days from the date of mailing if posted and sent regular mail. 
(d)  Appeals. Any person affected by such notice may petition for a hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such petition must be filed with the Building Inspector within ten days after service of the notice. Such petition shall contain a written statement of the grounds for appeal. Upon receipt of such petition, the Building Inspector shall give written notice to the petitioner of the time and place of the hearing, which shall be held as soon as practicable after receipt of the petition. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the petitioner should not comply with such notice. 
(e)  Determination of Board of Zoning Appeals. After the hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall sustain, modify or withdraw the petition based upon whether or not there has been compliance with this Article. If the Board of Zoning Appeals sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served under Subsection (c) of this Section shall automatically become an order if no petition is filed with the Building Inspector within ten days after service of the notice. After a hearing in a case when the Board of Zoning Appeals sustains a notice suspending a building permit, the permit is deemed to have been revoked. Any permit suspended by a notice served under Subsection (c) of this Section shall be automatically revoked if no petition is filed with the Building Inspector within ten days after service of the notice. 
(f)  Board of Zoning Appeals record. The hearing proceedings shall be summarized and reduced to writing. The public record of each case shall contain the written summary, the Board of Zoning Appeals' written findings and decision and any notice or order issued in connection therewith. Any person aggrieved by the Board of Zoning Appeals' decision may seek judicial review thereof as provided by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)10—15. 
(g)  Emergency orders. Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an emergency exists that requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, the Building Inspector may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the facts constituting the emergency and requiring that such action be taken as the Building Inspector deems necessary to meet the emergency. Such emergency order shall be effective immediately notwithstanding the other provisions of this Article. Upon petition by the affected person, a hearing shall be held as soon as possible under Subsection (d) of this Section. After such hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall sustain, modify, or revoke the emergency order depending upon whether or not the Building Inspector has complied with the Article. 
(h)  Forfeiture. 
(1)  In addition to any other remedies allowed by law, the Building Inspector or other authorized code enforcement officer may enforce this Article by commencing a forfeiture action in the Municipal Court through issuance of citations or authorizing the Village Attorney to serve and file a forfeiture complaint in the Municipal Court. 
(2)  Before any such forfeiture action may be commenced, the notice under subsection (a) shall be served, however, no such notice shall be required if the action relates to a property for which any notice under subsection (a) has previously been issued within the previous 12 months for violations of the same provision of this Article and involving the same or substantially similar factual predicate. 
(3)  Under no circumstances shall failure to serve the notice under subsection (a) invalidate any action commenced under this subsection. 
(4)  The penalty for violation of any provision of this Article shall be as set forth in Section 1-16, however, if the court finds that notice under subsection (a) was required to have been served pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection (h), the minimum penalty shall be no less than $1.00 for any violations occurring prior to, or within 30 days after, the service of the citation or complaint. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-93; Ord. No. 2017-14 , §§ 1—5, 6-12-2017)  
Sec. 8-554. - Maintenance responsibilities of owners and occupants. 
(a)  Every owner shall, either personally or by agent, improve and maintain all property under the owner's control to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All courts, yards, and other outdoor areas on the premises shall be graded or filled to divert surface water flow away from buildings. 
(2)  All exterior property areas shall be kept free from noxious weeds. 
(3)  All interior and exterior property areas shall be maintained in a condition free from debris, rubbish, garbage, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation. 
(4)  All fences and other minor construction, paved walkways, and vehicular areas shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(5)  All exterior surfaces of buildings and fences made of materials not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically coated with paint or another suitable preservative, which provides adequate resistance to weathering and maintains a neat and attractive appearance. 
(6)  All outdoor walkways, driveways, and parking areas serving multiple dwellings and commercial establishments shall be kept free from snow and ice, and any other hazards. 
(7)  All shared or public areas of commercial and multifamily buildings shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(8)  In buildings containing more than two dwelling units, adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers and recycling containers shall be provided and periodically emptied. Exterior storage of garbage and recycling containers on a usual or permanent basis shall be screened from view by the public or by occupants of nearby properties through an effective combination of fencing or walls. 
(b)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for complying with the following requirements: 
(1)  All portions of a dwelling or dwelling unit that the occupant occupies and controls shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(2)  All rubbish and garbage shall, in a clean and sanitary manner, be placed in garbage disposal facilities, garbage storage containers, or recycling containers. 
(3)  The occupant of a building containing two or less dwelling units shall provide adequate garbage facilities or containers and adequate recycling containers. 
(4)  Where the occupant's dwelling unit is the only one infested with insects, rodents, or other pests, the occupant shall be responsible for their extermination unless such infestation is caused by the owner's failure to maintain the building in a reasonably rodent-proof or insect-proof condition. 
(5)  All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in an operable condition and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  Each owner of an improvement shall keep in good repair all the exterior portions of such improvement and all interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of such improvement to fall into a state of disrepair. Each owner of an improvement shall cause or permit it to be maintained in a condition consistent with the provisions of Village ordinances and state codes. Upon written complaint, the Building Inspector shall make inspections of any improvement. These inspections may include physical entry upon the property and improvement, with the permission of the owner, to ensure that interior alterations or maintenance will not jeopardize the exterior appearance or structural stability of the improvement. If an owner refuses permission for entry, the Building Inspector may obtain a special inspection warrant pursuant to Section 8-552 from the Municipal Judge, and take other reasonable measures to further the enforcement of ordinances and codes. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-94)  
Sec. 8-555. - Outdoor storage of unsightly items. 
No person shall store outdoors or permit the outdoor accumulation of any items upon property the person owns or occupies in the manner described in this section unless such storage or accumulation is expressly permitted under this section or Chapter 62. 
(a)  Storage of junk and unsightly items. 
(1)  No person shall store junked, discarded or inoperable property outdoors including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, or other vehicles, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, rubbish or other unsightly debris or any other items in state of material disrepair, except pursuant to permit issued by the Village Board. 
(2)  No person may store outdoors any property of a type that is not weatherproof and designed both to be used accessory to the lawful use of the property and kept outdoors. Property designed to be used and kept outdoors includes, subject to paragraph (1), items such as weatherproof patio furniture, storage boxes, mailboxes; grills, playground equipment and lawn ornaments. Such property shall further be stored in a manner and location that is neat and orderly in appearance and consistent with the purpose of the item. 
(3)  No person may store outdoors any unlicensed motor vehicle, unlicensed boat or unlicensed aircraft. 
(4)  No person may store outdoors any building materials, raw landscaping materials or equipment including wood, bricks, cement blocks, fencing materials, tools, or earth moving equipment except as reasonably necessary during an active, lawful building or landscaping project. 
(b)  Vehicle parking. 
(1)  The following number of vehicles (including, but not limited to, cars, motorcycles, trucks 12,000 lbs. or less, trailers, recreational vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, boats, water-craft, race cars, tractors, and vans) are allowed parked outside for the particular categories of residential property identified: 
a.  Four vehicles per detached single-family residence; 
b.  Three vehicles per dwelling unit for two-family detached dwellings; 
c.  Two vehicles per dwelling unit for properties on which three or more dwelling units exist; 
d.  In the RH-1 zoning district the number of vehicles listed under Section 8-555(b)(1)a. and b. shall not be limited provided they are owned by a person residing on the premises; and 
e.  Farm tractors, trailers or trucks licensed under Wis. Stats. §§ 341.25(3) or 341.30 may be parked or stored within the A-1 or RH-1 districts no closer than 300 feet to a residence and shall be owned or operated by a person residing on the property. 
(2)  When parked in the front or side yard areas of all lots in urban residential districts, the vehicles must be placed on a hard-surfaced or graveled pad or driveway and parked perpendicular to the curb. Distance from property lines shall be no less than three feet. 
(3)  In urban residential districts, all vehicles other than motor vehicles used for ordinary transportation shall be stored indoors or in the rear or side yard unless: 
a.  Space cannot be made reasonably available indoors or in the rear yard or side yard; or 
b.  No reasonable access to either the side yard or rear yard exists. 
(4)  Parking is permitted only for storage purposes. Recreational vehicles or boats shall not be: 
a.  Used for dwelling purposes, except for overnight sleeping for a maximum of 14 days in any one calendar year. Cooking is not permitted at any time. 
b.  Permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines, or electricity. The recreational vehicle or boat may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries and other purposes. 
c.  Used for storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the unit or essential for its immediate use. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the above, a recreational vehicle may be parked anywhere on the premises during active loading or unloading, and the use of electricity or propane fuel is permitted when necessary to prepare a vehicle for use. 
(6)  Parking or storage of a commercial truck, tractor, or trailer on any urban residential lot see Section 35-159(b). 
(c)  Firewood storage and debris from trees. 
(1)  Firewood storage is permissible in side and rear yards, but not more than 15 percent of the side and rear yard may be used for firewood storage at any one time. Firewood shall be neatly stacked but not closer than two feet to any lot line and not higher than six feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. Fences as used in this Section shall not include hedges and other vegetation. Firewood may not be stored in the front yard, except for temporary storage for not more than 30 days from the date of delivery. 
(2)  All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood, downed or cut trees, and fallen or cut branches greater than two inches in diameter or eight feet in length, shall be promptly and properly disposed of and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises unless useable as firewood and properly stored. Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-95; Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 2, 6-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-01 , §§ 8—12, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 8-556. - Conflict of ordinances; effect of partial invalidity. 
(a)  In any case where a provision of this Article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code of the Village existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived, the provision that established the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(b)  In any case where a provision of this Article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the Village existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived, which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provision of this Article shall be deemed to prevail and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they conflict with this Article. 
(c)  If any Section, Subsection, Paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Article, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this Article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-97)  
Secs. 8-557—8-575. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - PLUMBING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Enforcement of state plumbing code, Wis. Stats. § 62.17; inspection warrants, Wis. Stats. § 66.0119; plumbing systems, Wis. Stats. § 145.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-576. - Title. 
This Article shall be known as the "Plumbing Code of the Village of McFarland," and will be referred to in this Article as "this Article." 
(Code 1998, § 15-2-1)  
Sec. 8-577. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this Article is to provide minimum regulations, provisions and requirements in the Village to ensure safety and adequacy to persons and property wherever plumbing is installed and to all alterations or improvements, including replacement of any apparatus or device pertaining to plumbing. 
(b)  The provisions of this Article shall apply to every building, or portion of a building, devoted to a new use for which the requirements are in any way more stringent than the requirements covering the previous use. 
(Code 1998, § 15-2-2)  
Sec. 8-578. - State regulations adopted. 
(a)  Adopted by reference. Wis. Stats. Ch. 145, the Wisconsin Plumbing Code, Wis. Admin. Code Chs. Comm. 25 and 81—87; are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this Article with the same force and effect as though set out in full. 
(b)  To be on file. A copy of the Wisconsin Plumbing Code shall be on file in the offices of the Plumbing Inspector and/or the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1998, § 15-2-3)  
Sec. 8-579. - Plumbing permits. 
(a)  Required. No work contemplated by this Article shall be started until a permit therefor has been obtained from the Plumbing Inspector or authorized agent, provided no permit shall be required for minor repairs to faucets or the removal of stoppages in soil and waste pipes. 
(b)  Application. The application shall be in writing upon forms that the Plumbing Inspector shall provide and shall include the name of the owner and the description of the property on which the work is to be done, along with such pertinent information as the Plumbing Inspector may require, and shall state that the property owner and the applicant will be bound by and subject to the provisions of this Article. 
(c)  Issuance, term, suspension and revocation. When the Plumbing Inspector is satisfied that the work proposed by the applicant can be done in conformity with the provisions of this Article and after the appropriate fees have been paid to the Plumbing Inspector, the Plumbing Inspector shall issue the permit. Such permit shall allow for the continuous performance of the work named thereon. A permit shall automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 60 days without good and reasonable cause for the same as may be approved by the Plumbing Inspector and shall automatically expire on completion of the work for which it is used, provided the Plumbing Inspector may, upon notice, suspend or revoke such permit for violation of the provisions of this Article. 
(d)  Restrictions on issuance. 
(1)  No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of this Article until such violation has been corrected. 
(2)  No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person against whom an order issued by the Plumbing Inspector is pending, provided this restriction may be waived by the Plumbing Inspector. 
(e)  Appeals for failure to issue, suspension and revocation. Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the Plumbing Inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to suspend or revoke such permit or to order work stopped under Subsection (c) of this Section may obtain review of such determination pursuant to Section 8-526. 
(Code 1998, § 15-2-5)  
Sec. 8-580. - Plumbers to be licensed. 
All plumbing work shall be done only by a plumber licensed by the State of Wisconsin for such work, provided a property owner may make repairs or installations in a single-family building owned and occupied by that person as that person's home if a permit therefor is issued and the work is done in compliance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-2-6)  
Sec. 8-581. - Plumbing permit fees. 
The schedule of permit fees to be paid shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Such fees shall be paid to the Plumbing Inspector at the time the permit is issued. 
(Code 1998, § 15-2-9; Ord. No. 98-20, § 15, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 2004-26, § 16, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 2007-03, §§ 7, 8, 1-8-2007)  
Secs. 8-582—8-610. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, Wis. Stats. § 101.178. 
 
Sec. 8-611. - Title. 
This Article shall be known as the "Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code of the Village of McFarland" and will be referred to in this Article as "this Article." 
(Code 1998, § 15-3-1)  
Sec. 8-612. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this Article is to provide minimum regulations, provisions and requirements in the Village to ensure safety and adequacy to persons and property wherever heating, ventilating and air conditioning is installed and to all alterations or improvements, including replacement of any apparatus or device, pertaining to heating, ventilating and air conditioning. 
(b)  The provisions of this Article shall apply to every building, or portion of a building, devoted to a new use for which the requirements are in any way more stringent than the requirements covering the previous use. 
(Code 1998, § 15-3-2)  
Sec. 8-613. - State regulations adopted. 
(a)  Adopted by reference. Wis. Admin. Code Chs. Comm. 23 and 63—65 are adopted and by reference made a part of this Article with the same force and effect as though set out in full. 
(b)  To be on file. A copy of the Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code shall be on file in the offices of the Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Inspector and/or Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1998, § 15-3-3)  
Sec. 8-614. - Heating, ventilating and air conditioning permits required. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to construct, install, alter or repair any heating, ventilating or exhaust system (and appurtenance), fireplace or wood stove, replace a boiler, furnace, install stoker and conversion units in or for any building before securing a permit, except that in cases of emergency the contractor may proceed with the work and file the application for a permit within 24 hours thereafter (Sundays and holidays excepted). A heating permit will not be required for the installation of electric baseboard or bathroom heaters when installed as auxiliary heat; that is, to supplement the existing heating system designed and installed to satisfy the load requirements of the space to be heated. The reference to appurtenances shall include direct heaters, cooling coils, central residential air conditioning (cooling) and similar devices affecting the safety or operation of the heating system. 
(b)  Application. The application shall be in writing upon forms that the HVAC Inspector shall provide and shall include the name of the owner and the description of the property on which the work is to be done, along with such pertinent information as the HVAC Inspector may require, and shall state that the property owner and the applicant will be bound by and subject to the provisions of this Article. 
(c)  Issuance, term, suspension and revocation. When the HVAC Inspector is satisfied that the work proposed by the applicant can be done in conformity with the provisions of this Article and after appropriate fees have been paid to the HVAC Inspector, the HVAC Inspector shall issue the permit. Such permit shall allow for the continuous performance of the work named thereon. A permit shall automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 60 days without good reasonable cause for the same as may be approved by the HVAC Inspector and shall automatically expire on completion of the work for which it is issued, provided the HVAC Inspector may, upon notice, suspend or revoke such permit for violation of the provisions of this Article. 
(d)  Restrictions on issuance. Restrictions on HVAC permit issuances are as follows: 
(1)  No HVAC permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of this Article until such violation has been corrected. 
(2)  No HVAC permit shall be issued to any person against whom an order issued by the HVAC Inspector is pending, provided this restriction may be waived by the HVAC Inspector. 
(e)  Appeals for failure to issue, suspension or revocation. Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the HVAC Inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to suspend or revoke such permit or to order work stopped may obtain a review of such determination pursuant to Section 8-526. 
(f)  Data required as part of the permit application. All drawings submitted for approval shall be accompanied by sufficient data and information for the HVAC Inspector to determine if the capacity of the equipment and the performance of the equipment shall satisfy the requirements of this Section. The following data shall be submitted: 
(1)  Submit heat loss calculation in BTU per hour for each room to be heated. 
(2)  Include calculations for ventilation requirements. 
(3)  Submit one or more copies of complete drawings. When the heating and ventilation drawings require approval of the Department of Commerce (Industrial Safety and Buildings Division), one or more approved copies shall be submitted with the application. 
(4)  Summation of heating and ventilating load requirement. 
(5)  Installations shall be made to conform to approved drawings. 
(6)  Plot plan showing the location of the condensing unit for air conditioning. 
(7)  For solar systems, furnish an estimate of the amount of energy in BTUs to be delivered by the system on an annual basis, which estimate shall be based on the "F" chart analysis or another method appropriate to the system considered, and collector performance data as is determined by a recognized testing lab. 
(8)  For solar systems, furnish the collector tilt and azimuth angle and a solar path shading diagram for the proposed collector location indicating the shading between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. CST for the entire year. 
(9)  For solar systems, furnish a plot plan showing the proposed location of the solar collector and any tree and/or structure that presently casts a shadow within 20 feet of the proposed collector location. 
(10)  For solar systems, furnish a detailed drawing showing anchorage and bearing of collector supports. 
(11)  For solar systems, furnish detailed drawings of all piping, pumps, blowers, wiring, storage vessels, ductwork, dampers, valves, insulation and all other material that will be required to install the system. 
(Code 1998, § 15-3-5; Ord. No. 2009-27, § 1, 12-29-2009)  
Sec. 8-615. - Heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) inspections. 
(a)  In any new building or addition, immediately upon completion of those portions of the installation that are thereafter to be concealed or covered, the heating contractor shall notify the HVAC Inspector that said portions of the installations are ready for inspection; and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to lath over, plaster or cover up any heating work before such work has been inspected and a rough inspection card posted. The HVAC Inspector shall have the right and authority to order the removal of all such lath, plaster or other covering which may have been placed over such work as has not been inspected. The HVAC Inspector shall make inspections within two working days after notice. Final inspection on new installations is to be made upon completion of such work. Inspection of repairs, replacement or conversion work is to be made upon completion of such work. The heating contractor shall notify the HVAC Inspector as soon as the installation is complete and ready for inspection. 
(b)  Wherever any work or project governed by provisions of the HVAC Code and for which a permit has been issued, as provided herein, is being performed or carried on in violation of any of the provisions of said Code, it shall be the duty of the HVAC Inspector to post a printed notice to stop work signed by the HVAC Inspector on the premises where such work is in progress and to notify anyone in charge of such work on the premises of such stop work order. After the posting of such notice, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do any further work on such project until such time as the defects or violations of the HVAC Code have been eliminated to the approval of the HVAC Inspector. 
(c)  When the HVAC Inspector finds any installation in which there are violations of the Code, the HVAC Inspector shall issue a written order specifying the violation and stating the date by which these corrections shall be made. Any licensee failing or neglecting to comply with written orders at the discretion of the HVAC Inspector shall not be issued any further permits until such violations have been corrected and penalty fee paid. Failure or neglect to comply with the provisions of the HVAC Code and of the permit issued under this Article shall be considered a violation of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-3-6)  
Sec. 8-616. - Heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) permit fees. 
(a)  Before the Building Inspector issues an HVAC permit, the owner or the owner's agent shall pay to the Director of Public Works the fees established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for this purpose. 
(b)  All fees shall be doubled if work is commenced prior to issuance of permit. 
(Code 1998, § 15-3-9; Ord. No. 98-20, § 16, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 99-24, § 2, 12-13-1999; Ord. No. 2004-26, § 17, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 2006-01, §§ 8—10, 2-23-2006; Ord. No. 2007-03, §§ 9—12, 1-8-2007)  
Secs. 8-617—8-635. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - ELECTRICAL CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Electrical construction and certification of electricians, Wis. Stats. § 101.80 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-636. - Title. 
This Article shall be known as "the Electrical Code of the Village of McFarland" and will be referred to in this Article as "this Article." 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-1)  
Sec. 8-637. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is the practical safeguarding of persons and buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power and for other purposes. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-2)  
Sec. 8-638. - State electrical codes. 
This Article does hereby incorporate, adopt, and enforce, by reference, Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 16 (Wisconsin Electrical Code, Volume 2), which shall apply to all new one- and two-family residential buildings as well as alterations and additions to all existing one- and two-family residential buildings, to accessory buildings, and to new portions of moved buildings. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-3; Ord. No. 98-06, § 1, 8-10-1998)  
Sec. 8-639. - Intent. 
(a)  The intent of this Article is to: 
(1)  Provide the minimum regulations for the installation of electrical systems and to provide safe and stable design, good workmanlike methods, and for the uses of materials and equipment; 
(2)  Provide for the issuing of permits, interpretation of codes, inspection of installations, enforcement of this Article; and 
(3)  Provide for penalties for violation thereof. 
(b)  The Sections contained in this Article shall be binding alike upon the owner of a building or premises, every person in charge of or responsible for or who causes the construction, repair, alteration or improvement of any electrical system devices, fixtures, or equipment. 
(c)  This Article is not intended as a design specification nor an instruction manual for untrained persons. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-4; Ord. No. 98-06, §§ 2, 3, 8-10-1998)  
Sec. 8-640. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this Article shall apply to all electrical work and installations in the Village. 
(b)  This Article provides for the administration and enforcement, permits, fees, approval of materials, minimum installation standards, interpretations, and the correction of defective or obsolete installations. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-5; Ord. No. 98-06, § 4, 8-10-1998)  
Sec. 8-641. - Rules and definitions. 
(a)  All definitions as set forth in Chapter 1 of the National Electrical Code and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 16 shall apply. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-6; Ord. No. 98-06, § 5, 8-10-1998)  
Sec. 8-642. - Credentials. 
(a)  Contractors. No person, either individually, as a member of a firm, or as an officer or employee of a corporation, shall conduct the business of electrical wiring, maintenance, construction (either inside or outside), contracting, as a master electrician or electrical contractor unless such person holds the appropriate credential issued by the State of Wisconsin Department of Commerce or the City of Madison, and no electrical work except minor repair work as defined in Section 8-643 shall be done by a person not having such credential unless such person is under the employment of a person holding such credential. The Village may, however, issue a permit to the owner only for an existing single-family residence, which the owner and immediate family solely occupy, if the person desiring such permit can prove to the Electrical Inspector competence to do such work in conformity with all rules and regulations governing installation of electrical wiring in residences, and such person shall pay the same fee as required of electrical contractors under this Article. Nothing herein provided shall apply to servicing of electrical appliances by the manufacturer. 
(b)  Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person with credentials issued by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce to allow the use of the credentials, directly or indirectly, for the purposes of obtaining local permits for others, except that a person with the appropriate credentials may lawfully obtain permits for corporations or firms who are actively engaged in the electrical contracting business with a recognized business location, provided that such person be permanently employed by such firm or corporation on a full-time basis and in a supervisory position. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-7; Ord. No. 98-06, §§ 6—13, 8-10-1998)  
Sec. 8-643. - Electrical permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to enter upon the erection, construction, alteration, or change of any electrical installation, work or wiring, except minor repair work as defined in Subsection (b) of this Section, until a permit has been obtained from the Village by a person properly licensed for the category of work to be performed as set forth in Section 8-642. The application for said permit shall describe the proposed installation or work and give the location of the premises where the same is to be placed. No permit shall be issued unless satisfactory proof is furnished to the Village that the applicant has been employed to perform the work or installation and will be responsible for the performance thereof in the manner required by ordinance and by law. The fees for such permit shall be paid in full at the time of submitting the permit application. An amended permit shall be used to correct any permit fees due for work that was performed and was not listed on the original permit. All applications for permits shall be signed by the license holder. 
(b)  A permit shall be required for the installation of any outlet and any electrical wiring for use on any circuit, including wiring for so-called low voltage wiring for control of heating, ventilating, cooling, lighting, signal and communication equipment, excepting signal systems, operated by and/or in conjunction with communications systems installed and maintained by a public utility. 
(c)  Minor repair work shall be construed to mean the replacement of broken or defective sockets, snap, push or toggle switches, convenience outlets, lighting fixtures and portable electric appliances. 
(d)  In the event of an emergency occurring at night or days when the Village office is closed, when the immediate initiation of work is necessary for the protection of fire, health or property, such necessary work may be done without previously obtaining a permit, provided application for the required permit is obtained on the morning of the first business day following the start of such work and fees follow within ten days. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-8; Ord. No. 98-06, §§ 14—17, 8-10-1998)  
Sec. 8-644. - Penalty for failure to take out permits. 
(a)  In addition to the penalty hereinafter provided for violations of this Chapter, a penalty equal to the permit fee will be charged for failure to notify the Village and obtain a permit number before work is started, except in cases of emergency; and such penalty, together with the permit fees, shall be paid to the Village before any further permits may be issued to the person doing such work. 
(b)  The payment of such doubled fees shall not relieve any person from fully complying with all of the regulations of this Chapter, nor from any other penalties prescribed in this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-9)  
Sec. 8-645. - Inspections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to connect up the electrical wiring and equipment of any building to any electrical supply lines or to turn on the current, unless a certificate of inspection has been issued by an Electrical Inspector; and it shall be the duty of the electrical utility supplying electrical service to any building to secure a copy of the certificate of inspection from the Electrical Inspector before supplying service to such building. 
(b)  The Electrical Inspector shall make inspections of all electrical wiring and equipment, shall have the right to enter any building during reasonable hours in the discharge of the Electrical Inspector's duties, and shall have the authority to cause the disconnection of any wiring or equipment where such wiring or equipment in the Electrical Inspector's judgment is dangerous to life or property. All wires and wireways that are to be concealed shall be inspected before the concealment, and no other craft shall cover up or conceal such wires or wireways until the installation has been inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector. Upon completion of the construction and installation of the electrical wiring and equipment of any building, it shall be the duty of the firm, person, or corporation doing the same to notify the Electrical Inspector, who shall inspect the installation; if the installation is found to be in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Electrical Inspector shall authorize connection to the electrical service and the turning on of the electrical service and turning on of the current. 
(c)  An electrical contractor, firm, person or corporation who calls for an inspection when the work is not completed may be assessed an additional amount as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code per inspection. It is unlawful to occupy a new residential, commercial or industrial building or permit such a building to be occupied until final inspections have been made and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-10; Ord. No. 98-06, §§ 18, 19, 8-10-1998)  
Sec. 8-646. - Number of inspections allowed on permit. 
Each permit shall entitle the holder to as many inspections as are necessary to ensure all work is done according to applicable codes and ordinances. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-11)  
Sec. 8-647. - Fees for permits and inspections. 
The fees for permits and inspections are established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 15-4-12; Ord. No. 98-06, §§ 20—23, 8-10-1998; Ord. No. 98-20, § 17, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 2004-26, §§ 21, 22, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 2007-03, §§ 13, 14, 1-8-2007)  
Secs. 8-648—8-667. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - SITE EROSION CONTROL[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Site erosion control, Wis. Stats. § 61.354; special charges for services, Wis. Stats. § 66.0627; stormwater systems, Wis. Stats. § 66.0821; soil and water resource management practices, Wis. Stats. § 92.11; erosion control, Wis. Stats. § 281.33; stormwater discharge permits, Wis. Stats. § 283.33. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-668. - Authority. 
This Article is adopted pursuant to the guidelines in Wis. Stats. § 61.354. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-1)  
Sec. 8-669. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings. The Village Board finds that soil erosion from land development activities and subsequent development can disturb natural cover and land surfaces resulting in a change of run-off patterns that may have a detrimental effect on water quality and downstream uses. This is of particular concern in the Village, in which a substantial portion of the surface water of the Village is within the boundaries of the Yahara Monona Priority Watershed Project boundaries. Land development activities and subsequent development need to be strictly regulated to avoid damage to other properties and sensitive areas. Further, effective sediment and stormwater management depends upon proper planning, design and timely installation of conservation practices, as well as continuing maintenance practices. 
(b)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this Chapter to preserve the natural resources; to protect the quality of the waters of the state and Village; and to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the people, to the extent practicable by minimizing the amount of sediment, soil loss, and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharge from land development activities on the property to lakes, streams and wetlands. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-2; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-670. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Agricultural building. Any structure directly incidental or devoted primarily to agricultural land use activities such as barns, silos or storage structures for agricultural equipment. 
(b)  Agricultural land use. Use of land for planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or yarding of livestock. 
(c)  Best management practice (BMP). A practice, technique, or measure that is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion and/or water pollution from runoff both during and after land development activities. These can include structural, vegetative or operational practices. 
(d)  Commercial land use. Use of land for the retail or wholesale sale of goods or services. 
(e)  Construction site erosion control. Preventing or reducing soil erosion and sedimentation from land development activity. 
(f)  Control measure. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant pollution. 
(g)  Control plan. A written description of the number, locations, sizes and other pertinent information of control measures designed to meet the requirements of this Article submitted by the application for review and approval by the Building Inspector and/or Village Engineer. 
(h)  Erosion. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
(i)  Erosion control measure. A control measure used to meet the requirements of Section 8-672. 
(j)  Excavation. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the resulting conditions. 
(k)  Existing development. Buildings and other structures and impervious area existing prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this Article is derived. 
(l)  Fill. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location and shall include the resulting conditions. 
(m)  Gully erosion. A severe loss of soil caused by or resulting in concentrated flow of sufficient velocity to create a defined flow channel. 
(n)  Impervious surface. Any land cover that prevents rain or melting snow from soaking into the ground, such as roofs (including overhangs), roads, sidewalks, patios, driveways and parking lots. For purpose of this Chapter, all road, driveway or parking surfaces including gravel surfaces shall be considered imperious, unless specifically designed to encourage infiltration and approved by the Village. 
(o)  Infiltration. The process by which rainfall or runoff seeps into the soil. 
(p)  Land development activity. Any activity that changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. These land development activities include, but are not limited to, any manmade alteration of the land surface that results in a change in topography or existing vegetative and nonvegetative soil cover, which may lead to changes in stormwater runoff and result in increased soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state, clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities, and the construction or redevelopment of buildings, roads, parking lots, paved and unpaved areas and similar facilities. This term does not include agricultural land use activities. 
(q)  New development. Any of the following activities: 
(1)  Structural development, including construction of a new building or other structures; 
(2)  Expansion or alteration of an existing structure that results in an increase in the surface dimensions of the building or structure; 
(3)  Land development activities; or 
(4)  Creation or expansion of impervious surface. 
(r)  Pervious surface. A surface that allows infiltration of precipitation or surface flow during a large portion of a precipitation event. Lawns, fields and woodlands are examples of pervious surfaces. 
(s)  Plan. The erosion control plan required by Section 8-672. 
(t)  Runoff. The rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. 
(u)  Sediment. Solid earth material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface at a different site. 
(v)  Sedimentation. The deposition of eroded soils at a site different from the one where the erosion occurred. 
(w)  Sensitive area. Lakes, perennially flowing an intermittent streams or wetlands. 
(x)  Set of one-year design storms. The following rain intensities and rain volumes or corresponding values specific to the community for the storm durations of one-half, one, two, three, six, 12 and 24 hours that occur approximately one per year. The following are typical characteristics of these one-year storms for most of the state: 
Storm Duration 
(hours) 	Rain Intensity 
(inches/hour) 	Average Total Rain 
(inches) 
0.5 	1.8 	0.9 
1 	1.1 	1.1 
2 	0.7 	1.3 
3 	0.5 	1.5 
6 	0.3 	1.7 
12 	0.2 	2.0 
24 	0.1 	2.5 
 
(y)  Sheet and rill erosion. A loss of soil caused by sheet flow or shallow concentrated flow, and characterized by an absence of channeling or a relatively uniform loss across the exposed upper layer of the soil or shallow irregular scouring of the soil surface. 
(z)  Site. The bounded area described in an erosion control plan or stormwater management plan. 
(aa)  Slope. The net vertical rise over horizontal run, expressed as a percentage, which represents a relatively homogenous surface incline or decline over the area disturbed. 
(bb)  Soil loss rate. The rate, measured in tons per acre per year, at which soil movement occurs as a result of sheet and rill erosion and does not apply to ditches or areas of concentrated flows. 
(cc)  Unnecessary hardship. That circumstance where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with regulations unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-4; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-671. - Design criteria, standards and specifications for control measures. 
All control measures required to comply with this Article shall meet the design criteria, standards and specifications for the control measures based on accepted design criteria, standards and specifications identified by the Building Inspector and/or Village Engineer. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-5)  
Sec. 8-672. - Maintenance of control measures. 
All sedimentation basins and other control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this Article shall be maintained by the applicant or subsequent landowner during the period of land disturbance and land development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance and to prevent nuisance conditions. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-6)  
Secs. 8-673—8-702. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC EROSION CONTROL PLANS 
 
Sec. 8-703. - Applicability. 
Activities on public lands and on all private lands shall be subject to this Article if: 
(1)  There is a Subdivision of land or a land division, as those terms are defined in Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 and Chapters 41 and 56 including the Village's extraterritorial jurisdiction and wherever so applied, the Village may enter into intergovernmental cooperative agreements pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0301 to enhance enforcement of this Article. 
(2)  An area of 4,000 square feet or greater will be disturbed by grading, removal of protective ground cover or vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land disturbing activities, or activities on a slope of ten percent or more. 
(3)  Excavation, filling or a combination thereof exceeds 400 cubic yards or more of dirt, sand or other excavation or fill material. 
(4)  Any public street, highway, road or bridge is to be constructed, enlarged, relocated or substantially reconstructed. 
(5)  Any public or private utility laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging an underground pipe or facility for a distance of 300 feet or more. 
(6)  Land disturbing activity that disturbs more than 100 lineal feet of road ditch, grass waterway, or other land area where surface drainage flows in a defined open channel; including the placement, repair, or removal of any underground pipe, utility, or other facility within the cross section of the channel. 
(7)  Any new public or private road or access drive longer than 125 feet. 
(8)  Land development activity of any size that in the opinion of the Village Engineer may cause undue channel erosion, increased water pollution, or the transportation of particulate matter or which endangers downstream property or public safety. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-7(a); Ord. No. 2002-09, §§ 2—6, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 3—6, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-704. - Exemptions and clarifications. 
(a)  The following activities are exempt from all requirements of this Article: 
(1)  Any activity directly related to the planning, growing, and harvesting of agricultural crops. 
(2)  Construction of agricultural buildings, provided the resulting new total impervious surface area does not exceed 20,000 square feet. 
(3)  One- and two-family dwelling units regulated under the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code; these sites shall be regulated during the period that residential building permits are in effect, consistent with then-existing Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code requirements. 
(4)  State building projects subject to Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13), and state highway projects subject to Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 401. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the language of Subsection (a)(2) of this Section, activities unrelated to actual building construction shall be subject to all the requirements of this Article. These activities shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Land disturbing activity prior to excavation for foundation work. 
(2)  Landscaping. 
(3)  Installation of driveways, parking areas, and sidewalks. 
(4)  Earthwork on an area greater than 4,000 square feet on sites not directly related to structural concerns. 
(5)  Development of ponds and channelized watercourses, commercial parks, and landing strips or airport runways. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, §§ 7, 8, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 3, 7, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-705. - General plan requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Erosion control plans required under Section 8-703 may include consideration of adjoining landowners' cooperative efforts to control transport of sediment, and shall include the items required in Section 8-672. 
(b)  Plan elements. All erosion control plans shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Site boundaries superimposed on a USGS 7.5-minute topographical map; 
(2)  Cross sections of road and drainage ditches; 
(3)  Profiles within road and drainage ditches; 
(4)  Culvert sizes; 
(5)  Direction of flow of runoff; 
(6)  Watershed size for each drainage area; 
(7)  Design discharges for ditches and structural measures; 
(8)  Runoff velocities for particular projects: 
a.  The standard design shall include run-off velocities for the two-year 24-hour storm event; 
b.  Designs of detention basins shall include, in addition to the two-year 24-hour storm, runoff velocities for the ten-year 24-hour storm event; 
(9)  Fertilizer, mulching and seeding rates and recommendations; 
(10)  Time schedules for stabilization of ditches and slopes; 
(11)  Plans shall adhere to the following minimum standards: 
a.  Prevent gully erosion and limit off-site permissible annual aggregate soil loss for exposed areas resulting from sheet and rill erosion to an annual, cumulative rate not to exceed 7.5 tons per acre per year; 
b.  Plan compliance under Subsection (b)(2)k.1. shall be determined using the Natural Resource Service Technical Guide or other commonly accepted soil erosion control methodology approved by the Dane County Conservationist and the Village Engineer, which includes the following considerations: 
1.  Season of year; 
2.  Site characteristics; 
3.  Soil erodibility and slope; and 
c.  For internally drained sites, erosion control measures for plan approval need not attempt to regulate soil transportation within the limits of the disturbed area; 
(12)  Description of methods by which sites are to be developed, indicating how the project will be phased to minimize the extent of area disturbed throughout the construction period; 
(13)  A proposed timetable of steps to mitigate the erosion caused by land development activity, in a manner consistent with accepted erosion control methods suitable to the specific site, including a timetable for prompt revegetation; all revegetation by seeding must be completed by September 15. Any seeding not completed by September 15 must be accomplished using sod. Any vegetated areas not established by November 15, shall be considered as though no vegetation is established until April 15 of the following year at the soonest and may be subject to additional erosion control measures such as sod, erosion mat, increased application rates of seed and mulch, or other measures required by the Village Engineer; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure no increase in surface water drainage from sites during or after construction, unless water is discharged into existing, adequate drainage areas, specifying all stormwater management controls such as outlet control structures or basins necessary to comply with maximum permitted discharges; 
(15)  Provisions to prevent mud-tracking off-site onto public thoroughfares during the construction period; 
(16)  Special provisions for erosion control practices and maintenance on sites with disturbed slopes greater than ten percent; 
(17)  Special provisions for erosion control practices and maintenance on sites adjacent to wetlands or surface water bodies; and any proposed modifications to approved plans or alterations to accepted sequencing of land disturbing activities at the site shall be approved by the Village Engineer prior to implementation of said changes; 
(18)  Provisions to ensure streets are swept clean of sand, dirt, mud, trash, straw, etc., daily; 
(19)  Limits of disturbed area; 
(20)  Limits of impervious area; and 
(21)  Provisions to reduce dust by means of watering or application of polymers or other acceptable means of dust control. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-7(b); Ord. No. 2002-09, § 7, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 3, 8—13, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-706. - Content of standard erosion control plan for land development activity. 
Applicants submitting erosion control proposals not meeting the criteria for simplified plan checklist under Section 8-707 shall submit the following: 
(a)  Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions on a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet showing the site and immediately adjacent areas: 
(1)  Site boundaries of adjacent lands that accurately identify site location; 
(2)  Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; 
(3)  One-hundred-year floodplains, floodfringes and floodways; 
(4)  Location of the predominant soil types; 
(5)  Vegetative cover; 
(6)  Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site; 
(7)  Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads, highways and paving; and 
(8)  Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed two feet. 
(b)  Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes including site topography with the same contour interval as the existing site map. 
(c)  Site construction plan. A site construction plan including: 
(1)  Locations and dimensions of all proposed land development activities; 
(2)  Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles; 
(3)  Locations and dimensions of all construction site management control measures necessary to meet the requirement of this Article; 
(4)  Schedule of anticipated starting and completion dates of each land development activity, including the installation of erosion control measures needed to meet the requirement of this Article. 
(d)  Control measures during construction. Provisions of maintenance of the erosion control measures during construction and until permanent cover is well established. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-7(b)(3); Ord. No. 2002-09, § 7, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 3, 14, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-707. - Simplified plan checklist. 
Applicants may submit erosion control proposals using simplified checklists of standard erosion control practices to be installed on sites, on a standard form approved by the Village, wherever all of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  The site is not more than 20,000 square feet in area; 
(b)  The site is not adjacent to and does not directly drain into any sensitive areas nearby; and 
(c)  There is a slope of less than six percent throughout the site. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-7(c); Ord. No. 2002-09, § 7, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 3, 15, 3-28-2005)  
Secs. 8-708—8-727. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8-728. - Application. 
No person may begin, or receive a zoning permit for, any land development activity subject to this Article, without having received prior approval of an erosion control plan pursuant to Division 2 of this Article. The applicant shall submit an application for approval of an erosion control plan and pay an application fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. By submitting an application, the applicant authorizes Village enforcement officials to enter the site to obtain specific information required for an informed review of the erosion control plan. The applicant must provide the following when applying for approval of an erosion control plan: 
(a)  A completed application form signed by the landowner or including a notarized statement signed by the landowner authorizing the applicant to act as the landowner's agent and bind the landowner to the terms of this Article. 
(b)  A proposed erosion control plan. 
(c)  Copies of permits or permit applications or approvals required by any other governmental entity to begin land development activities. 
(d)  A proposed timetable and schedule for completion and installation of all elements of the erosion control and stormwater management plans and a detailed schedule for completion of construction. 
(e)  An estimate of the cost of completion and installation of all elements of the erosion control and stormwater management plans. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-8(a); Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 16, 17, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-729. - Review. 
Within 20 days of receipt of the application, the Village shall review the application. A simplified plan checklist pursuant to Section 8-707 may be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator, other staff or a Building Inspector certified by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce to review such plans. In all other cases, erosion control plans shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer. If the application and proposed plan are deficient, the approving official shall inform the applicant, in writing, of any deficiency and may either ask for additional information or disapprove the plan, giving written reasons for the disapproval. All deficiencies in the application and in the erosion control plan shall be corrected before an erosion control plan may be approved or a zoning permit issued. Upon approval of the Village Engineer or Building Inspector, the erosion control permit shall be issued by the Director of Public Works after the applicant has met all other requirements of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-8(b); Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 16, 18, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-730. - Duration of erosion control permit. 
Any approval of an erosion control plan shall be valid for a period of 180 days. Upon application, the Director of Public Works may extend the period for an additional 180 days, and may require additional erosion control measures as a condition for the extension if necessary to meet the requirements of this Article. The applicant shall not be required to pay any additional fee for any extension granted. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-8(c); Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 16, 19, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-731. - Surety. 
As a condition of approval and issuance of an erosion control permit, the Director of Public Works may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other form of surety satisfactory in form and amount to the Village Attorney to assure execution of the approved erosion control plan and any conditions upon the erosion control permit. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-8(d); Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 16, 20, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-732. - Conditions of permit. 
All erosion control permits shall require the permittee to: 
(a)  Notify the Director of Public Works at least 48 hours prior to commencing any land disturbing activity; 
(b)  Notify the Director of Public Works of completion of any erosion control measures within ten days after their installation; 
(c)  Obtain written permission from the Director of Public Works and/or Village Engineer prior to modifying the erosion control plan; 
(d)  Install all erosion control measures identified in the approved erosion control plan; 
(e)  Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, control measures and other facilities identified in the erosion control plan; 
(f)  Promptly repair any situation or erosion damage to adjoining services and drainageways resulting from the land disturbing or land developing activities regulated under the terms of the erosion control plan, initiating the repair within 24 hours of notice of the situation or erosion damage; 
(g)  Inspect the erosion control measures after each rain of one-half-inch or more and at least once per week, and to initiate repairs within 24 hours; 
(h)  Allow the Director of Public Works and/or Village Engineer to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion control plan and for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the erosion control plan; 
(i)  Keep a copy of the erosion control plan on the site; 
(j)  Clean up and remove all off-site incidental mud-tracking on adjacent public thoroughfares by the end of each working day using proper disposal methods; 
(k)  Sweep all streets affected by permitted project clean of sand, dirt, mud, trash, straw, etc., daily. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-8(e); Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 16, 21, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-733. - Implementation of plan. 
The erosion control plan shall be implemented prior to the start of any land disturbing or land developing activity, and shall be maintained throughout the entire term of such activity. The applicant is responsible for successful completion of the erosion control plan as approved. Upon issuance of the permit, the permittee shall be liable for any and all costs incurred resulting from noncompliance with the permittee's approved plan. When a permittee seeks to transfer an interest in property subject to an approved erosion control plan prior to completion of the steps necessary to attain soil stabilization, the permittee must secure approval from the Village to transfer any portion of the permittee's responsibility for implementing the approved plan to another party. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-8(f); Ord. No. 2005-04, § 16, 3-28-2005)  
Secs. 8-734—8-764. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 8-765. - Inspections. 
As part of the plan approval process, the Director of Public Works or designee shall establish a minimum number of inspections to be conducted consistent with the land development activity proposed to be undertaken. The site of any regulated land development activity shall be inspected once every 30 days, or more frequently as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-9(a); Ord. No. 2005-04, § 22(a), 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-766. - Verification. 
Within ten days after completion of installation of all required erosion control measures in an approved plan, and when soil stabilization has been achieved, the permittee shall notify the Village to arrange a final inspection to verify plan compliance. This inspection shall not relieve the permittee from the responsibility to maintain erosion control measures or uphold plan requirements as set forth in Section 8-705. The Village shall inspect the property to verify compliance with the erosion control plan within ten days of notification of soil stabilization. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-9(b); Ord. No. 2005-04, § 22, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-767. - Plan or permit amendments. 
Any proposed modifications to approved plans, construction schedules or alterations to accepted sequencing of land development site activities shall be approved by the Village in consultation with the plan review agency prior to implementation of said changes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04, § 22(b), 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-768. - Noncompliance. 
Whenever the Village finds any noncompliance with the provisions of this Article, the Village may attempt to communicate with the owner or person performing the work to obtain immediate and voluntary compliance if such person is readily available. The following enforcement actions shall also be taken: 
(a)  Notice. 
(1)  If an inspection reveals any noncompliance with an approved erosion control plan, the Director of Public Works or designee shall notify the permittee by certified or registered mail or personal service of all specific instances of noncompliance. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule of remedial action and additional enforcement action which may be taken. 
(2)  Upon receipt of written notification from the Director of Public Works or designee, the permittee shall bring the work into compliance with the erosion control plan as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the Director of Public Works or designee in the notice. The permittee shall initiate such corrective action within 24 hours of notification by the Village. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  The Director of Public Works or designee shall issue and post a stop work order under either of the following circumstances: 
a.  Any land disturbing or land developing activity regulated under this Article is being undertaken without a permit; 
b.  Any noncompliance with an approved erosion control plan in which the permittee has failed to initiate corrective action within 24 hours or to follow the specifications and schedule set forth by the Director of Public Works or designee under Subsection (a)(1) of this Section. 
(2)  The stop work order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises subject to the erosion control plan and indicate the date of issuance, site location, reason for posting and the signature of the inspector posting the order. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this Article to remove the stop work order from the premises without authorization from the Director of Public Works. 
(4)  Upon issuance of a stop work order, the only permissible activity on the project shall be actions to bring the project into compliance with the approved plan following the specifications and schedule set forth by the Director of Public Works or designee, or actions to assure issuance of an approved erosion control plan until such time as the Director of Public Works or designee certifies compliance. 
(5)  In addition to posting a stop work order, the Village may provide written notification to the owner or contractor by personal service, by certified mail, or facsimile transmission. 
(c)  Injunction. Every violation of this Article is a public nuisance. Compliance with this Article may be enforced by an action for an injunction by the Village pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(8). It shall not be necessary for the Village to prosecute for forfeiture pursuant to Subsection (d) of this Section before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
(d)  Forfeitures. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall also be subject to a forfeiture, as provided in Section 1-16. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-9(c)—(f); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 40, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 22(d), 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-769. - Transfers of ownership. 
(a)  When a permittee transfers ownership, possession or control of property subject to an uncompleted erosion control plan, the party who is successor in interest to any portion of said real estate shall bear responsibility to control soil erosion on that portion of the real estate under the successor's ownership, possession or control, and shall comply with the standards provided in this Article. 
(b)  When ownership, possession or control of property subject to an uncompleted erosion control plan is transferred from one party to another, the former owner shall notify the party taking possession of the current status of compliance with the approved erosion control plan, shall provide a copy of said notice to the Director of Public Works, and shall provide a copy of the approved erosion control plan to the purchaser if the soil on the property being transferred has not been stabilized prior to the date of transfer. 
(c)  Transfers of interest in real estate subject to an approved, uncompleted erosion control plan may be completed consistent with this Article under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The transferee shall file a new, approved erosion control plan; 
(2)  The transferee shall obtain an approved assignment from the Village as sub-permittee to complete that portion of the approved erosion control plan for the transferred property; or 
(3)  The permittee shall provide the Village with a surety or a cash deposit in an amount sufficient to complete the work proposed in the approved plan. At the time of transfer, the permittee may seek to reduce any prior surety to the amount necessary to complete the remaining work. If the permittee enters into escrow agreements with transferees to complete an approved plan, such escrowed amounts shall be available to the Village to attain plan compliance. When an approved erosion control plan is not completed as proposed, the Director of Public Works or designee may obtain the surety to complete remaining work to achieve plan compliance. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-9(g); Ord. No. 2005-04, § 22(e), 3-28-2005)  
Secs. 8-770—8-791. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - APPEALS 
 
Sec. 8-792. - Generally. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the Director of Public Works, Village Engineer or the Building Inspector in administering this Article. Upon appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize variances from the provisions of this Article, which are not contrary to the public interest and where owning to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Article will result in unnecessary hardship. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute for zoning boards of appeals in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-10(a); Ord. No. 2005-04, § 23, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-793. - Who may appeal. 
Any applicant, permittee, landowner or land user may appeal any order, decision or determination made by the Director of Public Works, Village Engineer and/or Building Inspector in administering this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-10(b); Ord. No. 2005-04, § 23, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-794. - Stay of enforcement. 
Filing an appeal under this Section shall automatically stay all enforcement actions relating to the subject matter of the appeal until the appeal is decided. Filing of an appeal shall not prevent the Village from performing work or correcting conditions to the extent necessary to protect against conditions which threaten to cause personal injury or damage to off-site property. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-10(c); Ord. No. 2005-04, § 23, 3-28-2005)  
Secs. 8-795—8-811. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Stormwater and erosion control, Wis. Stats. § 61.354; special charges for services, Wis. Stats. § 66.0627; stormwater systems, Wis. Stats. § 66.0821; soil and water resource management practices, Wis. Stats. § 92.11; stormwater and erosion control, Wis. Stats. § 281.33; stormwater discharge permits, Wis. Stats. § 283.33. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-812. - Authority. 
(a)  This Article is adopted by the Village pursuant to its general police powers and Wis. Stats. § 61.354. This Article supersedes all conflicting and contradictory stormwater management regulations previously enacted. 
(b)  The provisions of this Article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the Village Board. 
(c)  The Village Board hereby designates the Director of Public Works to administer and enforce the provisions of this Article. 
(d)  The requirements of this Article do not limit any additional stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by WPDES Stormwater Permits issued by the Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Stats. § 283.33. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-20; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-20), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 1, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-813. - Findings. 
The Village Board finds that uncontrolled stormwater runoff from land development activity has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Specifically, uncontrolled stormwater runoff can: 
(a)  Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing stream bed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, and diminishing stream base flows; 
(b)  Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational, and water supply uses by increasing loadings of nutrients and other urban pollutants; 
(c)  Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads; 
(d)  Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading; 
(e)  Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainageways and other drainage facilities; 
(f)  Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and volumes; 
(g)  Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding; and 
(h)  Diminish the public enjoyment of natural resources. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-21; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-21), 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 8-814. - Purpose. 
The general purpose of this Article is to set forth stormwater management requirements and criteria that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare, and to the environment due to runoff of stormwater from land development activity. Specific purposes are to: 
(a)  Maintain and enhance safe and healthful conditions; 
(b)  Regulate longterm, post-development stormwater discharges from land development activities; 
(c)  Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater, prevent and control soil erosion, prevent and control water pollution, and protect spawning grounds, fish, and aquatic life; 
(d)  Reduce runoff velocities and retain sediments and pollutants on the site to the maximum practical extent; 
(e)  Control the overflow of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies; 
(f)  Prevent undue channel erosion; 
(g)  Control increases in the scouring of drainageways and transportation of particulate matter; 
(h)  Prevent conditions that endanger downstream property; 
(i)  Control building sites, placement of structures, and promote sound economic growth; and 
(j)  Provide services to maintain and enhance the quality of life within the community. 
To this end, the Village will manage stormwater to protect, maintain and enhance the natural environment, human life, diversity of fish and wildlife, and recreational use of waterways within the Village limits. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-22; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-22), 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 8-815. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Agricultural land use/activity. Use of land for planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption; pasturing or yarding of livestock; growing and tending of gardens and trees; and harvesting of trees. 
(b)  Best management practice (BMP). A practice, technique, or measure that is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion and/or water pollution from runoff both during and after land development activities. These can include structural, vegetative or operational practices. 
(c)  Business day. A day on which Village offices are routinely and customarily open for business. 
(d)  Common plan of development or sale. All lands included within the boundary of a certified survey or Subdivision plat, or with a series of adjacent surveys or plats created for the purpose of development or sale where multiple, separate and distinct land-developing activity may take place at different times and on different schedules. 
(e)  Community water supply. A public water supply system that serves at least 15 service connections used by yearround residents or regularly serves at least 25 yearround residents. Any water supply system serving seven or more homes, ten or more mobile homes, ten or more apartment units or ten or more condominium units shall be considered a community water supply system unless the owners of the property served by the water supply system provide information to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works indicating that 25 yearround residents will not be served. 
(f)  Design storm. A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, spatial distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total rainfall depth. 
(g)  Discharge volume. The quantity of runoff discharged from the land surface as the result of a rainfall event. 
(h)  Division of land. Either a minor or major Subdivision as defined in this Section respectively. 
(i)  Existing development. Buildings, other structures and impervious surfaces existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this Article is derived. 
(j)  Fee in lieu. A payment of money to the Village in place of meeting all or part of the stormwater performance standards required by this Article. 
(k)  Financial guarantee. A cash deposit, performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantee submitted to the Village by an applicant to ensure that requirements of this Article are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
(l)  Gross aggregate area. The total area, in acres, of all land located within the property boundary containing the land development activity. 
(m)  Groundwater enforcement standard. A numerical value expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater, which is adopted under Wis. Stats. § 160.07 and Wis. Admin. Code § NR 140.10 or Wis. Stats. § 160.09 and Wis. Admin. Code § NR 140.12. 
(n)  Groundwater preventive action limit. A numerical value expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater, which is adopted under Wis. Stats. § 160.15 and Wis. Admin. Code §§ NR 140.10, 140.12, or 140.20. 
(o)  Heavily disturbed site. A site where an area of land is subjected to significant compaction due to the removal of vegetative cover or earth moving activities, including filling. 
(p)  Hydrologic soil group (HSG). The same meaning as used in the runoff calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices. 
(q)  Impervious surface. A surface that does not allow infiltration during precipitation events. Rooftops, sidewalks, parking lots, and street surfaces are examples of impervious surface. 
(r)  Infiltration. The process by which rain or surface runoff penetrates into the soil. 
(s)  Land development activity. Any activity that changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. These land development activities include, but are not limited to, any manmade alteration of the land surface that results in a change in topography or existing vegetative and nonvegetative soil cover, which may lead to changes in stormwater runoff and result in increased soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state, clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities, and the construction or redevelopment of buildings, roads, parking lots, paved and unpaved areas and similar facilities. This term does not include agricultural land use activities. 
(t)  Lightly disturbed site. A site where an area of land is subjected to minor compaction due to the limited removal of vegetative cove or earth moving activities. 
(u)  Maintenance agreement. A legal document that is filed with the County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
(v)  Municipal water supply system. A community water supply system owned by a city, village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district, public inland lake and rehabilitation district, municipal water district or a federal, state, county or municipal owned institution for congregate care or correction, or a privately owned water utility serving the foregoing. 
(w)  New development. Any of the following activities: 
(1)  Structural development, including construction of a new building or other structures; 
(2)  Expansion or alteration of an existing structure that results in an increase in the surface dimensions of the building or structure; 
(3)  Land disturbing activities; or 
(4)  Creation or expansion of impervious surface. 
(x)  Nonerosive velocity. A rate of flow of stormwater runoff, usually measured in feet per second, that does not erode soils. Nonerosive velocities vary for individual sites, taking into account topography, soil type, and runoff rates. 
(y)  Nonstorm discharge. A discharge to the stormwater management system created by some process other than stormwater runoff. 
(z)  Nonstructural measure. A practice, technique, or measure to reduce the volume, peak flow rate, or pollutants in stormwater that does not require the design or installation of fixed stormwater management facilities other than residential development. Development of the following land uses: commercial, industrial, government and institutional, recreation, transportation, communication, and utilities. The term does not include agricultural land use activity. 
(aa)  Peak flow discharge rate. The maximum rate at which a unit volume of stormwater is discharged resulting from a rainfall event. 
(bb)  Pervious surface. A surface that allows infiltration of precipitation or surface flow during a large portion of a precipitation event. Lawns, fields and woodlands are examples of pervious surfaces. 
(cc)  Plan. An erosion control plan under Article XVII, Division 2 of this Chapter or a stormwater management plan under Division 4 of this Article. 
(dd)  Post-construction stormwater discharge. Any stormwater discharged from a site following the completion of land development activity and final site stabilization. 
(ee)  Post-development condition. The extent and distribution of land cover types, anticipated to occur under conditions of full development that will influence stormwater runoff and infiltration. 
(ff)  Practice/management practice. A practice, technique or measure that is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil corrosion and/or water pollution from runoff both during and after land development activities. 
(gg)  Predevelopment condition. The extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of land development activity, assuming that all land uses prior to land development activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner. Lands shall be deemed to have runoff characteristics equivalent to NRCS TR-55 Curve Numbers (CNs) of 30, 58, 71 and 78 for Hydrologic Soil Groups A, B, C, and D, respectively. This term is used to match pre- and post-development stormwater peak flows and volumes as required by this Article. In a situation where cumulative impervious surface created after the adoption of the ordinance from which this Article is derived exceeds the 20,000 square feet threshold, the pre-development conditions shall be those prior to any land disturbance. 
(hh)  Pretreatment. The treatment of stormwater prior to its discharge to the primary stormwater treatment practice in order to reduce pollutant loads to a level compatible with the capability of the primary practice. 
(ii)  Redevelopment. Any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding 4,000 square feet of land disturbance performed on sites where the entire existing site is predominantly developed to commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential uses. Projects may include a mix of redevelopment and new impervious surfaces. 
(jj)  Residential. A residential dwelling containing one or two dwelling units. 
(kk)  Runoff. The rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. 
(ll)  Runoff curve number (RCN). The meaning used in the runoff calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Construction Service Engineering, Field Manual for Conservation Practices. 
(mm)  Site. The bounded area described in an erosion control plan or stormwater management plan. 
(nn)  Site restriction. Any physical characteristic that limits the use of a stormwater best management practice. 
(oo)  Slope. The net vertical rise over horizontal run, expressed as a percentage, which represents a relatively homogeneous incline or decline over an area of land. 
(pp)  Storm events. The precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a specified recurrence interval for Dane County, Wisconsin. For example, one-year, two-year, ten-year and 100-year storm events mean the precipitation amounts that occur over a 24-hour period that have a recurrence interval of one, two, ten and 100 years. 
(qq)  Stormwater conveyance system. Any method employed to carry stormwater runoff from a land development activity to the waters of the state. Examples of methods include: swales, channels and storm sewers. 
(rr)  Stormwater management measure. Structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
(ss)  Stormwater management plan. One or more documents that together identify the actions to be taken and/or the practices to be installed to reduce stormwater peak discharge rates, volumes and pollutant loads, from land development activity, to levels meeting the purpose and intent of this Article. 
(tt)  Stormwater management system plan. A comprehensive plan developed to address stormwater drainage and nonpoint source pollution control problems on a watershed or sub-watershed basis, and which meets the purpose and intent of this Article. 
(uu)  Stormwater runoff. That portion of precipitation falling during a rainfall event, or that portion of snow- and ice-melt, that does not soak into the soil, and flows off the surface of the land and into a natural or artificial conveyance network. 
(vv)  Street reconstruction. Removal and replacement of the road subgrade, where existing stormwater conveyance systems are modified. 
(ww)  Structural measure. A source area practice, conveyance measure, and/or end-of-pipe treatment that is designed to control stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and peak discharge rates. Channels, weirs, swales, detention and retention ponds, and overflow and outfall structures are all examples of structural measures to contain storm events. 
(xx)  Structure. Any human-made object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon, or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed. 
(yy)  Submission. The plan materials and/or hydrologic calculations required to be presented to the Village for review. 
(zz)  TR-55. Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, published by the Engineering Division, United States Natural Resource Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture, June 1992. 
(aaa)  Unnecessary hardship. That circumstance where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with regulations unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this Article. 
(bbb)  Village Engineer. The individual designated to administer the Article. 
(ccc)  Well. An excavation or opening into the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater. 
(ddd)  Wetland functional value. The type, quality, and significance of the ecological and cultural benefits provided by wetland resources, such as: flood storage, water quality protection, groundwater recharge and discharge, shoreline protection, fish and wildlife habitat, floral diversity, aesthetics, recreation, and education. 
(eee)  Wetlands. An area where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions. These wetlands include existing, mitigated and restored wetlands. 
(fff)  WPDES. Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(ggg)  WPDES stormwater permit. A permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Stats. § 283.33 that authorizes the point source discharge of stormwater to waters of the state. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-23; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-23), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 2, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-816. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Applicability. This Article applies to land development activities within the boundaries of the Village as well as all land development activities subject to the Village's extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction that meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Any development other than agricultural development after August 22, 2001, that results in the cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet of impervious surface to the site; 
(2)  Agricultural development where the resulting new total impervious surface area exceeds 20,000 square feet; 
(3)  Any development that requires a Subdivision plat, as defined in Chapter 56; 
(4)  Any development that requires a Certified Survey Map, as defined in Chapter 56 for property intended for commercial or industrial use; 
(5)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that meets any of the criteria herein, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules; 
(6)  Land development activity of any size that, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, is likely to result in stormwater runoff which exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, which causes undue channel erosion, which increases water pollution or the transportation of particulate matter, or which endangers downstream property or public safety. 
(b)  Exemptions and clarifications. Exemptions from the provisions of this Article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any activity directly related to the planting, growing and harvesting of agricultural crops that creates no impervious surfaces shall be exempt from all requirements of this Article. 
(2)  Redevelopment where no additional impervious surfaces are created shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 8-844. Where new impervious surfaces are created in a redevelopment project, all provisions of this Article shall apply to the new impervious surfaces. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-24; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-24), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 3, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-817. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any land development activity initiated after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the Article provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with said provisions. 
(b)  The Director of Public Works shall notify the responsible owner or operator by certified mail of any noncomplying land development activity. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be taken. 
(c)  Upon receipt of written notification from the Director of Public Works, the permit holder shall correct work that does not comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions of this permit. The permit holder shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the Director of Public Works in the notice. 
(d)  If the violations to this Article are likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities or waters of the state, the Director of Public Works or designee may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the Village, plus interest and legal costs, shall be billed to the record owner of the property, and if not paid, shall be entered on the tax rolls and collected as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(e)  The Director of Public Works is authorized to post a cease and desist order on all land development activity in violation of this Article, or to request the Village Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order from a court. 
(f)  The Director of Public Works may revoke a permit issued under this Article for noncompliance with Article provisions. 
(g)  Any permit revocation or cease and desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the Director of Public Works or by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(h)  The Director of Public Works is authorized to refer any violation of this Article, or of a cease and desist order issued pursuant to this Article, to the Village Attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings. 
(i)  Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a forfeiture under Section 1-16. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(j)  Every violation of this Article is a public nuisance. Compliance with this Article may be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the Village. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
(k)  When the Director of Public Works determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this Article has failed to follow practices set forth in the stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth in said stormwater management plan, the Director of Public Works or a party designated by the Director of Public Works may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The Director of Public Works shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial guarantee posted pursuant to Section 8-880. Where such a guarantee has not been established, or where such a guarantee is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627, and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-31; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-29), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, §§ 42, 43, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 18, 3-28-2005)  
Secs. 8-818—8-842. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 8-843. - Stormwater discharge quality. 
Unless otherwise provided for in this Article, all land development activities subject to this Article shall establish on-site management practices to control the quality of stormwater discharged from the site. On-site management practices shall be used to meet the following minimum standard: 
(a)  Best management practices. Best management practices shall be designed in accordance with the methods set forth in the latest edition of the Wisconsin Storm Water Manual, Part 2: Technical Design Guidelines for Storm Water BPM's as published and amended by the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, the Natural Resources Conservation Service's Field Office Technical Guide, Chapter 4, and any other technical methodology approved by the Dane County Conservationist. 
(b)  Runoff volumes and peak flow rates. Runoff volumes and peak flow rates used in designing the water quality components of stormwater structures shall be calculated using the "Small Storm Hydrology" method set forth in the latest edition of the Wisconsin Storm Water Manual, Part 2: Technical Design Guidelines for Storm Water BPMs as published and amended by the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(c)  Discharge of urban stormwater pollutants to wetlands. Discharge of urban stormwater pollutants to wetlands without pre-treatment shall be minimized. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the Village Engineer. Significant changes to wetland functional values due to stormwater pollutant loads shall be avoided. 
(d)  Stormwater pretreatment and infiltration. Stormwater discharges shall be pre-treated prior to infiltration, to prolong maintenance of the infiltration practice and to prevent discharge of stormwater pollutants at concentrations that will result in exceedances of groundwater preventive action limits or enforcement standards established by the Department of Natural Resources in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 140. Stormwater shall not be injected underground through excavation or openings that would violate Wis. Admin. Code § NR 812.05. Stormwater infiltration is prohibited under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Stormwater runoff is generated from highly contaminated source areas at manufacturing or industrial sites; 
(2)  Stormwater runoff is carried in a conveyance system that also carries contaminated, nonstormwater discharges; 
(3)  Stormwater runoff is generated from active construction sites. 
(e)  Stormwater ponds and infiltration devices. Stormwater ponds and infiltration devices shall not be located closer to water supply wells than indicated in this Subsection without first notifying the Village Engineer: 
(1)  Within 100 feet from a nonpublic water supply well; 
(2)  Within 400 feet from a municipal water supply well. 
(f)  Land development activities. Land development activities with stormwater runoff reaching Outstanding or Exceptional Resource Waters as identified in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 102, may be required to use additional stormwater management measures that exceed the minimum requirements in this Article. 
(g)  Stormwater management goals. The following standards shall be met whenever possible, and proposed design, suggested location and implementation of practices to meet these goals shall be included in plans: 
(1)  For existing development, design practices to retain soil particles greater than 40 microns on the site (20 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year 24-hour storm event, according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension. 
(2)  For street reconstruction, design practices to retain soil particles greater than 20 microns on the site (40 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year, 24-hour storm event, according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension. 
(h)  Oil and grease control. For all stormwater plans for commercial or industrial developments and all other uses where the potential for pollution by oil and/or grease exists, the first 0.5 inches of runoff will be treated. This requirement may be waived by the Village Engineer only when the applicant can demonstrate that installation of such practices is not necessary. 
(i)  Sediment control. Plans shall be designed, engineered and implemented to achieve the following results: 
(1)  For new development, design practices to retain soil particles greater than five microns on the site (80 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year 24-hour storm event (2.5 inches over 24 hours), according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension; 
(2)  For redevelopment resulting in exposed surface parking lots and associated traffic areas, design practices to retain soil particles greater than 20 microns on the entire site (40 percent reduction) resulting from a one-year 24-hour storm event, according to approved procedures, and assuming no sediment resuspension. Under no circumstances shall the site's existing sediment control level or trapping efficiency be reduced as a result of the redevelopment. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-25(a); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-25(a)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, §§ 4—6, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-844. - Stormwater discharge quantity. 
Unless otherwise provided for in this Article, all land development activities subject to this Article shall establish on-site management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharged from the site as described in this Article. Infiltration of stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas shall be incorporated to the maximum extent practical to provide volume control in addition to control of peak flows. On-site management practices shall be used to meet the following minimum performance standards, however, redevelopment projects shall not be required to comply with Subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this Section: 
(a)  Runoff rate control. 
(1)  Hydrologic calculations. All runoff calculations shall be according to the methodology described in TR-55, or other methodology approved by the Village Engineer and the Dane County Conservationist. The pre-development runoff curve number (RCN) used in such calculations shall be 30 for HSG A, 58 for HSG B, 71 for HSG C, and 78 for HSG D. 
Heavily disturbed sites will be lowered one permeability class for hydrologic calculations. Lightly disturbed areas require no modification. Where practices have been implemented to restore soil structure to predeveloped conditions, no permeability class modification is required. 
(2)  Design standards. All stormwater facilities shall be designed, installed and maintained to effectively accomplish the following: 
a.  Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the two-year, 24-hour storm event (2.9 inches over 24 hours duration); 
b.  Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the ten-year, 24-hour storm event (4.2 inches over 24 hours duration); 
c.  Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 25-year, 24-hour storm event (4.8 inches over 24 hours duration); 
d.  Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 100-year, 24-hour storm event (6.0 inches over 24-hour duration). 
(b)  Peak flow rates of stormwater runoff. The proposed land development shall not increase peak flow rates of stormwater runoff from that which would have resulted from the same storm occurring over the site with the land in its predevelopment conditions for storms of 24-hour duration and recurrence intervals of two, ten, 25, and 100 years. 
(c)  Conveyance systems. All stormwater conveyance systems within the proposed development, and receiving surface runoff from the proposed development, shall be designed to completely contain peak storm flows as described in this Article. Calculations for determining peak flows for conveyance system sizing shall use curve numbers based on the existing or future proposed land use for off-site areas (whichever results in the highest peak flows), and the proposed land use for the on-site areas. Appropriate post-development curve numbers are described in TR-55. 
(d)  Open channel conveyance systems. For open channel conveyance systems the peak flow from the 100-year, 24-hour storm shall be completely contained within the channel bottom and banks. 
(e)  Storm sewer pipes. For storm sewer pipes the peak flow from the ten year, 24-hour storm shall be completely contained within the pipes. 
(f)  Determination of peak flow rates and volume of runoff. Determination of peak flow rates and volume of runoff for purposes of meeting the requirements of this Article shall be computed based on the principals and procedures described in TR 55. The Village Engineer may approve other calculation methods. 
(g)  Rainfall distributions. The rainfall distributions for the storm events shall be based on the NRCS Type II storms as described in TR-55. 
(h)  Increases or decreases in the hydrology of wetlands. Increases or decreases in the hydrology of wetlands shall be minimized to the extent practical. Where such changes are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using methods acceptable to the Village Engineer. Significant changes to wetland functional values shall be avoided as defined in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 103. 
(i)  Runoff from the 100-year storm. Runoff from the 100-year storm to public right-of-way stormwater easements, or environmental corridors where downstream accommodations are not in place shall be maintained. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-25(b); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-25(b)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 7, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-845. - Outlets. 
Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable outlet capable of carrying designed flow as required in Section 8-844(a)(2), at a nonerosive velocity. Outlet design must consider flow capacity and flow duration. This requirement applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to stormwater conveyance or waterbody. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-25(c)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 8, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-846. - Infiltration. 
All downspouts, driveways and other impervious areas shall be directed to pervious areas, unless infeasible. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-25(d)), 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 8-847. - Exceptions. 
The Village Engineer may establish stormwater management requirements either more stringent or less stringent than those set forth in this Article, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
(a)  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the Village Engineer and that is required to be implemented by this Article. 
(b)  The proposed land development shall limit peak flow rates of storm runoff after development to 100 percent of that which would have resulted from the same storm occurring over the site with the land in its predevelopment conditions for storms of 24-hour duration and recurrence intervals of two, ten, 25, and 100 years. 
(c)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. This requires that the off-site facility is in place, is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the requirements of this Article, and has a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice. 
(d)  The Village Engineer finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to site conditions. 
(e)  The Village Engineer determines that an added level of protection is needed to protect sensitive resources. 
(f)  The Village Engineer determines that no benefit will result from construction of specified management requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-26(c); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-25(e)), 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 8-848. - Fee in lieu of on-site stormwater management practice. 
Where the Village Engineer otherwise determines that it would be inappropriate to require a site to meet the minimum stormwater management requirements on-site, the applicant shall pay a fee to the Village. 
(a)  The fee shall be based upon the differing costs and requirements for managing stormwater arising from residential, commercial, or industrial development. Based upon a study by the Village Engineer performed in 1995, the fees established in lieu of on-site stormwater management practices shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  The fee shall be adjusted annually as of January 1 of each year by the Village Engineer, utilizing the Consumer Price Index—All Urban Consumers for Midwest Region, prepared by the United States Department of Labor. 
(c)  All such fees collected shall be placed in a designated fund and used exclusively for land acquisition, engineering, design, construction, administration and maintenance of regional stormwater management practices. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-26(d); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-25(f)), 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 8-849. - General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management measures. 
The following considerations shall be observed in managing stormwater runoff: 
(a)  Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this Article. 
(b)  Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety. 
(c)  Stormwater management measures used in developing the stormwater management plan should be considered according to the following order of preference. Limitations to this order of preference that may be recognized include natural site characteristics, financial feasibility, type of development, legal rights in redirecting stormwater flows and The Wisconsin Stormwater Manual, Part Two: Technical Design Guidelines for Stormwater BMP's (Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources). 
(1)  On-site infiltration measures for rooftop, sidewalk, parking lot and driveway runoff. 
(2)  On-site and off-site infiltration-style conveyance measures. 
(3)  Off-site wet detention measures. 
(4)  On-site wet detention measures. 
(5)  Extended detention measures. 
(6)  Off-site infiltration measures. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-26(e); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-25(g)), 9-9-2002)  
Secs. 8-850—8-876. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 8-877. - Required. 
No landowner or operator may undertake a land development activity subject to this Article without receiving a stormwater management plan permit from the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-27(a); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-26(a)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-878. - Application and fee. 
Unless specifically excluded by this Article, any landowner or operator desiring a stormwater management plan permit shall submit to the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector a stormwater management plan permit application on a form provided by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector for that purpose. The completed application form must be signed by the landowner or include a notarized statement signed by the landowner authorizing the applicant to act as the landowner's agent and bind the landowner to the terms of this Article. Unless otherwise exempted by this Article, a stormwater management plan permit application must be accompanied by the following information before the stormwater management plan permit application will be considered by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector: 
(a)  A stormwater management plan; 
(b)  A maintenance agreement; 
(c)  Any payment of proposed fees in lieu of on-site stormwater management practices; 
(d)  A deed restriction as provided for in this Article; 
(e)  Copies of permits or completed permit applications or approvals required by any other governmental entity to begin land disturbing activity; 
(f)  A proposed timetable and schedule for completion and installation of all elements of approved erosion control and stormwater management plans and a detailed schedule for completion of construction; 
(g)  An estimate of the cost of completion and installation of all elements of the approved erosion control and stormwater management plans; 
(h)  The nonrefundable permit fee. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-27(b); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-26(b)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-879. - Review and approval of permit application. 
The Director of Public Works or Building Inspector shall forward a copy of all application materials to the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall review the application materials and provide a recommendation to the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
(a)  Within 30 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all documents required by this Article, the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. The Director of Public Works or Building Inspector shall base the decision on requirements set forth in this Article. 
(b)  If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved, the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector shall issue the permit. 
(c)  If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance agreement are disapproved, the applicant may revise the stormwater management plan or agreement, or may appeal the decision of the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector as provided for in this Article. 
(d)  If additional information is submitted, the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector shall have 30 business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
(e)  If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance agreement are disapproved, the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-27(c); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-26(c)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-880. - Financial guarantee. 
The Village may require the submittal of an installation financial guarantee and a maintenance financial guarantee, in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney, prior to issuance of the permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed and maintained by the permit holder as required by the stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation financial guarantee shall be determined by the Village Engineer, not to exceed the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 25 percent. The amount of the maintenance financial guarantee shall be determined by the Village Engineer, not to exceed the maintenance costs estimated in the stormwater plan for the period during which the permit holder has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantees shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. Conditions for the release of financial guarantees are as follows: 
(a)  The installation financial guarantee shall be released in full only upon submission of as built plans in written and digital form and written certification by a registered professional engineer in the state that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this Article. The Village Engineer may make provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the installation financial guarantee based on the completion of various development stages. 
(b)  The maintenance financial guarantee, minus any costs incurred by the Village to conduct required maintenance, shall be released at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another private entity, via an approved maintenance agreement, or to the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-30; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-26(d)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-881. - Permit conditions. 
All permits issued under this Article shall be subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this Article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The Director of Public Works or Building Inspector may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the permittee. An action by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with this Article. 
(a)  Compliance with this permit does not relieve the permit holder of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(b)  The permit holder shall design, install, and maintain all structural and nonstructural stormwater management measures in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, and this permit prior to the start of any land disturbing activity through the duration of the project. 
(c)  The permit holder shall notify the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector at least two business days before commencing any work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan, and within five business days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If required as a special condition, the permit holder shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector so that practice installations can be inspected during construction. 
(d)  Once installed, stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection to determine if they are in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and ordinance. The inspection must be made by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector, or other competent professional selected by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector. The Director of Public Works or Building Inspector shall notify the permit holder in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit. The permit holder is further required to submit a certificate of completion, stating the completion of the permitted work in accordance with the plans, as well as all applicable Village, state and federal requirements. The certificate must be signed by the permit holder, the contractor and the designer engineer. 
(e)  The permit holder shall notify the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved stormwater management plan. The Director of Public Works or Building Inspector may require that the proposed modifications be submitted for approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management plan and execution. 
(f)  The permit holder shall maintain all stormwater management practices specified in the approved stormwater management plan until the practices either become the responsibility of the Village, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved maintenance agreement. 
(g)  The permit holder authorizes the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector to perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater management measures into conformance with the approved stormwater management plan, and consents to a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627, or to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under this Article. 
(h)  If so directed by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector, the permit holder shall repair at the permit holder's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainageways caused by stormwater runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(i)  The permit holder shall permit property access to representatives of the Village for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit. 
(j)  Where a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all runoff off-site, it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to obtain from adjacent property owners any easements or other necessary property interests concerning flowage of water. Issuance of this permit does not create or affect any such rights. 
(k)  The permit holder is subject to the enforcement actions identified in this Article if the permit holder fails to comply with the terms of this permit. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-27(d); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-26(e)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 41, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-882. - Inspections. 
The site of any regulated land disturbing activity shall be inspected once every 30 days, or more frequently as determined by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector during the plan construction phase with assistance from the plan review agency staff. 
(a)  Within ten days after installation of all practices in an approved stormwater management plan, the permittee shall notify the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector and submit drawings documenting construction. The person who designed the stormwater management plan for the permittee shall submit as-built certification to ensure that constructed stormwater management practices and conveyance systems comply with the specifications included in the approved plans. At minimum, as-built certification shall include a set of drawings comparing the approved stormwater management plan with that was constructed. Other information shall be submitted as required by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector or designee. 
(b)  The Director of Public Works or Building Inspector or designee shall inspect the property to verify compliance within ten days of notifications. 
(c)  Maintenance is the responsibility of the owner, and facilities are subject to inspection and orders for repairs. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-883. - Deed restriction. 
A deed restriction notifying future landowners of applicable stormwater management practice maintenance requirements, timetables and the potential liability imposed by this Chapter for failure to bring the property into compliance with this Article after notification, shall be recorded with the Dane County Register of Deeds prior to issuance of a permit. The foregoing information shall also be noted on every plat and Certified Survey Map. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-26(f)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-884. - Permit duration. 
Permits issued under this Article shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the Village Engineer notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under Section 8-881. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-27(e); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-26(g)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-885. - Transfers of ownership. 
(a)  When a permittee transfers ownership, possession or control of property subject to an uncompleted stormwater management plan, the party who is successor in interest to any portion of said real estate shall bear responsibility to control soil erosion on that portion of the real estate under the successor's ownership, possession or control, and shall comply with the standards provided in this Chapter. 
(b)  When ownership, possession or control of property subject to an uncompleted stormwater management plan is transferred from one party to another, the former owner shall notify the party taking possession as to the current status of compliance with the approved stormwater management plan, also providing a copy of said notice to the Village Engineer, and shall provide a copy of the approved stormwater management plan to the purchaser if the soil on the property being transferred has not been stabilized prior to the date of transfer. 
(c)  Transfers of interest in real estate subject to an approved, uncompleted stormwater management plan may be completed consistent with this Chapter under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The transferee shall file a new, approved stormwater management plan; 
(2)  The transferee shall obtain an approved assignment from the Village as subpermittee to complete that portion of the approved stormwater management plan for the transferred property; or 
(3)  The permittee shall provide the Village with a surety or a cash deposit in an amount sufficient to complete the work proposed in the approved plan. At the time of transfer, the permittee may seek to reduce any prior surety to the amount necessary to complete the remaining work. If the permittee enters into escrow agreements with transferees to complete an approved plan, such escrowed amounts shall be available to the Village to attain plan compliance. When an approved stormwater management plan is not completed as proposed, the Village Engineer may obtain the surety to complete remaining work to achieve plan compliance. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-27(i); Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-26(h)), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9, 3-28-2005)  
Secs. 8-886—8-903. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Site erosion control and stormwater management, Wis. Stats. § 61.354. 
 
Sec. 8-904. - Requirements. 
(a)  Enumerated. The stormwater management plan required under this Article shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 14 of the Dane County Ordinances, as well as the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; person responsible for installation of stormwater management practices; person responsible for maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party. 
(2)  A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land Subdivision plat. Include a USGS 7.5-minute topographical map showing the property boundaries of the proposed development. 
(3)  Predevelopment site conditions, including: 
a.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following: 
1.  Site location and legal property description; 
2.  Predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups; 
3.  Existing cover type and condition; 
4.  Topographic contours of the site at the scale not to exceed two feet; 
5.  Topography and drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; 
6.  Watercourses that may effect or be affected by runoff from the site; 
7.  Flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections, including time of travel and time of concentration applicable to each; 
8.  Watershed boundaries used in determinations of peak flow discharge rates and discharge volumes from the site; 
9.  Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; 
10.  Limits of the 100-year floodplain; 
11.  Location of wells located within 1,200 feet of stormwater detention ponds, infiltration basins, or infiltration trenches; 
12.  Delineation of wellhead protection areas delineated pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.16. 
b.  Computations of peak flow discharge rates and discharge volumes for the two-year/24-hour, ten-year/24-hour, 25-year/24-hour design storm events and 100-year/24-hour storm events. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The computations shall be made for each discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross referenced to the required maps. 
(4)  Post-development site conditions, including: 
a.  Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and wetlands. 
b.  Explanation of any restrictions or stormwater management measures in the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and Village ordinances. 
c.  One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet showing: 
1.  Revised pervious land use including vegetative cover type and condition; 
2.  Impervious land use including all buildings, structures, and pavement; 
3.  Revised topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two feet; 
4.  Revised drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; 
5.  Locations and dimensions of drainage easements; 
6.  Locations of maintenance easements specified in the maintenance agreement; 
7.  Flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections, including time of travel and time of concentration applicable to each; 
8.  Location and type of all stormwater management conveyance and treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; 
9.  Location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainageway; watershed boundaries used in determinations of peak flow discharge rates and discharge volumes; 
10.  Any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site. 
d.  Computation of the runoff volume resulting from the 1.5-inch rainfall, and computations of peak flow discharge rates and discharge volumes for the two-year/24-hour, ten-year/24-hour, 25-year/24-hour storm events, and 100-year/24-hour storm events. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The computations shall be made for each discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required maps. 
e.  Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the placement and design of stormwater management measures. 
f.  Results of impact assessments on wetland functional values. 
g.  Design computations and all applicable assumptions for the stormwater conveyance (open-channel, closed-pipe) system. 
h.  Design computations and all applicable assumptions for stormwater quality practices (sedimentation type, filtration-type, infiltration-type) as needed to show that practices are appropriately sized to accommodate runoff from the 1.5-inch rainfall. For practice designs that depart from those specified in the Wisconsin Storm Water Manual, Part 2, the results of continuous simulation modeling, conducted according to the guidelines established in this manual, shall be presented in such a way as to show the reduction in average annual total suspended solids loading from the developed site. 
i.  Detailed drawings including cross sections and profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and treatment practices. 
j.  Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of each stormwater management practice. 
k.  Other information as needed by the Village Engineer to determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management measures with the provisions of this Article. 
l.  All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be certified by a competent engineer, to be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and in accordance with The Wisconsin Storm Water Manual, Part 2: Technical Design Guidelines for Storm Water BMP's as published and amended by the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, the Natural Resources Conservation Service's Field Office Technical Guide, Chapter 4, and any other technical methodology approved by the Dane County Conservationist. 
(b)  Exceptions. The Village Engineer may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management performance standards under this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-28; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-27), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, §§ 10—12, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-905. - Maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Required. The maintenance agreement required for stormwater management practices under this Article shall be an agreement between the Village and the permittee to provide for maintenance of stormwater management practices beyond the duration period of the permit. The agreement shall be recorded as a property deed restriction by the permit applicant with the Dane County Register of Deeds so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management practices. Where this Article is applied pursuant to the Village's extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction, the town in which the land disturbing activity occurs the town shall be a party to the maintenance agreement. 
(b)  Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  Identification of all stormwater management practices and designation of the drainage areas served by these practices. 
(2)  A schedule for regular maintenance and a description of the maintenance procedures for each aspect of the stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater management plan. 
(3)  Identification of the person or party responsible for long-term maintenance of the stormwater management practices. 
(4)  The responsible party shall maintain stormwater management practices in accordance with the schedule included in the agreement. 
(5)  The Village Engineer is authorized to access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement. 
(6)  The Director of Public Works or designee shall maintain public records of the results of all site inspections, shall inform the party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and shall indicate any specific corrective actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into accordance with this Article. 
(7)  The party designated under the maintenance agreement shall perform the corrective action upon receipt of notification of deficiencies by the Director of Public Works or designee and within the time established by the Director of Public Works. 
(8)  If the responsible party does not make the corrective actions within the specified time period, the Director of Public Works or designee is authorized to perform the corrective actions identified in the inspection report. The Director of Public Works shall enter the costs of these corrective actions on the tax rolls, and collect the money as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(c)  Exceptions. The Village may waive the requirement for a separate maintenance agreement for cases in which: 
(1)  The Village intends to accept the practices for ownership and maintenance upon completion of construction and expiration of any warranty period; and 
(2)  An alternative agreement, such as a Village/developer agreement, is in place to provide for maintenance during the warranty period. 
(d)  Termination. The maintenance agreement shall be terminated at such time that responsibility for maintenance of the stormwater management practice is legally transferred to the Village or agency acceptable to the Village, through a written, binding agreement. The termination date for the maintenance agreement shall be the date upon which the legal transfer of maintenance responsibility to the Village or agency is made effective. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-29; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-28), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, §§ 13—17, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-906. - Appeals. 
(a)  Village Board. The Village Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the Director of Public Works or designee in administering this Article. The Village Board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. The Village Board may consider recommendations on appeals made by the Plan Commission and the Public Utilities Committee. 
(b)  Variances. The Village Board may authorize variances from the provisions of this Article that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owning to special conditions a literal enforcement of this Article will result in unnecessary hardship. 
(c)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the Village Board may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any officer, department, or board of the Village affected by any decision hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-32; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-30), 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 19, 3-28-2005)  
Sec. 8-907. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, ordinances or approvals previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, in cases where previous approvals did not allow the proper restriction of runoff and pollutant levels, the provisions of this Article shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-32), 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 8-908. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Article shall be held to be the minimum requirements to be met by an applicant, and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1(15-5-33), 9-9-2002)  
Sec. 8-909. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for erosion control plans. Each applicant desiring to undertake a regulated activity subject to this Chapter shall submit to the Director of Public Works a fee required by the following fee schedule: 
(1)  Simplified plan checklists. As established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  Sites larger than 20,000 square feet in area and two acres or less in area. As established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(3)  Sites larger than two acres in area and five acres or less in area. As established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(4)  Sites larger than five acres in area. The applicant shall be responsible for paying a fee equal to the actual cost to the Village for all engineering work and inspections incurred by the Village in connection with review of the erosion control plan and inspections of the implementation of the plan. At the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall prepay the estimated fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Following review of the plan, the Village Engineer shall estimate the total cost of the Village Engineer's review and inspections in connection with the review and implementation of the plan. If the amount is estimated to be more than the $1,000.00 deposited with the application, the Director of Public Works shall require the applicant to deposit with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, in escrow, the remaining sum required by the Village Engineer's estimate. 
(b)  Fees for stormwater management plans. Each applicant desiring an activity regulated by this Article, shall submit to the Director of Public Works a fee required by the following schedule: 
(1)  Stormwater management plan without detention plan. As established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  Stormwater management plan with detention plan. As established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  Payment; accountability. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall pay bills submitted for engineering and inspection out of the funds escrowed under Subsection (a)(4) of this Section. In the event the amount deposited with the Village Clerk-Treasurer falls below 25 percent of the amount required to be deposited, the Director of Public Works or designee shall require the permittee to replenish the escrow to the original amount required hereunder. Upon final acceptance of implementation of the erosion control plan, the amounts remaining in the escrow shall be refunded to the applicant. An account of all fees paid by the Village and the status of the escrow shall be provided to the permittee at least quarterly. In the event the applicant or permittee defaults in establishing or replenishing the escrow, the Village may take enforcement action as contemplated under Article XVII, Division 4 of this Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 15-5-40; Ord. No. 98-20, § 18, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 16, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 3-28-2005; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 53—55, 6-26-2017)  
Secs. 8-910—8-936. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - ACCESS TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 8-937—8-960. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 
 
Sec. 8-961. - Statement of purpose. 
The Village is committed to providing adequate access by disabled or visually impaired persons to public buildings. This Division provides for a grievance procedure providing for prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 USC 794 states, in part, that "no otherwise qualified handicapped individual … shall, solely by reason of his handicap, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance …." 
(Code 1998, § 15-6-1(a))  
Sec. 8-962. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  Complaints should be filed with the Village Building Inspector, who has been designated to coordinate Section 504 compliance. 
(b)  A complaint should be filed in writing or verbally, contain the name and address of the person filing it, and briefly describe the alleged violation of the regulations. 
(c)  A complaint should be filed within 30 days after the complainant becomes aware of the alleged violation. 
(d)  An investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow a filing of a complaint. The investigation will be conducted by an appropriate person designated by the Village Building Inspector who should review the Handicapped Requirements Handbook published by the Federal Programs Advisory Service. 
(e)  A written determination as to the validity of the complaint and description of the resolution, if any, shall be issued by the designated person and a copy forwarded to the complainant no later than 30 days after its filing. 
(f)  The Section 504 coordinator shall maintain the files and records of the Village relating to the complaints filed. 
(Code 1998, § 15-6-1(b))  
Sec. 8-963. - Appeals. 
(a)  The complainant may appeal the decision of the Section 504 coordinator where the complainant is dissatisfied with the resolution. The appeal request shall be made within seven days to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(b)  The grievance shall be heard by the Village Board within 15 working days after the filing of an appeals request. The grievance shall be heard at the Municipal Center at a convenient time fixed by the Village Board. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give at least three days' written notice to the applicant by first class mail of any such grievance hearing. 
(c)  Either party to the grievance may be represented, present evidence by testimony or otherwise, cross-examine witnesses and make argument either in person or by an agent of their choosing. Proceedings may, and, upon request of the applicant, shall, be recorded. 
(d)  The decision of the Village Board on the grievance appeal shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The decision of the Village Board shall be rendered within three working days of the close of the hearing and the Village Board shall immediately upon rendering the decision mail a copy thereof by first class mail to the applicant at the current post office address given in the applicant's application and record a copy of its determination with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(Code 1998, § 15-6-1(c); Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 56, 57, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 8-964. - Other remedies. 
The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint filed hereunder shall not be impaired by the person's pursuit of other remedies such as the filing of a Section 504 complaint. Utilization of this grievance procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies. However, the Village believes that resolution of the complaint will be more promptly achieved if the Village is able to provide a remedy before the complaint is brought to an external organization. 
(Code 1998, § 15-6-1(d))  
Sec. 8-965. - Due process. 
This Article shall be construed to protect the substantive rights of interested persons, to meet appropriate due process standards and to ensure that the Village complies with Section 504 regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 15-6-1(e))  
Chapter 11 - BUSINESSES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Licensees required to pay local taxes, assessments and claims. 
(a)  Nonpayment of taxes or forfeitures. The Village shall not issue or renew any license to transact any business within the Village: 
(1)  For any purposes for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the Village are delinquent and unpaid. 
(2)  For any person who is delinquent in payment: 
a.  Of any taxes, assessments or other claims owed the Village; or 
b.  Of any forfeiture resulting from a violation of any Village ordinance. 
(b)  Applicability. This Section shall apply to licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(c)  Denial of renewal. An application for renewal of a license subject to this Chapter shall be denied pursuant to the provisions of Subsection (a) of this Section only following notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by Subsection (d) of this Section. 
(d)  Hearing. Prior to any denial of an application for renewal of a license, including denials pursuant to Subsection (a) of this Section, the applicant shall be given notice and opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  With respect to licenses renewable under Article II, Division 2 of this Chapter, notice and opportunity for hearing shall be as provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.12, as amended from time to time. 
(2)  With respect to licenses other than those described in Subsection (a) of this Section, the Village Board or its assignee shall notify the applicant in writing of the Village's intention not to renew the license and shall provide the applicant with an opportunity for hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the intended action and shall establish a date, not less than three days nor more than ten days after the date of the notice on which the applicant shall appear before the Village Board. If the applicant shall fail to appear before the Village Board on the date indicated on the notice, the Village Board shall deny the application for renewal. If the applicant appears before the Village Board on the date indicated in the notice and denies that the reasons for nonrenewal exist, the Village Board shall conduct a hearing with respect to the matter. At the hearing, both the Village and the applicant may produce witnesses, cross examine witnesses and be represented by counsel. The applicant shall, upon request, be provided a written transcript of the hearing at the applicant's expense. If the Village Board determines the applicant shall not be entitled to renewal pursuant to Subsection (a) of this Section, the application for renewal shall be denied. 
(e)  Other grounds for hearing. Where an individual, business or corporation wishes to appeal the Village Clerk-Treasurer's decision not to issue a license or permit under this Article on grounds other than those specified in Subsections (a)—(d) of this Section, the applicant may file a request in writing with the Village Clerk-Treasurer that the matter be referred to the Village Board. A public hearing shall be scheduled within 14 calendar days by the Village Board. All parties may be represented by counsel. The Village Board shall consider all relevant information and shall render a decision which shall be binding. 
(Code 1998, § 7-9-1; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 132, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 58, 6-26-2017)  
Secs. 11-2—11-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOL BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. § 125.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 11-21—11-43. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES AND INTOXICATING LIQUOR 
 
Sec. 11-44. - Wisconsin Statutes adopted. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 125, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Article. Any future amendment, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this Article in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of alcohol beverage control. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-1) 
State Law reference— Alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. § 125.01 et seq.  
Sec. 11-45. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article the terms "alcohol beverages," "intoxicating liquors," "sell," "sold," "sale," "restaurant," "club," "retailer," "person," "fermented malt beverages," "wholesalers," "retailers," "operators," and "nonintoxicating beverages" shall have the meaning given them by Wis. Stats. § 125.02. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Business. All lawful activity contemplated to be conducted on the licensed premises at the time such license was issued. 
(b)  Operate or be operated. The conducting of business, during all such times of the day in which such business is normally conducted, and shall mean that such business is open for business to the general public during such times. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-2) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 125.02.  
Sec. 11-46. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall vend, sell, deal or traffic in or have possession of with intent to vend, sell, deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in any quantity whatever, or cause the same to be done, without having procured a license as provided in this Article nor without complying with all the provisions of this Article, and all statutes and regulations applicable thereto, except as provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 125.26, 125.27, 125.28 and 125.51. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-3)  
Sec. 11-47. - Classes of licenses. 
(a)  Retail "Class A" intoxicating liquor license. A retail "Class A" intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer under the authority of the Village Board, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors only in original packages or containers and to be consumed off the premises so licensed. 
(b)  Retail "Class B" intoxicating liquor license. A retail "Class B" intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer under authority of the Village Board, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on the premises so licensed and in the original package or container in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time, to be consumed off the premises, except that wine may be sold in the original package or otherwise in any other quantity to be consumed off the premises. 
(c)  Retail "Class C" license. A Retail "Class C" license when issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer under authority of the Village Board, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell, or offer for sale, and authorizes the retail sale of wine by the glass or in an opened original container for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(d)  Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. A Class "A" retailer's fermented malt beverage license, when issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer under the authority of the Village Board, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages only for consumption away from the premises where sold and in the original packages, containers or bottles. 
(e)  Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. A Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license, when issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer under the authority of the Village Board, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell, or offer for sale, fermented malt beverages, either to be consumed upon the premises where sold or away from such premises. The holder may also sell beverages containing less than one-half of a percentum of alcohol by volume, without obtaining a special license to sell such beverages. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-4(a)—(d), (h)(2); Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 74—77, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 59, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Class "B" license issuance, Wis. Stats. §§ 125.26, 125.34(5)(6); nonintoxicating beverage, Wis. Stats. § 66.0433.  
Sec. 11-48. - Class "B" license. 
(a)  Issued. Such license may be issued after July 1. The license shall expire on the following June 30. 
(b)  Application. Class "B" licenses may be issued to any person qualified under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5). Such licenses may not be issued to any person acting as agent for or in the employ of another except that this restriction does not apply to a hotel or restaurant which is not a part of or located on the premises of any mercantile establishment, or to a bona fide club, society or lodge that has been in existence for at least six months before the date of application. A Class "B" license for a hotel, restaurant, club, society or lodge may be issued in the name of an officer who shall be personally responsible for compliance with this Article. Except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.31. Class "B" licenses may not be issued to brewers or fermented malt beverages wholesalers. Except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.29, beginning on May 5, 1994, a Class "B" license may not be issued to a person holding a wholesaler's license issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.28 or to a person who has a direct or indirect ownership interest in a premises operating under a wholesaler's license issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.28. 
(c)  Renewal. Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 125.26(2)(b)2.a, a person who holds a Class "B" license and a wholesaler's license issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.28, both of which licenses were issued before May 5, 1994, may, subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 125.04 and 125.12, renew and continue to hold both licenses. If a person holding a Class "B" license and a wholesaler's license under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(2)(b)2.b fails to renew either license, is denied renewal of either license under Wis. Stats. § 125.12 or has either license suspended or revoked under Wis. Stats. § 125.12, the person is subject to Wis. Stats. § 125.26(2)(b)2.a. 
(d)  Hotels. Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 125.04(3)(a)3. and (9), a Class "B" license authorizes a person operating a hotel to furnish a registered guest who has attained the legal drinking age with a selection of fermented malt beverages in the guest's room, which is not part of the Class "B" premises. Fermented malt beverages furnished under this Subsection shall be furnished in original packages or containers and stored in a cabinet, refrigerator or other secure storage place. The cabinet, refrigerator or other secure storage place must be capable of being locked. The cabinet, refrigerator or other secure storage place shall be locked, or the fermented malt beverages shall be removed from the room, when the room is not occupied and when fermented malt beverages are not being furnished under this Subsection. A key for the lock shall be supplied to a guest who has attained the legal drinking age upon request at registration. The hotel shall prominently display a price list of the fermented malt beverages in the hotel room. Fermented malt beverages may be furnished at the time the guest occupies the room, but for purposes of this Chapter, the sale of fermented malt beverages furnished under this Subsection is considered to occur at the time and place that the guest pays for the fermented malt beverages. Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 125.32(3), the guest may pay for the fermented malt beverages at any time if the guest pays in conjunction with checking out of the hotel. An individual who stocks or accepts payment for alcohol beverages under this Subsection shall be the licensee, the agent named in the license if the licensee is a corporation or limited liability company or the holder of a manager's or operator's license or be supervised by one of those individuals. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-4(d); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 77, 1-27-2002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions Wis. Stats. § 125.26(2), (2m).  
Sec. 11-49. - Temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license. 
(a)  License. As provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.26(1) and (6), temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to county or local fair associations or agricultural societies, to houses of worship, lodges or societies that have been in existence for at least six months before the date of application and to posts of veterans' organizations authorizing the sale of fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic or similar gathering, at a meeting of the post, or during a fair conducted by the fair association or agricultural society. A license issued to a county or district fair licenses the entire fairgrounds where the fair is being conducted and all persons engaging in retail sales of fermented malt beverages from leased stands on the fairgrounds. The county or district fair to which the license is issued may lease stands on the fairgrounds to persons who may engage in retail sales of fermented malt beverages from the stands while the fair is being held. Such license is valid for dates as approved by the Village Board. 
(b)  Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the president or corresponding officer of the society or association making such application and shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer together with the appropriate license fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Any person claiming to represent any group other than the one applied for shall, upon conviction thereof, to be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Section 1-16 and will be ineligible to apply for a temporary Class "B" license for one year. The license shall specify the location, hours and dates of license validity. If the application is for a license to be used in a Village park, the applicant shall specify the main point of sale facility. Licensees under this category shall fully comply with the restrictions prescribed in Sections 11-56—11-66. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-4(e); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 78, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 60, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 125.26(1), (6).  
Sec. 11-50. - Temporary "Class B" wine license. 
(a)  License. Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 125.51(10), temporary "Class B" licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to county or local fair associations or agricultural societies, to houses of worship, lodges or societies that have been in existence for at least six months before the date of application and to posts of veterans' organizations authorizing the sale of wine in an original package, container or bottle or by the glass if the wine is dispensed directly from an original package, container or bottle at a particular picnic or similar gathering, at a meeting of the post, or during a fair conducted by the fair association or agricultural society. No fee may be charged to a person who, at the same time, applies for a temporary Class "B" beer license under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6), or the same event. A license issued to a county or district fair, licenses the entire fairgrounds where the fair is being conducted and all persons engaging in retail sales of wine from leased stands on the fairgrounds. The county or district fair to which the license is issued may lease stands on the fairgrounds to persons who may engage in retail sales of wine from the stands while the fair is being held. 
(b)  Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the president or corresponding officer of the society or association making such application and shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer together with the appropriate license fee. Any person claiming to represent any group other than the one applied for shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Section 1-16 and will be ineligible to apply for a temporary "Class B" wine license for one year. The license shall specify the location, hours and dates of license validity. If the application is for a license is to be used in a Village park, the applicant shall specify the main point of sale facility. Licensees under this category shall fully comply with the restrictions prescribed in Sections 11-56—11-66. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-4(f); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 79, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 61, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Temporary "Class B" wine license, Wis. Stats. § 125.51(10).  
Sec. 11-51. - Wholesaler's license. 
A wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license, when issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer under authority of the Village Board, shall entitle the holder to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages only in original packages or containers to dealers, not to be consumed in or about the premises of said wholesaler 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-4(g); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 80, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 62, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Wholesaler's license, Wis. Stats. § 125.28.  
Sec. 11-52. - Retail "Class C" licenses. 
(a)  In this Subsection, the term "barroom" means a room that is primarily used for the sale or consumption of alcohol beverages. 
(b)  A "Class C" license may be issued to a person qualified under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5), for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of gross receipts and which does not have a barroom or for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of gross receipts and which has a barroom in which wine is the only intoxicating liquor sold if the municipality's quota prohibits the municipality from issuing a "Class B" license to that person. A "Class C" license may not be issued to a foreign corporation, foreign limited liability company or a person acting as agent for or in the employ of another. 
(c)  A "Class C" license shall particularly describe the premises for which it is issued. 
(d)  A "Class C" license may only be issued in the Village after the quota in Section 7-2-6(e) is full. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-4(h)) 
State Law reference— Retail "Class C" license, Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3m).  
Sec. 11-53. - Reserve "Class B" licenses. 
A reserve "Class B" license means a license that is not granted or issued by the Village on December 1, 1997, and that is counted under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(br), which, if granted or issued, authorizes the sale of intoxicating liquor to be consumed by the glass only on the premises where sold, and also authorizes the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package or container in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time, to be consumed off premises, except that wine may be sold in the original package or otherwise in any other quantity to be consumed off the premises. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-4(i); Ord. No. 98-07, § 1, 8-10-1998) 
State Law reference— Reserve "Class B" license, Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4)(a)4.  
Sec. 11-54. - License fees. 
(a)  Generally. The following license fees shall be charged for licenses issued by the Village Board for the sale of intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages within the Village. All such fees are payable after approval of the application by the Village Board and prior to the release of the license being delivered to the licensee, with the exception of special Class "B" fermented malt beverages licenses, for which the fee shall be paid at the time application is submitted. 
(1)  Class "A" fermented malt beverages retailer's license. The annual fee for this license will be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The fee for a license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued. 
(2)  Class "B" fermented malt beverage license. The annual fee for this license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. This license may be issued at any time for six months in any calendar year, for which 50 percent of the applicable license fee shall be paid, but such license shall not be renewable during the calendar year in which issued. The fee for a license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license issued. 
(3)  Temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license. The fee for this license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code, per event. 
(4)  Temporary "Class B" wine license. The fee for this license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code, per event. However, there shall be no fee if the temporary wine license is obtained along with a temporary fermented malt beverage license. 
(5)  Fermented malt beverage wholesaler's license. The annual fee for this license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(6)  "Class A" intoxicating liquor retailer's license. The annual fee for this license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(7)  "Class B" intoxicating liquor retailer's license. The annual fee for this license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. This license may be issued at any time for six months in any calendar year, for which 50 percent of the applicable license fee shall be paid, but such license shall not be renewable during the calendar year in which issued. 
(8)  "Class C" wine license. The annual fee for this license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The fee for less than 12 months shall be prorated. 
(9)  Reserve "Class B" intoxicating liquor license. The fee for an initial issuance of a reserve "Class B" license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code, except that the fee for the initial issuance of a reserve "Class B" license to a bona fide club or lodge situated and incorporated in the state for at least six years is the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for such a club or lodge. The annual fee for renewal of a reserve "Class B" license is the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(10)  "Class B" license for full-service restaurants and hotels. The initial annual fee for a "Class B" license for a full-service restaurant that has a seating capacity of 300 or more persons, or a hotel that has 50 or more rooms of sleeping accommodations and that has either an attached restaurant with a seating capacity of 150 or more persons or a banquet room which will accommodate 400 or more persons, shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Thereafter, the annual renewal fee shall be as established in the same. 
(b)  Cancellation for failure to pay fee. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue each license approved by the Village Board and shall make the same available at the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office in Village Hall. Any licenses for which the license fee is not paid within 15 days of approval of the application by the Village Board shall be returned to the Village Board for cancellation or other disposition. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-5; Ord. No. 98-07, §§ 2, 3, 8-10-1998; Ord. No. 99-02, § 4, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 81, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 63, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Retail "Class A" licenses, Wis. Stats. § 125.51(2); retail "Class B" licenses, Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3); reserve "Class B" licenses, Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(e)2; retail "Class C" license, Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3m).  
Sec. 11-55. - [Online ordering and curbside pickup of alcohol beverages.] 
(1)  Online ordering and curbside pickup of alcohol beverages for Class "A" and "Class A" licenses. 
(a)  No establishment or licensee shall allow online purchase of alcohol beverages and curbside delivery of such purchases ("Click and Collect"), without having such authorization in the license or obtaining a "Change of Premises" from the Village Board, upon recommendation of the Public Safety Committee to license that portion of the establishment's parking lot that will allow vehicles to park for purposes of picking up their online order. Only Class "A" and "Class A" licenses are eligible for "Click and Collect." An application for "Click and Collect" must include the following: 
1.  The applicant shall file a detailed operation plan with their license application or "Change of Premises" application that clearly details how their "Click and Collect" operation will function. 
The operation plan shall include the applicant's protocol for assuring that underage persons and intoxicated persons do not pick up alcohol via the "Click and Collect" program. 
2.  Failure of an applicant to provide a detailed operation plan with their license application or "Change of Premises" application shall result in the Clerk's Office not forwarding the application to the Public Safety Committee for consideration. 
(b)  No establishment holding an alcohol beverage license or licensee shall allow online purchase and pick-up of alcohol beverages unless the sale is consummated on the licensed premises. 
1.  Payment for the purchase must be completed on premises and may not be completed until the purchaser is at the licensed premises and has presented valid photo identification that has been verified by a licensed operator employed by the premises. 
2.  The licensed operator must verify that the person placing the "Click and Collect" order is the same person picking up the order. 
3.  The sale and delivery of "Click and Collect" purchases shall be made only by a licensed operator. 
4.  No alcohol sales are permitted if the purchaser fails to present valid photo identification. 
5.  The "Click and Collect" system must allow the purchase of alcohol to be denied without affecting the remainder of the purchase. 
(c)  Each "Click and Collect" transaction must capture and retain a live video recording of the entire transaction and the vehicle into which the order is being loaded for 30 days. Upon request by law enforcement, the licensee shall provide law enforcement with copies of any such video. All parking lot signage shall notify patrons that all click and collect transactions are monitored by security footage and staff. 
(d)  Each "Click and Collect" transaction must record and retain the following information for 30 days: 
1.  The name of the purchaser. 
2.  The type of identification card presented and the number and expiration date of that identification card. 
3.  The purchaser's date of birth. 
4.  The license plate of the vehicle into which the order is being loaded. 
(e)  Pick-up of "Click and Collect" orders shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(f)  There shall be a minimum four-hour waiting period between order time and pick-up time. 
(g)  Orders placed after 2:00 p.m. cannot be picked up until the following day. 
(h)  If the "Click and Collect" purchaser is not the driver of the vehicle into which the order is being loaded, the licensed operator must verify that the driver is 21 years of age or older. 
(i)  The licensed operator shall report to his or her manager any purchaser who shows signs of alcohol consumption, and in conjunction with the manager, shall assess sobriety for purposes of approving or denying the sale. The sale shall be denied if the purchaser appears to be intoxicated. 
(j)  The pick- up area for "Click and Collect" purchases shall be clearly defined with visible markings, signs, and/or barriers. Such area shall be well lit and within view of other employees in the licensed structure. 
(k)  No events other than the delivery of "Click and Collect" orders shall be allowed on the expanded premises. 
(l)  During the time the licensed operator delivers alcohol beverages in the pick-up area, at least one other on duty employee must remain inside the licensed structure in visual observation of the transaction and register. 
(2)  Penalty. Any licensee or person who violates any provision of this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $250.00, nor more than $1,000.00 plus court costs and fees. Licensees are also subject to demerit point assessment for violations of this Subsection. 
( Ord. No. 2018-18 , § 2, 1-14-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-05 , adopted July 11, 2016, repealed former § 11-55 which pertained to the economic development grant, and derived from Ord. No. 2005-11, § 1(7-2-5(c)), adopted June 27, 2005. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 2018-18 , § 2, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, enacted new provisions to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 11-56. - Application for license. 
(a)  General considerations. 
(1)  The Village Board is not required to grant all the licenses available. All applications are subject to an investigation and inspection by the Chief of Police and/or other appropriate authority to determine whether the applicant and/or premises to be licensed complies with all regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. All licenses must be renewed annually. A license period is July 1 to June 30. 
(2)  Consideration for the granting or denial of a license will be based on: 
a.  Arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to the limitations imposed by Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, and Wis. Stats. § 125.12(1)(b); 
b.  The financial responsibility of the applicant; 
c.  The appropriateness of the location and the premises where the licensed business is to be conducted; and 
d.  Generally, the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed. 
(3)  If a licensee is convicted of an offense substantially related to the license activity, the Village Board may act to revoke or suspend the license. 
(b)  Contents. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form prescribed by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue and shall be sworn to by an applicant as provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 887.01—887.04, and shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer not less than 15 days prior to the granting of such license. The premises shall be physically described to include every room and storage space to be covered by the license, including all rooms not separated by a solid wall or joined by connecting entrances. 
(c)  Application. The application for such licenses shall contain the following information verified under oath by the applicant: 
(1)  Address of the building for which the license is desired and the description including a diagram of the overall dimensions, seating arrangements, capacity and bar size of the premises therein, where fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors are to be sold. 
(2)  A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States, or a domestic corporation, limited liability company or limited liability partnership. 
(3)  A statement as to whether applicant or owner has ever been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor for violation of any federal laws, any state laws, any laws of any other states or ordinances of any municipality, or have any criminal charges presently pending and, if so, the number and the dates of such convictions and the penalty imposed. 
(4)  A statement as to whether the applicant or owner holds or has applied for any other "Class A," Class "A," "Class B" or Class "B" licenses for any other location within the state and, if so, the number of such licenses held or applied for by such applicant. 
(5)  A statement as to whether any other business other than the sale of fermented malt beverages, intoxicating liquor and soft drinks as herein defined is to be conducted on the premises sought to be licensed and, if so, a description of the nature of such business, but such information shall not be required in an application for an operator's license. 
(6)  A statement that the applicant is not acting as agent for or in the employ of another. 
(7)  If the application is a Class "B" or "Class B" license, a statement as to whether any brewer, bottler, wholesaler, or corporation, a majority of whose stock is owned by any brewer, bottler, or wholesaler has or intends to supply, furnish, lease, give, pay for, or take any chattel mortgage on any furniture, fixture, fittings, or equipment to be used in or about the premises covered by the application. 
(8)  If the application is made for a "Class B" or Class "B" license, a statement as to whether any brewer, bottler or wholesaler has advanced, paid or furnished the money for license fee, or intends to do so, or is financially interested in, directly or indirectly, the license for which application is made. 
(9)  The application shall contain the name, residence, and age of the applicant or owner. It shall also contain the name of the person whom a corporation or association shall designate as manager with the address of the same. 
(10)  Such application shall also contain such other reasonable and pertinent information as the Village Board may, from time to time, require. 
(d)  Corporations. Such application shall be filed and sworn to by the applicant of an individual, by the president and secretary, of a corporation, limited liability company or limited liability partnership. 
(e)  Publication. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall publish each application for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B" or "Class C" license. There is no publication requirement for temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6), or temporary "Class B" wine licenses under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(10). The application shall be published once in the official Village newspaper, and the costs of publication shall be paid by the applicant at the time the application is filed, as determined under Wis. Stats. § 985.08. 
(f)  Amending application. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact set out in the application of any licensee, such licensee shall file with the issuing authority a notice in writing of such change within ten days after the occurrence thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-6; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 82, 83, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 64, 65, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— General licensing requirements, Wis. Stats. § 125.04.  
Sec. 11-57. - Qualifications of applicants and premises. 
(a)  Residence requirements. A retail Class "A" or Class "B" fermented malt beverage or "Class A" or "Class B" intoxicating liquor license shall be granted only to persons who are citizens of the United States and who have been residents of the state continuously for at least 90 days prior to the date of the application. 
(b)  Applicant to have malt beverage license. No retail "Class B" intoxicating liquor license shall be issued to any person who does not have or to whom is not issued a Class "B" retailer's license to sell fermented malt beverages. 
(c)  Right to premises. No applicant will be considered unless the applicant has the right to possession of the premises described in the application for the license period, by lease or by deed. 
(d)  Age of applicant. No Class "A," "Class A," Class "B" or "Class B" licenses shall be granted to any underage person as defined by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(e)  Corporate restrictions. 
(1)  No license or permit may be issued to any corporation, limited liability company or limited liability partnership unless the entity meets the qualifications under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(a)1 and 4 and (b), unless the agent of the entity appointed under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(6) and the officers and directors, or members or managers, of the entity meet the qualifications of Wis. Stats. § 125.04(a)1 and 3 and (b) and unless the agent of the entity appointed under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(6) meets the qualifications under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(a)2 and 5(c). The requirement that the entity meet the qualifications under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(a)1 and (b) does not apply if the entity has terminated its relationship with all of the individuals whose actions directly contributed to the conviction. 
(2)  Each corporate applicant shall file with its application for such license a statement by its officers showing the name and addresses of the persons who are stockholders together with the amount of stock held by such person. It shall be the duty of each corporate applicant and licensee to file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer a statement of transfers of stock within 48 hours after such transfer of stock. 
(3)  Any license issued to a corporation, limited liability company or limited liability partnership may be revoked in the manner and under the procedure established in Wis. Stats. § 125.12, when more than 50 percent of the stock interest, legal or beneficial, in such corporation, limited liability company or limited liability partnership is held by any person not eligible for a license under this Article or under the state law. 
(f)  Separate license required for each place of sale. A separate license shall be required for each stand or place that is in direct connection or communication where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale; and no license shall be issued to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association for the purpose of possession, selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment. 
(g)  License quotas. 
(1)  No more than the number of retail "Class B" licenses permitted under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4), shall be granted by the Village. 
(2)  The Village may utilize the annual population estimate received from the Wisconsin Department of Administration Demographic Service Center or the Bureau of Census of the United States Government in determining quotas. 
(h)  Licensed premises. Licenses issued by the Village shall be for the structure itself and shall not confer any license or right to utilize property outside of the licensed structure, unless specifically provided for in the license or otherwise authorized by the Village Board. All sales of intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages within the Village shall be limited to and shall be made upon the premises described within the license granted by the Village Board. Specifically prohibited by this Section is the sale and delivery of alcohol beverages by food delivery services. 
(i)  Issuance for sales in dwellings prohibited. No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of possessing, selling, or offering for sale any alcohol beverages in any dwelling house, flat, or residential apartment. 
(j)  Delinquent taxes, assessments, etc. 
(1)  Premises. No initial or renewal alcohol beverage license shall be granted for any premises for which Village taxes, assessments, forfeitures, utility bills, garbage collection fees, sewer and water bills or other assessments or other claims to the Village are delinquent and unpaid. 
(2)  Persons. No initial or renewal alcohol license shall be granted to any person: 
a.  Delinquent in payment of any taxes, utility bills, garbage collection fees, sewer and water bills, assessments or other claims owned to the Village. 
b.  Delinquent in payment of a forfeiture resulting from a violation of any ordinance of the Village. 
(k)  Sales tax qualification. All applicants for retail licenses shall provide proof, as required by Wis. Stats. § 77.61(11), that they are in good standing for sales tax purposes (i.e., hold a seller's permit) before they may be issued licenses. 
(l)  Connecting premises. Except in the case of hotels, no person may hold both a "Class A" license and either a "Class B" license or permit, a Class "B" license or permit, or a "Class C" license for the same premises or for connecting premises. Except for hotels, if either type of license or permit is issued for the same or connecting premises already covered by the other type of license or permit, the license or permit last issued is void. If both licenses or permits are issued simultaneously, both are void. 
(m)  Limitations on other business; Class "B" premises. No Class "B" license or permit may be granted for any premises where any other business is conducted in connection with the premises, except that this restriction does not apply if the premises for which the Class "B" license or permit is issued is connected to premises where other business is conducted by a secondary doorway that serves as a safety exit and is not the primary entrance to the Class "B" premises. No other business may be conducted on premises operating under a Class "B" license or permit. These restrictions do not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A hotel. 
(2)  A restaurant, whether or not it is a part of or located in any mercantile establishment. 
(3)  A combination grocery store and tavern. 
(4)  A combination sporting goods store and tavern in towns, villages and fourth-class cities. 
(5)  A combination novelty store and tavern. 
(6)  A bowling alley or recreation premises. 
(7)  A club, society or lodge that has been in existence for six months or more prior to the date of filing application for the Class "B" license or permit. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-7; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 84, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 66, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2018-18 , § 1, 1-14-2019)  
Sec. 11-58. - Investigation; approval of application. 
(a)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the Chief of Police, Fire Inspector and Building Inspector of each new or renewal application, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the premises, together with such other investigation as shall be necessary to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing sanitation in restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license. The Police Department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, including, but not limited to, requesting information from the state, surrounding municipalities, and/or any community where the applicant has previously resided concerning the applicant's arrest and conviction record. The report of the Police Department shall include any and all incidents relating in any manner to the premises sought to be licensed, whether or not the incident led to any official action against the premises or its licensee. These officials shall furnish a report to the Village Clerk-Treasurer in writing, who shall forward to the Village Board and the Public Safety Committee, the information derived from such investigation accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused. No license shall be renewed without a re-inspection of the premises and report as originally required. 
(b)  The Chief of Police is required to maintain records of any and all incidents in any way related to the licensed premises, whether or not there was actual prosecution and/or conviction. 
(c)  If the inspecting officials recommend the denial of the application, the applicant shall be notified by the Village Clerk-Treasurer prior to the Public Safety Committee hearing at which the application is to be considered. The notice shall set forth the basis for such recommendation and inform the applicant of the opportunity to appear before the Public Safety Committee and to provide evidence as to why the application should be approved. The Public Safety Committee shall make an advisory recommendation to the Village Board on the advisability of granting such license. 
(d)  In determining whether to grant such license, consideration shall be given to the arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to the limitations imposed by Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335 and Wis. Stats. § 125.12(1)(b); financial responsibility of the applicant, the appropriateness of the location and premises where such licensed business is to be conducted, and generally the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reported. An application may be denied based upon the applicant's arrest and conviction record if the applicant has been convicted of a felony (unless duly pardoned) or if the applicant has habitually been a law offender. For purposes of this licensing procedure, "habitually been a law offender" is generally considered to be an arrest or conviction of at least two offenses that are substantially related to the licensed activity within the five years immediately preceding the license application. Because a license is a privilege, the issuance of which is a right granted solely to the Village Board, the Village Board, and the Public Safety Committee in making its recommendation, reserves the right to consider the severity and facts and circumstances of the offense when making the determination to grant, deny or not renew a license. 
(e)  If the Village Board denies the license, the applicant shall be notified in writing, by certified mail or personal service, of the reasons for the denial. The notice shall also inform the applicant of the opportunity to appear before the Village Board and to provide evidence as to why the denial should be reversed. Such written notice shall be mailed or served upon the applicant at least ten days prior to the Village Board meeting at which the application is to be reconsidered. If, upon reconsideration, the Village Board again denies the application, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons therefor. An applicant who is denied any license upon reconsideration of the matter may apply to Circuit Court pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(d), for review. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-8; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 85—87, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 67—69, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-59. - Additional application considerations. 
(a)  Applicant and premises. In determining the suitability of an applicant, consideration shall be given to the moral character and financial responsibility of the applicant, the appropriateness of the location and premises proposed and generally the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed. 
(b)  Health and sanitation regulations. No license shall be issued unless the premises conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the Wisconsin Building Code, Wisconsin Plumbing Code, and the regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services applicable to restaurants. The premises must be properly lighted and ventilated, must be equipped with separate sanitary toilet and lavatory facilities equipped with running water for each sex and must conform to all ordinances of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-9)  
Sec. 11-60. - Granting of license. 
Opportunity shall be given by the governing body to any person to be heard for or against the granting of any license. Upon the approval of the applicant by the Village Board, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue to the applicant a license, upon payment by the applicant of the license fee to the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-10; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 88, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 70, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-61. - Transfer and lapse of license. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12), a license shall be transferable from one premises to another if such transfer is first approved by the Village Board. An application for transfer shall be made on a form furnished by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Proceedings for such transfer shall be had in the same form and manner as the original application. The fee for such transfer shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Whenever a license is transferred, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall forthwith notify the Wisconsin Department of Revenue of such transfer. In the event of the sale of a business or business premises of the licensee, the purchaser of such business or business premises must apply to the Village for reissuance of said license and the Village, as the licensing authority, shall in no way be bound to reissue said license to said subsequent purchaser. 
(b)  Whenever the agent of a corporate holder of a license is for any reason replaced, the licensee shall give the Village Clerk-Treasurer written notice of said replacement, the reasons therefore and the new appointment. An application for change of agent shall be made on a form furnished by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. A fee for such transfer shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A of this Code. Until the next regular meeting or special meeting of the Village Board, the successor agent shall have the authority to perform the functions and be charged with the duties of the original agent. However, said license shall be invalid upon receipt by the Village Clerk-[Treasurer] of notice of disapproval of the successor agent by the Department of Revenue or other peace officer of the Municipality in which the license was issued. The Corporation's license shall not be in force after receipt of such notice or after a regular or special meeting of the Village Board until the successor agent and another qualified agent is appointed and approved by the Village and the Wisconsin Department of Revenue. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-11; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 89, 90, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2009-25, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 71, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Transfer of licenses or permits, Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12).  
Sec. 11-62. - Numbering of license. 
Each license issued under the provisions of this Article shall be numbered and shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall affix the Village seal to the license. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-12; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 91, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 72, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-63. - Posting licenses; defacement. 
(a)  Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall immediately post such license and keep the same posted while in force in a conspicuous place in the room or place where said beverages are drawn or removed for service or sale. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post such license or to be permitted to post it upon premises other than those mentioned in the application or knowingly to deface or destroy such license. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-13) 
State Law reference— Posting of license, Wis. Stats. § 125.04(10).  
Sec. 11-64. - Conditions of license. 
All retail "Class A," "Class B," Class "A" and Class "B" licenses granted or renewed hereunder shall be granted subject to the following conditions, and all other conditions of this Section, and subject to all other ordinances and regulations of the Village applicable thereto: 
(a)  Consent to entry. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the Village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the removal from said premises of all things and articles there had in violation of Village ordinances or state laws, and consents to the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses. 
(b)  Employment of minors. No retail "Class B" or Class "B" licensee shall employ any person under 18 years of age, but this shall not apply to hotels, restaurants, or combination grocery stores and taverns where 49 percent or less of the gross revenue is derived from the sale of intoxicating liquors, nor to bona fide clubs. Family members may work on the licensed premises but are not permitted to sell or dispense alcohol beverages. 
(c)  Disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed premises shall, at all times, be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises. 
(d)  Licensed operator on premises. There shall be upon premises operated under a "Class A," Class "A," "Class B," Class "B" or "Class C" license, at all times that the premises are open for business, the licensee, the agent named in the license if the licensee is a corporation, the agent named in a "Class B" or Class "B" license, or some person who shall have an operator's license and who shall be responsible for the acts of all persons serving as waiters, or serving or selling in any other manner any fermented malt beverages or intoxicating beverages to customers. No person, including underage members of the licensee's immediate family, other than the licensee or agent may serve fermented malt beverages or alcohol beverages in any place operated under a "Class A," Class "A," "Class B," Class "B" or "Class C" license unless the person has an operator's license or is at least 18 years of age and is under the immediate supervision of the licensee or agent or a person holding an operator's license, and who is on the premises at the time of the service. 
(e)  View of interior unobstructed. No holder of a retail Class "B" or "Class B" license hereunder shall permit the interior of the premises to be obstructed by window tinting, blinds, screens or partitions, provided that partitions not exceeding 48 inches in height may be permitted within the interior, and provided further this Section shall not apply to a licensed premises where the principal business conducted is that of a restaurant or hotel. 
(f)  Alcohol beverages to be sold and consumed only in authorized parts of premises. No alcohol beverage may be sold, dispensed, or consumed under a "Class B" or Class "B" license in any portion of the business or premises not authorized in said license. 
(g)  Restrictions near schools and houses of worship. No retail "Class A," Class "A," "Class B" or Class "B" license shall be issued for premises, the main entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the main entrance of any established public school, parochial school, hospital or house of worship. Such distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the maintenance entrance of such school, house of worship or hospital to the main entrance to such premises. This Subsection shall not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of real property within 300 feet thereof by any school building, hospital building or house of worship building. 
(h)  Consumption on premises. All purchase of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages by the glass or in open containers shall be consumed on the licensed premises where served and shall not be removed therefrom to any thoroughfare, street, alley or sidewalk or anywhere outside the licensed premises unless authorized by the Village Board. 
(i)  Gambling prohibited. No gambling or game of chance of any sort shall be permitted in any form upon any premises licensed under this Article or the laws of the state, except the Wisconsin State Lottery. 
(j)  Credit prohibited. No retail "Class A," Class "A," "Class B," Class "B" or "Class C" liquor, wine or fermented malt beverage licensee shall sell or offer for sale any alcohol beverage to any person by extending credit, except hotel credit extended to a resident guest or a club to a bona fide member. It shall be unlawful for such licensee or permittee to sell alcohol beverages to any person on a passbook or store order or to receive from any person any goods, ware, merchandise or other articles in exchange for alcohol beverages. 
(k)  Licensee or permittee responsible for acts of employees. A violation of this Article by a duly authorized agent or employee of a licensee or permittee under this Article shall constitute a violation by the licensee or permittee. Whenever any licensee or permittee under this Article shall violate any portion of this Article, proceedings for the suspension or revocation of the license or permit of the holder thereof may be instituted in the manner prescribed in this Article. 
(l)  Operational telephone required. All premises located within the Village that are licensed to sell alcohol beverages shall, during hours they are open, be equipped with a functioning land line telephone connected to the business premises, which shall be available to the operators and/or patrons of the establishment. 
(m)  Health and sanitation regulations. The rules and regulations of the State Board of Health governing sanitation in restaurants shall apply to all "Class B" liquor or "Class C" licenses issued under this Article. No "Class B" or "Class C" license shall be issued unless the premises to be licensed conform to such rules and regulations. 
(n)  Outdoor consumption. Licensed premises under a "Class B," Class "B" or "Class C" license may include areas outside a fully enclosed building in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Any application for a new license, the renewal of an existing license or a change in the description of licensed premises which seeks to include an outdoor area within the licensed premises' description shall require notice to each person owning property within 500 feet of the proposed licensed premises. The applicant shall prepay the cost of sending such notice before the notices are sent. The notice shall include a copy of the application and the date, time and location of any public hearings or other public meetings at which the application is scheduled to be considered. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by detailed plans or drawings demonstrating the size, location, surface and building materials, and use of the outdoor area, including fencing and signage, and any other information necessary to determine compliance with this Subsection. The outdoor consumption application, along with associated plans and drawings, shall be reviewed for a recommendation by the Public Safety Committee and a final decision made by the Village Board. 
(3)  The Village Board may impose conditions specific to any outdoor areas of the licensed premises as deemed necessary to prevent undue adverse impacts on neighboring property, the character of the surrounding neighborhood, traffic conditions, parking or any other matter to protect the public health, safety, welfare or convenience, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Restricting the hours during which alcohol consumption may be permitted within the outdoor area; 
b.  Requiring additional parking beyond the minimum required by the Zoning Code; 
c.  Regulation of lighting and screening; 
d.  Any conditions recommended by the Public Safety Committee; 
e.  Any conditions imposed by the Plan Commission as part of its required site plan review under Section 62-310 of this Code. 
(4)  In addition to any specific conditions imposed under Subsections (2) and (3), the following shall be minimum conditions of all licenses with respect to outdoor areas unless the Village Board makes a specific finding that the condition is not necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare: 
a.  Outdoor areas are prohibited within 50 feet of the lot line of a parcel zoned for residential purposes. This prohibition shall not apply to prohibit an outdoor area where an accessory apartment exists on the same parcel as the licensed premises. 
b.  The hours during which alcohol consumption may be permitted within the outdoor area is restricted to 11:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday; and 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
c.  The perimeter of any outdoor portion of a licensed premises shall be enclosed by a permanent, secure fence not less than four feet in height. Such fence shall be constructed of wood, plastic, or metal and erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable Village ordinances. If the outdoor portion of a licensed premises is an outdoor sports area, the enclosure may instead be made by temporary netting not less than ten feet high during the applicable sports season. Such netting shall not be installed sooner than 14 days prior to, and shall be removed no later than 14 days after, the season or the period established under Section 11-69(f)(6)c., whichever is shorter. The outdoor area shall comply with all applicable building code requirements including the provision of readily distinguishable means of egress for fire and emergency purposes. 
d.  Amplified music, speakers, microphones, televisions or other audio or video devices shall be subject to Chapter 20, Article III of the Village Code of Ordinances regarding Noise and Section 11-69(f) if applicable. 
e.  The outdoor area shall not have an undue adverse impact upon nearby property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, parking or other matter affecting the public health, safety, welfare, or convenience. 
f.  The size of the outdoor area may not be larger than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the licensed premises within a permanent building. Interior building capacity shall not be increased as a result of the addition of the outdoor area. The playing area of any outdoor sports area permitted under Section 11-69 shall not be included for purposes of determining compliance with this subparagraph so long as the playing area is not permitted to be occupied by persons not participating in the sporting activity for which the playing area is designed. 
g.  A conspicuous notice shall be posted at each fire exit stating: "No Beer, Liquor or Wine May Be Carried in an Open Container Beyond this Point." 
h.  No bar/counter service shall be permitted in outdoor areas, however, wait staff may serve in the outdoor area. 
i  Except for outdoor sports activities permitted under Section 11-69, the outdoor area shall not be used for any activities other than service and consumption of food and/or drink. Smoking may be permitted in accordance with applicable State and local regulations. 
j.  The outdoor area shall be accessible to the disabled, and the license holder shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and village laws, ordinances and regulation concerning accessibility. 
k.  Containers for refuse disposal and regular cleanup shall be placed inside of the outdoor area. 
l.  If the outdoor area is used for outdoor sports activities as permitted under Section 11-69 and persons under the age of 21 are allowed to be present on the licensed premises, all persons 21 years of age or older who intend to consume alcohol beverages in the outdoor area, shall be issued a wristband that is bright in color which shall be issued only upon showing valid identification proving the person is 21 years of age or older. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-14; Ord. No. 2013-01, §§ 1, 2, 4-22-2013; Ord. No. 2015-07, §§ 1—4, 7-27-2015; Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 1-25-2016; Ord. No. 2019-19 , § 1, 10-28-2019; Ord. No. 2020-20 , § 1, 6-22-2020)  
Sec. 11-65. - Closing hours. 
Closing hours shall be established in conformance with Wis. Stats. § 125.32(3), and further restricted as follows: 
(a)  "Class B" and Class "B" licenses. 
(1)  No premises for which a retail "Class B" or Class "B" liquor and fermented malt beverage license or "Class C" wine license has been issued shall be permitted to remain open for the sale of liquor or fermented malt beverages or for any other purpose between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Saturday and Sunday. There shall be no closing hours on January 1. See Section 62-71 regarding the necessity for a conditional use permit for businesses wanting to remain open to the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
(2)  Hotels and restaurants, whose principal business is the furnishing of food or lodging to patrons shall be permitted to remain open for the conduct of their regular business but shall not sell liquor or malt beverages during the closing hours of Subsection (a)(1) of this Section. 
(3)  The licensee, permittee and employees shall be permitted to check out receipts, check the licensed premises for security and do minor cleaning up during closed hours. Under no circumstances shall the consumption of alcohol beverages be permitted after closing time. Commercial janitorial service personnel shall be allowed to enter the licensed premises for the purpose of cleaning during closed hours. The premises shall be well lighted during cleanup. The licensee shall notify the Police Department of the names, vehicle descriptions, license number, and other information requested by the Police Department regarding off-hours presence and any variation of the above for exigent circumstances. Entertainers shall not be considered employees for purposes of this Section. 
(b)  "Class A" and Class "A" licenses. A retail "Class A" or Class "A" license establishment shall remain closed between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  Carryout hours. Between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., no licensee of a "Class B" or Class "B" licensed premises may sell fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors in an original unopened package, container or bottle or for consumption away from the premises. 
(d)  Modification of closing restrictions. Hotels and restaurants whose principal business is the furnishing of food, drinks, or lodging to patrons, bowling alleys, indoor horseshoe-pitching facilities, curling clubs, and golf courses may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but may not sell fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors during the closing hours. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-15; Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
State Law reference— Closing hours, Wis. Stats. §§ 125.32(3), 125.68(4).  
Sec. 11-66. - Restrictions on temporary Class "B" and "Class B" licenses. 
(a)  Requirements. No person or organization shall be granted a temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license or temporary "Class B" wine license by the Village Board, as authorized by Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6) and § 125.51(10), until such person or organization has met the applicable requirements under this Article and been approved pursuant to this Section. 
(b)  Procedure. The applicant for a temporary Class "B" or "Class B" license shall submit a completed application to the Village Clerk-Treasurer, on a form approved by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, providing all information required for the issuance of the license and all applicable information required for an event permit under of Chapter 36 of this Code. The application shall also include the following: 
(1)  The proposed location, dates and times where alcohol beverages will be sold. 
(2)  A sketch showing the layout for handling sales of alcohol beverages. 
(3)  The names, address, and prior relevant experience, if any, of every person proposed to sell alcohol beverages. 
(4)  A statement that the person or organization agrees to promptly pay the Village for the Village's charges incurred either in regulating this license or in remedying any unsatisfactory post-event maintenance by the person or organization. 
(5)  A copy of the application or license of each person holding the beverage operator's license who will supervise the sales of alcohol beverages. 
(6)  A certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per person, $2,000,000.00 per occurrence and $1,000,000.00 property damage and naming the Village as an additional insured. 
(7)  Such application shall also contain such other reasonable and pertinent information as the Village Board may, from time to time, require. 
(c)  Standards for issuance of license. The Village Board shall not issue a temporary Class "B" or "Class B" license unless it is satisfied that the following standards will be met by the applicant: 
(1)  The applicant may sell alcohol beverages only from locations that are physically separate from locations where any other items are sold. 
(2)  The location where alcohol beverages are sold shall not be accessible to the public, except from the selling point. 
(3)  The Village shall provide and the applicant shall post conspicuous notices at the point of sale prohibiting the presence of minors at the point of sale and the sale of alcohol beverages to minors or intoxicated persons. 
(4)  Prior to the special event, the applicant shall contact the Police Department for instruction in the proper sale of alcohol beverages and to arrange for routine on-site police protection and patrol. At the time the Village Board considers the application, the Chief of Police shall report what on-site arrangements are appropriate and the arrangements made by the applicant. 
(5)  A person holding a beverage operator's license shall supervise all sales of alcohol beverages at the point of sale. Said person shall restrict access to the point of sale to those persons actually selling alcohol beverages. 
(d)  Exception. In its sole discretion, the Village Board may prescribe additional reasonable requirements based on the particular circumstances of the special event to provide adequate security of the premises or at the point of sale. The Village Board may also waive any requirements of this Section in circumstances where the Village Board finds, on the basis of the applicant's representations, that security is adequate without the specific requirement. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-16; Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 5, 3-11-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 5, adopted March 11, 2019, changed the title of § 11-66 from "Restrictions on temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage or wine special event license" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Temporary Class "B" license, Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6).  
Sec. 11-67. - Revocation and suspension of licenses; nonrenewal; subsequent changes. 
(a)  Procedure. Whenever the holder of any license under this Article violates any portion of this Article or Chapter 38, Article IV, proceedings for the revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure established by this Section. 
(b)  Cancellation of premised licenses. 
(1)  Grounds for cancellation for nonuse of license. Any "Class A," Class "A," "Class B" or Class "B" fermented malt and/or intoxicating liquor licenses granted under this Article for which the subject premises: 
a.  Is not open for business within 30 days of the granting of such license; 
b.  Is not open for business for a period of 180 consecutive days or more; or 
c.  Is not open for business at least 50 percent of the days within any 12 month period, either within a licensing year or overlapping two licensing years; 
shall be cancelled unless, after notice and hearing as provided in Subsection (b)(2) of this Section, the Village Board shall determine that good cause exists for the failure of the licensee to be open for business for periods in excess of the minimums set forth in this Subsection. If such cause is found to exist, the Village Board may set such terms as it deems appropriate to the continuation of the license with respect to minimum days of operation or a time frame within which the subject premises must open for business to avoid cancellation of the subject license. 
(2)  Notice and hearing. Prior to cancellation of any license, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the licensee in writing of the Village's intention to cancel the license for nonuse and provide the licensee with an opportunity for a hearing. Such notice shall also specify the time, place and date of the hearing, which shall be not less than 15 days after the date of the notice. Such hearing shall be conducted as provided in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(b). 
(c)  License revocation or suspension. 
(1)  Notice and hearing. Whenever a person holding a license to sell alcohol beverages has failed to maintain the premises according to standards prescribed for sanitation, or in whose premises persons are permitted to loiter for purposes of prostitution, or when the licensee has not observed and obeyed any lawful order of the Village Board or police officers of the Village, has violated Village ordinances, or for any other good reason, including the reasons set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(ag) or any amendment thereto, the Village Board shall issue a summons, to be signed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer commanding the licensee complained of to appear before the Village Board on a day and time and at a place named in the summons to show cause why the license should not be revoked or suspended. In addition, any resident may file a sworn, written complaint with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, as may the Public Safety Committee following prior investigation and determination of the matter. Such summons shall be served not less than three and not more than ten days before the time at which the licensee is commanded to appear and shall be served on the licensee in the manner provided under Wis. Stats. Ch. 801, for service in civil actions in circuit court. The complaint shall be served with the summons and shall set forth the offense allegedly committed, the date and place of said offense and the facts constituting the alleged offense. If such licensee shall not appear as required by the summons, the complaint shall be taken as true, and if the Village Board deems its allegations sufficient, the Village Board shall revoke or suspend the license as provided herein. 
(2)  Procedure on hearing; effect of revocation. 
a.  The Village President or, in the Village President's absence, the Village President Pro Tem, shall conduct the hearing, administer oaths to all witnesses and may issue subpoenas. So far as practicable, the rules of evidence provided in Wis. Stats. § 68.11, shall be followed. The complainant shall have the burden of providing the charges to a preponderance of the evidence. The licensee and the complainant may be represented by counsel, may call and examine witnesses and cross-examine witnesses of the other party. All proceedings and testimony shall be recorded on tape. If either party requests a stenographic recording and transcription, the Village shall make the necessary arrangements, but the expenses shall be borne by the requesting party. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall serve as secretary to the Village Board and shall make and receive all exhibits admitted into the record. The Village Board, upon the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing, shall determine by simple majority vote of those present whether the charges are true. If the Village Board finds the complaint to be true, the license shall either be suspended for not less than ten days nor more than 90 days or revoked. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice of each suspension or revocation to the person whose license is suspended or revoked. 
b.  If the complaint is found to be true, the licensee shall pay to the Village the actual cost of the proceedings. If the complaint is found by the Village Board to be malicious and without probable cause, the complainant shall pay the cost of the proceedings in the same amount. 
c.  When a license is revoked, it shall be so entered of record by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and no other license shall be granted to such licensee or for such premises for a period of 12 months from the date of the revocation, nor shall any part of the money paid as application fee for any license so revoked be refunded. 
(d)  Nonrenewal of license. 
(1)  Notice. The Village Board may refuse to renew a license for the causes provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.12 (2)(ag). Prior to the time for renewal of the license, the Chief of Police shall notify the licensee, in writing, of the Chief of Police's intention to recommend to the Public Safety Committee that the license not be renewed. The notice shall provide the licensee with an opportunity for a hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the Chief of Police's recommendation not to renew the license. 
(2)  Request for hearing. If the licensee requests a hearing, the hearing shall be conducted by the Public Safety Committee not less than three days nor more than ten days after the Village receives a written request, as provided in Subsection (c)(2) of this Section and Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(b). 
(3)  Hearing before Public Safety Committee. If a hearing is held before the Public Safety Committee, the Public Safety Committee shall submit a report, including findings of fact, conclusions of law and a recommendation as to what action the Village Board should take with respect to the license. The Public Safety Committee shall provide a copy of the report to the licensee. 
(4)  Objections to committee report. The licensee may file a written objection to the report with the Village Clerk-Treasurer within ten days of receipt of the report, and shall have the opportunity to present arguments supporting the objection to the Village Board. The Village Board may require the licensee to orally present arguments supporting the objection during a meeting of the Village Board, or may rely on the argument raised in the written objection filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(5)  Action by Village Board. The Village Board shall review the Public Safety Committee's report and any arguments presented by the licensee and determine whether to renew the license. If there is no objection to a report recommending nonrenewal of a license, the license shall not be renewed. 
(e)  Subsequent changes. 
(1)  After issuance of a license, whenever anything occurs to change any fact set forth in the license application or renewal form, the licensee shall file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer written notice within ten days after the occurrence thereof. 
(2)  After issuance of a license, should the licensee under a retail "Class B" intoxicating liquor license wish to change the licensed premises from a restaurant into a tavern, or from a tavern into a restaurant, the licensee shall file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer a written notice setting forth said desire not less than 60 days prior to the contemplated change. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall refer the notice to the Village Board, which shall schedule a public hearing as soon thereafter as possible, which shall be attended by the licensee. At the hearing, the licensee shall be given the opportunity to be heard as to why the Village Board should approve the change. The Village Board shall provide for an orderly opportunity for all other persons to be heard on the subject. Following the hearing, the Village Board shall approve or disapprove of the proposed change and will issue a written decision upon the request of any interested person. 
(3)  Failure by the licensee to notify the Village under either of the above applicable procedures shall be grounds for suspension, nonrenewal, or revocation of the licensee's license. 
(f)  Other provisions. Any license issued pursuant to this Article shall be subject to such further regulations and restrictions as may be imposed by the Village Board by amendment to this Section or by the enactment of new ordinances. If any licensee shall fail or neglect to meet the requirements imposed by such new restrictions and regulations such licensee's license may be revoked in accordance with this Section. In case of revocation of any license or any violation of any provision of this Article in accordance with this Section or by the court or for any reasonable cause except the imposition of new restrictions, no refund shall be made of any part of the license fee. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-17; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 92—99, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 73—78, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Subsequent changes, Wis. Stats. § 125.04(3)(h); revocation, suspension, refusal to issue or renew, Wis. Stats. § 125.12.  
Sec. 11-68. - Nonalcohol events for underage persons on licensed premises. 
The presence of underage persons on a licensed premises as provided under Wis. Stats. § 125.07(3)(a)10, shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  The licensee or agent of a corporate licensee shall notify the Police Department at least 48 hours in advance of the date of any event at which underage persons will be present on the licensed premises. Each such nonalcohol event notice shall specify the date on which the event is to occur and the time of commencement. All notices shall be filed with the Police Department during normal working hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday) and shall be given on forms prescribed by the Police Department. After a nonalcohol event notice has been given, the licensee may cancel an event only by giving like notice to the Police Department in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection. Regardless of the date given, all notices shall expire and be deemed cancelled no later than the date of expiration or revocation of the applicable retail "Class B" or Class "B" license. 
(b)  During the period of any nonalcohol event, a notice card prescribed by the Police Department shall be posted at all public entrances to the licensed premises notifying the general public that no alcohol beverages may be consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the licensed premises during the event. Such notice cards shall be made available by the Police Department to a requesting licensee. 
(c)  Once a nonalcohol event has commenced, no alcohol beverages may be consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the licensed premises until the next day following the closing hours of the licensed premises. 
(d)  During the period of any nonalcohol event, all alcohol beverages shall be stored in a locked portion of the licensed premises in a secure place out of the sight and physical reach of any patron present and shall be under the direct and immediate control and supervision of the licensee or a licensed bartender in the employ of the licensee. All beer taps and automatic dispensers of alcohol beverages (speed guns) shall be either disconnected, disabled or made inoperable. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-18) 
State Law reference— Underage persons at nonalcohol events on licensed premises, Wis. Stats. § 125.07(3)(a)10.  
Sec. 11-69. - Outdoor sports activities regulated. 
(a)  Purpose. The Village Board finds that restrictions are necessary for outdoor sports activities at premises holding "Class B" intoxicating liquor or Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses due to concerns arising from noise, density and related problems. This Section enacted pursuant to police power, provides a framework for regulatory controls on such outdoor sports activities, enacted pursuant to police powers. 
(b)  Approval required. No licensee shall conduct or sponsor any outdoor sports activity or event on property forming any part of the real property on which the licensed premises exist without the prior approval of the Public Safety Committee which shall take into consideration the recommendation of the Plan Commission with respect to the plans and description of the proposed outdoor sports area. 
(c)  Application. If a licensee desires to conduct or sponsor an outdoor sports activity or event on the licensee's property, the licensee shall file an application with the Village Clerk-Treasurer setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for the actual conduct of the activity or event; 
(2)  The date and duration of time for the proposed activity or event; 
(3)  An accurate description of that portion of the licensee's property proposed to be used; 
(4)  A good faith estimate of the number of participants and spectators for the proposed activity or event; and 
(5)  The licensee's plan for maintaining the cleanliness of the licensed area. 
(d)  Time for filing. The licensee shall file the application not less than 30 days before the date of the proposed activity or event. The Public Safety Committee may waive the 30-day time limit upon a licensee's showing of exigent circumstances. The application shall be accompanied by a payment of the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for review of the application. 
(e)  Review. The Public Safety Committee shall review the applications in light of the standards of this Section. If the nature of the property or the event requires the imposition of additional regulations, the Public Safety Committee may impose these regulations upon an express finding detailing the reasons for additional regulation. 
(f)  Standards. The following standards shall apply to any outdoor sports activity regulated under this Section: 
(1)  Approval of an application shall not act to permit outdoor consumption of alcohol beverages on the property. Outdoor consumption shall be permitted only in outdoor areas included within licensed premises pursuant to Section 11-64(n). 
(2)  If the estimated number of participants and spectators shall bring the number of persons on the property above the number for which licensed premises' restroom facilities are rated adequate, the licensee shall provide a number of portable temporary restrooms sufficient to service the estimated number of persons. 
(3)  The Public Safety Committee shall not grant approval to any applicant where the outdoor sports area is within 200 feet of any dwelling. 
(4)  The applicant shall provide parking adequate for the proposed activity or event, whether on-site or through agreements with property owners shown to the Public Safety Committee's satisfaction to permit their property to be used for parking for the proposed activity or event. 
(5)  The applicant shall show the Public Safety Committee plans adequate to provide reasonable access to participants and spectators for the event, and to limit access for all other persons. 
(6)  If the proposed outdoor sports area is on a property that, at the time of the original application is adjacent to any residential property or within 70 feet of any residential property the regulations set forth in subparagraphs a. through c. of this paragraph shall apply. For purposes of this section, a "residential property" is any property, located in a zoning district identified in Section 62-69 of the McFarland Municipal Code, excluding the A-1 or CO district, upon which a residential use exists as a legal or legal-nonconforming use, or upon which a residential use is to commence as evidenced by a building permit authorizing creation of a residential use having been filed with the Building Inspector. 
a.  Outdoor lighting shall conform to an approved lighting plan prepared by a professional lighting engineer. The plan shall certify that the outdoor lighting shall not permit any light trespass onto any residential property greater than .01 footcandles. 
b.  Whistles shall not be used except as required to call for stoppage of play. 
c.  Use of the outdoor sports area shall be limited to the period between April 1 and November 1. 
(7)  If persons under the age of 21 are allowed to be present on the licensed premises, all persons 21 years of age or older who intend to consume alcohol beverages in the outdoor ports area, shall be issued a wristband that is bright in color which shall be issued only upon showing valid identification proving the person is 21 years of age or older. 
(8)  The outdoor sports area shall have all lights for competition turned off and no alcohol shall be possessed or consumed within the outdoor sports area after 9:30 p.m. 
(9)  Amplified music, audio speakers, microphones, televisions or other audio or video devices are prohibited. 
(g)  Maintenance standards. The licensee shall clean up all garbage and debris relating to the activity or event at least once per 24 hours during the activity or event. 
(h)  Noise. The licensee shall not permit the noise level of the activity or event to exceed 75 dB, measured at any border of the licensee's real property. 
(i)  Violations. Failure of the licensee to comply with any of the provisions of this Section shall be grounds for suspension, nonrenewal or revocation of the licensee's alcohol beverage license. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-19; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 100, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2004-26, § 5, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, 4-22-2013; Ord. No. 2015-07, §§ 6—11, 7-27-2015; Ord. No. 2016-01, §§ 2, 3, 1-25-2016; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 79, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-70. - Operator's license. 
(a)  Operator's licenses; Class "A," Class "B" or "Class C" premises. Except as provided under Wis. Stats. §§ 125.32(3)(b) and 125.07(3)(a)10, no premises operated under a Class "A," Class "B," or "Class C" license or permit may be open for business unless there is upon the premises the licensee or permittee, the agent named in the license or permit if the licensee or permittee is a corporation, or some person who has an operator's license and who is responsible for the acts of all persons serving any fermented malt beverages to customers. An operator's license issued in respect to a vessel under Wis. Stats. § 125.27(2), is valid outside the municipality that issues it. For the purpose of this Section, any person holding a manager's license under Wis. Stats. § 125.18, or any member of the licensee's or permittee's immediate family who has attained the age of 18, shall be considered the holder of an operator's license. No person, including a member of the licensee's or permittee's immediate family, other than the licensee, permittee or agent, may serve fermented malt beverages in any place operated under a Class "A," Class "B," or "Class C" license or permit unless the person has an operator's license or is at least 18 years of age and is under the immediate supervision of the licensee, permittee, agent or a person holding an operator's license, who is on the premises at the time of the service. 
(b)  Temporary operator's licenses. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may issue temporary operator's licenses. Such licenses may be valid for between one and 14 days, which period shall be stated on the license. Such temporary licenses shall be issued only to those persons employed by or donating their services to a nonprofit organization holding a license under Section 11-49(a) or (b). No person may hold more than two temporary operator's license per year. 
(c)  Provisional operator's licenses. 
(1)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a provisional operator's license to any person who has completed the application for an operator's license under Section 11-71(a), is eligible for a license according to the investigation conducted under Section 11-71(b), has paid the fees under Section 11-73(a) and (c) and has enrolled in the training course under Section 11-71(c). The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall also issue a provisional license to any person who, at the time of application for an operator's license and payment of the fees under Section 11-73(a) and (c), files a certified copy of a valid operator's license issued by another municipality of the state. 
(2)  A provisional license may not be issued to any person who has been denied an operator's license by the Village. 
(3)  A provisional license shall expire 60 days after its issuance, upon issuance of an operator's license, or if a provisional license is issued on the basis of a certified copy of a valid operator's license in another municipality, upon expiration of the operator's license from the other municipality whichever comes sooner. 
(d)  Use by another prohibited. 
(1)  No person may allow another to use such person's Class "A" or Class "B" license or permit to sell alcohol beverages. 
(2)  The license or permit of a person who violates Subsection (d)(1) of this Section shall be summarily revoked by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-30; Ord. No. 2004-26, §§ 6—8, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 80—82, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2020-12 , § 1, 4-13-2020) 
State Law reference— Operator's licenses, Wis. Stats. §§ 125.32(2), 125.68(2); temporary license, Wis. Stats. § 125.17(4); provisional license, Wis. Stats. § 125.17(5).  
Sec. 11-71. - Procedure upon application for operator's license. 
(a)  Application. An operator's license may be issued to qualifying individuals meeting the applicable requirements set forth under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5) and this Section. Applications for operator's licenses must be submitted on a form provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, home, and work phone numbers. 
(2)  Date of birth, gender, Social Security number, and driver's license or state identification card number. 
(3)  Whether the applicant has completed a responsible beverage server training course pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.17(6). 
(4)  Whether the applicant has held an operator's license within the previous two years. If one has been held in a different municipality, a copy of the license or a letter from the clerk of the municipality shall be provided. 
(5)  The applicant's arrest and conviction record substantially related to the licensed activity, including: 
a.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony. 
b.  Whether the applicant has been arrested for and/or convicted of violating any law or ordinance during the last ten years. 
c.  Whether the applicant has any pending charges, including criminal and ordinance violations. 
If so, the applicant shall provide the details of each arrest, conviction and charge, including: 
a.  The dates of the arrest and conviction. 
b.  The specific offense for which the applicant was arrested or charged. 
c.  The name and location of the court that adjudicated the case, and case number. 
d.  A description of the nature and circumstances of the offense. 
e.  Whether the applicant was consuming alcohol beverages or drugs at the time of the incident, not including non-impairing medications prescribed to the applicant. 
f.  Whether the incident occurred in or around an establishment that serves alcohol beverages. 
g.  Whether the incident involved alcohol beverages or controlled substances in any other way. 
The applicant may also submit evidence of rehabilitation and fitness to perform the licensed activity. 
(6)  Whether the applicant has had a license to serve alcohol beverages suspended, revoked, or surrendered in lieu of suspension or revocation and if so, the name of the municipality and the date the license was suspended, revoked, or surrendered. 
(7)  The address and date of residency for each place the applicant has resided for the previous five years. 
(8)  Any other information required by the Village Clerk-Treasurer or Chief of Police to run all required background checks or to otherwise process the application. 
(9)  Any other information required by the Village Board. 
(b)  Investigation. All applications are subject to an investigation by the Police Department and/or other appropriate authority to determine whether the applicant to be licensed complies with all regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. The Police Department shall investigate the applicant and, as part of that investigation, request information from the state, surrounding municipalities, and/or any community where the applicant has previously resided concerning the applicant's arrest and conviction record. Based upon such investigation, the Police Department shall issue written recommendations to grant or deny the license. If the Police Department recommends denial, the Police Department shall provide, in writing, the reasons for such recommendation. The recommendation for denial shall be forwarded to the Public Safety Committee for further review and a recommendation to the Village Board. If the Police Department finds the application to be incomplete or omitting any required information from Subsection (a), the application shall be rejected and returned to the applicant. 
(c)  Training course. 
(1)  Except as provided in Subsection (c)(2) of this Section, the Village Clerk-Treasurer may not issue an operator's license unless the applicant has successfully completed a responsible beverage server training course at any location that is offered by a technical college district and that conforms to curriculum guidelines specified by the technical college system board or a comparable training course, which may include computer-based training and testing that is approved by the department or the educational approval board or unless the applicant fulfills one of the following requirements: 
a.  The person is renewing an operator's license. 
b.  Within the past two years, the person held a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B" or "Class C" license or permit or a manager's or operator's license. 
c.  Within the past two years, the person has completed such a training course. 
(2)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer may issue a provisional operator's license to a person who is enrolled in a training course under Subsection (c)(1) of this Section and who meets the standards established by the Village and shall revoke that license if the applicant fails to successfully complete the course in which the applicant enrolls. 
(3)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer may not require that applicants for operator's licenses undergo training in addition to that under Subsection (c)(1) of this Section, but may require applicants to purchase, at cost, materials that deal with relevant local subjects not covered in the course under Subsection (c)(1) of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-31; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 101, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, 4-14-2004; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 83, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2018-08 , § 1, 7-23-2018; Ord. No. 2019-10 , § 1, 5-13-2019; Ord. No. 2020-12 , § 2, 4-13-2020) 
State Law reference— Qualifications for licenses and permits, Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5); training course, Wis. Stats. § 125.17(6).  
Sec. 11-72. - Duration. 
Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article shall be valid for a period of one year and shall expire on the June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-32) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 125.17(3).  
Sec. 11-73. - Operator's license fee. 
(a)  Operator's license. The fee for an operator's license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for the term or part thereof. 
(b)  Temporary operator's license. The fee for a temporary operator's license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  Provisional operator's license. The fee for a provisional operator's license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-33; Ord. No. 99-02, §§ 5, 6, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 4, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 102, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2004-26, § 9, 12-13-2004) 
State Law reference— Operator's license fee, Wis. Stats. § 125.17(3)—(5).  
Sec. 11-74. - Issuance or denial of operator's license. 
(a)  Issuance of approved licenses. If the Police Department recommends granting the operator's license, or the Village Board approves granting the operator's license, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the license. Such licenses shall state the applicant's name and address and the date of the expiration of such license. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall make the license available for pick up at the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office. Any operator's license for which the fee is not paid within 15 days of approval of the application by the Village Board shall be returned to the Village Clerk-Treasurer for cancellation or other disposition. 
(b)  Denial. 
(1)  If the application is denied by the Village Board, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall, in writing, inform the applicant of the denial, the reasons therefor, and of the opportunity to request a reconsideration of the application by the Village Board. Such notice must be sent by registered mail to, or served upon, the applicant at least ten days prior to the Village Board's reconsideration of the matter. At such reconsideration hearing, the applicant may present evidence and testimony as to why the license should be granted. 
(2)  If upon reconsideration, the Village Board again denies the application, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons therefor. An applicant who is denied any license may apply to Circuit Court pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(d), for review. 
(c)  Basis for denial. 
(1)  Consideration for the granting or denial of a license will be based on: 
a.  Arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to the limitations imposed by Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322, and 111.335, and Wis. Stats. § 125.12(1)(b); 
b.  Reserved; 
c.  Generally, the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed. 
(2)  If a licensee is convicted of an offense substantially related to the licensed activity. 
(3)  An application may be denied based upon the applicant's arrest and conviction record if the applicant has been convicted of a felony (unless duly pardoned) or if the applicant has habitually been a law offender. For purposes of this licensing procedure, "habitually been a law offender" is generally considered to be an arrest or conviction of at least two offenses which are substantially related to the licensed activity within the five years immediately preceding the license application. Because a license is a privilege, the issuance of which is a right granted solely to the Village Board, the Village Board reserves the right to consider the severity, and facts and circumstances of the offense when making the determination to grant, deny or not renew a license. Further, the Village Board, at its discretion, may, based upon an arrest or conviction record of two or more offenses that are substantially related to the licensed activity within the five years immediately preceding, act to suspend such license for a period of one year or more. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-34; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 103—105, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 84, 85, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2018-08 , § 1, 7-23-2018; Ord. No. 2020-12 , § 3, 4-13-2020) 
State Law reference— Revocation, suspensions, refusals to issue, Wis. Stats. § 125.12.  
Sec. 11-75. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under the provisions of this Article shall be posted on the premises whenever the operator dispenses beverages or shall be in the operator's possession, or the operator shall carry a license card. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-35)  
Sec. 11-76. - Revocation of operator's license. 
Violation of any of the terms or provisions of the state law or of this Article relating to operator's licenses by any person holding such operator's license shall be cause for revocation of the license. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-36)  
Sec. 11-77. - Penalties. 
(a)  Forfeitures for violations of Wis. Stats. §§ 125.07(1)—(5) and 125.09(2), adopted by reference in Section 11-44, shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the comparable Wisconsin Statutes, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article of this Code, except as otherwise provided in Subsection (a) of this Section or who shall conduct any activity or make any sale for which a license is required without a license, shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Section 1-16. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1998, § 7-2-40)  
Secs. 11-78—11-97. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CIGARETTES, TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND NICOTINE PRODUCTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 3, adopted March 13, 2017, changed the title of Art. III from "Cigarettes and Tobacco Products" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Cigarette and tobacco products retailer license, Wis. Stats. § 134.65. 
 
Sec. 11-98. - License required. 
No person shall, in any manner, or upon any pretense, or by any device, directly or indirectly, upon any premises, or by any device, sell, expose for sale, possess with intent to sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give away, or keep for sale, any cigarette, cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers, tobacco product, nicotine product or any substitute therefor, without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1998, § 7-3-1(a); Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 4, 3-13-2017) 
State Law reference— Cigarette and tobacco products license, Wis. Stats. § 134.65.  
Sec. 11-99. - Application for license, fee. 
Every person, firm or corporation desiring a license under this Section shall file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer a written application, stating the name of the person and the place for which such license is desired. Each license shall be filed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall name the licensee and the place such licensee is authorized to conduct such business, and the same shall not be delivered until the applicant shall pay to the Village Clerk-Treasurer the license fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 7-3-1(b); Ord. No. 98-20, § 2, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 106, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 86, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— License application and fee, nontransferable, Wis. Stats. § 134.65(2)(b), (3).  
Sec. 11-100. - Issuance, conditions and term of license. 
(a)  Such licenses shall be issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(b)  The licensee shall comply with the restrictions and training requirements set forth in Wis. Stats. § 134.66. 
(c)  Each license shall be issued on July 1 in each year, or thereafter whenever applied for, and shall continue in force from date of issuance until the succeeding June 30 unless sooner revoked for any violation of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 7-3-1(c); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 107, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 5, 3-13-2017; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 87, 6-26-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 5, adopted March 13, 2017, changed the title of § 11-100 from "Issuance and term of license" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Issuance, records to be kept, penalty for violations, Wis. Stats. § 134.65(4), (5).  
Secs. 11-101—11-128. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DIRECT SELLERS AND SOLICITORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Transient merchant, Wis. Stats. § 66.0423; solicitation of funds for charitable purposes, Wis. Stats. § 440.41; statewide peddler's license for residents who are disabled ex-soldiers, Wis. Stats. § 440.51; warning on contracts, Wis. Stats. § 241.27. 
 
Sec. 11-129. - Requirements. 
No direct seller or solicitor shall engage in any activity governed by this Article without complying with the requirements applicable to the class of activity in which the direct seller or solicitor is engaged. 
(Code 1998, § 7-4-1)  
Sec. 11-130. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Charitable organization. Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation described in § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and exempted from income taxes under § 501(a) of that code. 
(b)  Contribution. The promise or grant of any money or property of any kind or value, including net proceeds from sales of tickets, and donations required by the solicitor for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
(c)  Direct seller. Any individual who, for such individual, or for a partnership, association, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership or corporation, sells goods or services, or takes orders for the later delivery of goods or services, at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of said individual, partnership, association or corporation, including, but not be limited to, peddlers, hawkers, and transient merchants. 
(d)  Goods. Personal property of any kind, including goods provided incidental to services offered or sold. 
(e)  Permanent merchant. A person who, for at least one year prior to the consideration of the application of this Article to said merchant: 
(1)  Has continuously operated an established business at a physical location within the Village; or 
(2)  Has continuously resided in the Village for at least one year and currently does business from such seller's residence. 
(f)  Person. All humans of any age or sex, partnerships, corporations, associations, groups, organizations and any other description of a collection of human beings working in concert or for the same purpose or objective. 
(g)  Solicitor. Any person who plans, conducts, manages, or carries on any drive or campaign in the Village for the purpose of soliciting contributions for or on behalf of any charitable organization or any other person, or who engages in the business of or holds said person out to persons in this state as independently engaged in the business of soliciting contributions for such purpose. 
(h)  Farmers' market. A temporary food market at which locally produced fruits, vegetables, meats, cheeses, baked goods, and hand-crafted items are sold directly to consumers. 
(Code 1998, § 7-4-2; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 108, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1, 7-23-2018; Ord. No. 2019-12 , § 1, 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 11-131. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this Article other than Section 11-134(2)—(4) and (6) and Section 11-133: 
(a)  Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes; 
(b)  Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods; 
(c)  Any person selling agricultural products from commercially zoned property which such person has grown unless such sales are made door-to-door; 
(d)  Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the established place of business for goods or services regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their regular course of business; 
(e)  Any person who has an established place of business within the McFarland School District where the goods or services being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home visit by, said person; 
(f)  Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer; 
(g)  Reserved; 
(h)  Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law; 
(i)  Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in solicitation of funds on behalf of said organization, provided that there has been submitted to the Village Clerk-Treasurer proof that such charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.41 et seq., or which is exempt from that statute's registration requirements; 
(j)  Any person selling goods when authorized pursuant to an event permit issued by the Village, pursuant to Chapter 36; 
(k)  Any person at a farmers' market selling fruits, vegetables, meats, cheeses, baked goods and hand-crafted items that the person or his or her family produced. This exemption does not extend to the resale or wholesale of products, and the sale of additional goods and products not produced by the seller or his or her family. 
(Code 1998, § 7-4-3; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 109, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 88, 89, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2, 7-23-2018; Ord. No. 2019-12 , § 2, 6-24-2019)  
Sec. 11-132. - Direct seller license. 
(a)  Required information. Applicants for a license as a direct seller must complete and return to the Village Clerk-Treasurer a license application furnished by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, which shall require the following information: 
(1)  Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary address, if any, from which business will be conducted; 
(2)  Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and date of birth; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold; 
(4)  The time period for which the right to conduct business is desired; 
(5)  Nature of business or solicitation to be conducted and a brief description of the goods or services offered; 
(6)  Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable; 
(7)  Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant in the conduct of direct sales in the Village; 
(8)  Last cities, villages or towns, not to exceed three, where the applicant most recently conducted similar business or solicitation prior to making this application; 
(9)  Address and telephone number where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving this Village or completing the direct sales activity, whichever occurs first; 
(10)  Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to direct sales or solicitations, the circumstances of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(b)  Documentation. Applicants shall present to the Village Clerk-Treasurer for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required; 
(2)  A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures where the applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities; 
(3)  A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law; such certificate to state that the applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is made; 
(4)  A photograph approximately two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of such person, which was taken no more than one year prior to the application; 
(5)  A copy of the applicant's fingerprints taken by any authorized law enforcement agency. 
(c)  Application fee. At the time of filing the application, the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code shall be paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer to cover the cost of processing the application and investigation of the applicant. 
(d)  Investigation. Upon receipt of the application, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall refer it immediately to the Chief of Police, who shall cause a complete investigation of the applicant based upon the information in the application and report the findings of such investigation to the Clerk-Treasurer. 
(e)  Issuance of license. 
(1)  Standards for issuance. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license authorizing the direct sales described in the application as soon as practicable following receipt of a report from the Chief of Police, unless the Village Clerk-Treasurer determines one or more of the following: 
(a)  The application is incomplete, or information required by Subsection (a) has not been provided. 
(b)  The application or supporting documents contain any false or materially misleading information or any material omission. 
(c)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor, ordinance violation or other offense, the circumstances of which substantially relate to the circumstances of direct sales activities. 
(2)  License provisions. If the Clerk-Treasurer determines that the applicant meets the requirements of this Section, or if the Village Board determines to issue the license after appeal, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry. Licenses may be issued with an effective period of seven days, 30 days or the calendar year. The licensee shall thereupon sign a statement appointing the Village Clerk-Treasurer as agent for receipt of service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of the performance or nonperformance of any sale or service performed by the licensee in connection with the direct sales activities in the event the licensee cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. All licenses are subject to subsequent revocation, as provided in Section 11-136. 
(f)  Non-issuance by Clerk-Treasurer. 
(1)  Except as provided in Subsection (2), if an application is not approved by the Clerk-Treasurer pursuant to Subsection (e)(1)(c), the Clerk-Treasurer shall provide to the applicant in writing a statement of the reasons for the denial, including a statement of how the circumstances of each offense which is the basis for the denial relates to direct sales activities, and provide a copy of the written denial to the applicant. The written notice to the applicant shall also provide the applicant with the opportunity pursuant to Wis. Stats § 111.335(4)(c), to provide evidence to the Village Board at a hearing under paragraph (g) demonstrating that he or she has been rehabilitated and is fit to engage in the direct sales activities. 
(2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to any offense that constitutes an "exempt offense," which includes a violation specified in Wis. Stats. Ch. 940, Wis. Stats. §§ 948.02, 948.025, 948.03, 948.05, 948.051, 948.055, 948.06, 948.07, 948.075, 948.08, 948.085, 948.095, or a violation of the law of another jurisdiction that would be a violation of an above-described offense if committed in this state. 
(g)  Appeals. Any person whose application has not been approved by the Clerk-Treasurer, may appeal to the Village Board in writing within 14 days of notice of the decision. The procedure for such appeal shall follow Section 11-1(d) and (e). Upon any appeal of a license denial based in whole or part on Section 11-132(e)(1)(e), the Board shall consider any evidence of rehabilitation presented by the applicant pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 111.335(4)(d). If the applicant demonstrates rehabilitation and fitness to engage in direct sales activities, the Board shall grant the license unless it finds grounds other than the applicant's conviction record for denying the application. 
(Code 1998, § 7-4-4; Ord. No. 98-20, § 2, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 5, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 110—113, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 90—93, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 3, 7-23-2018; Ord. No. 2020-10 , § 1, 2-24-2020)  
Sec. 11-133. - Solicitors registration procedure. 
(a)  Applicants for registration as a solicitor shall complete and return to the Village Clerk-Treasurer a signed registration form furnished by the Village Clerk-Treasurer containing the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the charitable person, firm, association, organization or corporation that the solicitor represents or is employed by, together with credentials establishing the relationship; 
(2)  Purpose of the charitable organization; 
(3)  Names, permanent addresses, and telephone numbers of the persons who will actually engage in the soliciting, together with the time periods and routes on which the persons will solicit; 
(4)  A statement of whether the charitable organization is registered with the Wisconsin Department of Regulation and Licensing under Wis. Stats. § 440.41 et seq.; 
(b)  At the time for filing the application, the applicant shall present the following to the Village Clerk-Treasurer for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required; 
(2)  A photograph approximately two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of such person, which was taken no more than one year prior to the application; 
(3)  If intending to solicit on behalf of a charitable organization required to be registered with the state, a complete copy of the organization's registration form and supporting materials under Wis. Stats. § 440.41 et seq., the latest annual report under Wis. Stats. § 440.41(4), and the registration materials, bond and contract under Wis. Stats. § 440.41(5), (6), and (7); 
(4)  If intending to solicit on behalf of a charitable organization not required to be registered with the state, a copy of the charitable organization's latest filed federal tax form. 
(c)  No fee shall be charged for registration of solicitors. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall examine the application and supporting documents. If the application and supporting documents are complete, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall register the applicant as a solicitor. The registration shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1998, § 7-4-5; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 114—116, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 94—96, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 4, 7-23-2018)  
Sec. 11-134. - General regulation of direct sellers and solicitors. 
(a)  Prohibited practices. 
(1)  A direct seller or solicitor shall be prohibited from: calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. and all day on legal holidays, except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(2)  No direct seller or solicitor shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(3)  No direct seller or solicitor shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(4)  No direct seller or solicitor shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which such direct seller or solicitor is conducting business. 
(5)  No direct seller or solicitor may call at the rear door of any dwelling except by prior appointment. 
(6)  No direct seller or solicitor may remain on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant, or other person having apparent authority over the premises. 
(b)  Disclosure requirements. After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller or solicitor shall expressly disclose the direct seller or solicitor's name, the name of the company or organization the direct seller or solicitor is affiliated with, if any, the identity of goods or services the direct seller or solicitor offers to sell and the purpose of the contact. Each such seller or solicitor shall carry proof in the form of a photo identification card issued and executed by the organization for whom the individual is selling or soliciting demonstrating that the individual is authorized to act on behalf of the company or organization, as well as a copy of the registration or license issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The photo identification card shall be visible at all times when engaged in selling or soliciting. The direct seller or solicitor shall produce such proof and registration or license for inspection by the individual or by any law enforcement officer immediately upon request. 
(Code 1998, § 7-4-6; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 117, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 97, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 5, 7-23-2018)  
Sec. 11-135. - Additional regulation of direct sellers. 
(a)  A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity, or character of goods or services offered for sale, or the purpose of the visit, or the identity of the organization represented. 
(b)  If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller or any sales order for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.00, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 423.203; the seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 423.203(1), (2) and (3). 
(c)  If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, the direct seller shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 7-4-7; Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 6, 7-23-2018)  
Sec. 11-136. - Revocation of licenses. 
(1)  Grounds. Any license issued under this section may be revoked by the Village Board after notice and hearing if: 
(a)  The seller made any material omission or any false, materially misleading or otherwise untrue statement in the application for a license. 
(b)  The seller has made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales. 
(c)  The seller has violated any provision in this chapter. 
(d)  The seller has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor, ordinance violation or other offense, the circumstances of which substantially relate to the circumstances of direct sales activities, and the seller fails to show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and fitness to perform direct sales activities. 
(2)  Revocation hearing. 
(a)  Notice of hearing. Written notice of a hearing on the revocation of any license issued under this section shall be mailed to the licensee at the permanent address shown on the registration at least seven days, or shall be served personally on the registrant at least 72 hours, prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and a statement of the facts upon which the hearing will be based. 
(b)  Hearing. If the licensee fails to appear before the Village Board on the date indicated on the notice, the Village Board shall revoke the licensee's direct seller license. If the licensee appears before the Village Board on the date indicated in the notice and denies that the reasons for revocation exist, the Village Board shall conduct a hearing with respect to the matter. At the hearing, both the Village and the seller may introduce evidence, produce witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by counsel. The licensee shall, upon request, be provided a written transcript of the hearing at the seller's expense. The Village Board shall issue findings and a decision within 30 days after the date of the hearing. 
(3)  Temporary suspension. Any law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that a person issued a license or permit under this chapter has committed a criminal offense or violated any provision of this chapter in the course of direct sales or solicitation activities may immediately suspend the person's license or permit pending a hearing under Subsection (2). The suspension shall be immediately reported to the Clerk/Treasurer who shall schedule a hearing as soon as practicable, unless review of the suspension is waived by the licensee or permittee. 
( Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 7, 7-23-2018)  
Secs. 11-137—11-153. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL OR ELECTRICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
 
Sec. 11-154. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Major arcade. Any single premises or location at which is located more than nine mechanical or electronic amusement devices. 
(b)  Mechanical or electronic amusement device. Any machine, device, or game which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, or similar item, permits a person or operator to use the device as a game or contest of skill or amusement, whether or not the device registers a score, and which is not a gambling device. The term shall include, but not be limited to, billiard tables, pool tables, electronic darts, electronic or mechanical game machines, pinball machines, ski-ball machines, shooting games, and electronic video games. 
(c)  Minor arcade. Any single premises or location at which is located between four and nine mechanical or electronic amusement devices. 
(d)  Video game of chance. A game or device that simulates one or more games commonly referred to as poker, blackjack, craps, hi-lo, roulette, any game in which winners are selected based on the results of a race or sporting event, any banking card game, baccarat or chemin de fer, any game that involves rolling dice, keno, bingo 21, bingo jack, bingo let, bingo craps, any game of change that is placed on a slot machine or any mechanical, electro-mechanical or electronic device that is generally available to be played at a gambling casino or other common gambling forms regardless of whether the video game of chance offers any type of pecuniary award or gain to players. 
(Code 1998, § 7-5-1)  
Sec. 11-155. - Registration and licensing of amusement devices. 
(a)  All devices to be licensed. 
(1)  Any person maintaining, operating or permitting the operation of a mechanical or electronic amusement device shall obtain a license to operate such device from the Village Clerk-Treasurer, unless the premises on which the device is maintained or operated is licensed as a minor or major arcade. The fee for operation of a mechanical or electronic amusement device shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Such license shall expire on June 30 of each year. The applicant shall submit an application for each place where a mechanical or electronic amusement device is to be operated, stating the name of the owner of the device, the place where the device is to be operated and such other information as the Village Clerk-Treasurer may reasonably require. If the Village Clerk-Treasurer is satisfied that the applicant meets all the requirements of this Section, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the license. Such license shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises at all times while the device is operable. 
(2)  No person shall make available for public use any video game of chance without a license. The license shall be valid for one year only. A license shall be obtained for each machine and shall specify the premises upon which each machine shall be kept. Neither a major nor minor arcade license shall substitute for a video game of chance license. No person shall be issued more than five licenses for video games of chance nor shall more than five licenses be issued for any individual premises. The fee for a video game of chance license shall be as established in the fee schedule established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Applications for a video game of chance license shall follow the same process as required for amusement devices in this Article. 
(3)  No person may offer anything of value for playing of the video game of chance other then continued or free play of the device. Providing anything of value or paying of monies constitutes gambling and subjects the licensee to the laws and ordinances pertaining to illegal gambling. 
(b)  Minor arcade license. 
(1)  Any person owning or operating a premises on which between four and nine mechanical or electronic amusement devices are kept at any one time shall, in lieu of obtaining a license under Subsection (a) of this Section, obtain a minor arcade license for the premises, which shall permit the holder thereof to operate or maintain the specified number of devices on the licensed premises. The fee for a minor arcade license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Such license shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(2)  The application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant. 
b.  Name and address of person responsible for management of the arcade, including list of such person's qualifications, experience and references, and date, place and circumstances of conviction of violation of any local ordinance, state or federal law directly related to the activity proposed to be licensed. 
c.  Complete description of the premises to be licensed. 
d.  Statement of the number of devices to be kept on the premises, describing each by make and type. 
e.  Name of owner of the machines. 
f.  Type of supervision to be provided. 
g.  A zoning permit or current zoning application, if required by the Zoning Administrator. 
h.  Detailed operating plan, including hours of operation and manner of supervision to be provided. 
i.  Such other information as the Village Clerk-Treasurer may reasonably require. 
(3)  If the Village Clerk-Treasurer is satisfied that the premises and management thereof meet the requirements of this Section and Section 11-1, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall submit the application to the Village Board. No minor arcade license shall be valid until approved by the Village Board. The applicant shall display such license conspicuously on the premises at all times during which the arcade is in operation. 
(c)  Major arcade license. 
(1)  Any person owning or operating a premises on which ten or more mechanical or electronic amusement devices are kept at any time shall obtain for such premises a major arcade license in lieu of obtaining a license under Subsection (a) of this Section. The fee for a major arcade license shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Such license shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(2)  Application for a major arcade license shall be in writing on forms provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall contain the information required under Subsection (b)(2) of this Section. 
(3)  The operating plan and any restrictions placed on the premises under the zoning permit, if required, shall be incorporated by reference in any arcade license or renewal thereof. No major arcade license shall be valid until approved by the Village Board. The license shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises at all times during which the arcade is in operation. 
(Code 1998, § 7-5-2; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 118—120, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 98—101, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-156. - Restrictions applicable to all mechanical or electronic amusement devices, video games of chance and arcades. 
(a)  Premises to be safe and sanitary. No license shall be granted for any mechanical or electronic amusement device, video game of chance or arcade unless the premises complies with all fire and building code requirements of the Village and the state, provides adequate room for operation of the devices without blocking access, and is an otherwise safe and sanitary environment. 
(b)  Premises to be supervised. No mechanical or electronic amusement device, video game of chance or arcade license shall be granted unless the applicant therefor shows that the premises will be adequately supervised. 
(c)  Orderly conduct required. The licensee shall maintain supervision of the premises in such a manner as to ensure that no disorderly conduct, gambling or other activity prohibited by local ordinance, state or federal law is permitted on such premises. 
(d)  Wisconsin Department of Justice registration required. No mechanical or electronic amusement device may lawfully be operated in the Village unless there is affixed thereto a Wisconsin Department of Justice identification number, if required by law. If any device is found in the Village without such registration number, any police officer is authorized to summarily revoke the license of the premises where the offense is committed. 
(e)  Offering of prizes or awards prohibited. No licensee under this Section shall offer, advertise, make, or give any reward, prize, money or thing of value to any person by reason of the operation of any mechanical or electronic amusement device. 
(f)  Consent to inspection. An applicant for a license under this Section thereby consents to the entry of police or authorized representatives of the Village upon the licensed premises at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection and search and consents to removal from the premises and introduction into evidence in prosecutions for violations of this Article all things found therein in violation of this Section or state law. 
(g)  Parking. No license shall be issued or renewed unless the licensee has provided off-street parking stalls conforming to Village minimum parking regulations. 
(h)  Village claims. No license shall be granted or renewed for any coin-operated amusement device or video game of chance on any premises upon which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the Village are delinquent and unpaid. 
(i)  Entry fees. No licensee shall charge customers a fee, cover charge, cubicle rental, membership fee or other charge for the privilege of using the premises on which any coin-operated amusement device or video game of chance is located. 
(Code 1998, § 7-5-3)  
Sec. 11-157. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  Mechanical or electronic amusement device and video game of chance license. Mechanical or electronic amusement device or video game of chance licenses may be transferred from premises to premises during the license year without charge. The holder of such license shall notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer within ten days of the time such transfer is made. 
(b)  Minor arcade license. A minor arcade license may be transferred from one premises to another or from the holder to another person upon application to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and a payment of the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may grant or deny such application or transfer and, if denied, the applicant has the right of review of such determination under Chapter 2, Article XI before the Village Board. 
(c)  Major arcade license. Major arcade licenses are not transferable. 
(Code 1998, § 7-5-4; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 121, 122, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 102, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-158. - Suspension or revocation of licenses. 
(a)  Any license issued under this Article may be suspended or revoked for cause by the Village Board. Except for summary revocation under Section 11-156(d), no license shall be suspended or revoked except upon written verified complaint filed with the Village Board by a member of such body, a law enforcement officer or resident of the Village. The licensee shall be served with a written copy of the charges and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The licensee shall be given notice of such hearing not more than 20 nor less than five days after notice, except as otherwise agreed between the parties. 
(b)  At such hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, shall have the right to present and cross-examine witnesses and, upon request, may have subpoenas issued by the presiding officer to compel the attendance of witnesses. Any suspension ordered by the Village Board shall be for not less than ten nor more than 90 days. 
(Code 1998, § 7-5-5)  
Secs. 11-159—11-184. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of fireworks, Wis. Stats. § 167.10. 
 
Sec. 11-185. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this Article, the term "fireworks" means anything manufactured, processed or packaged for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion that does not have another common use, but does not include any of the following: 
(a)  Fuel or a lubricant. 
(b)  A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell. 
(c)  A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle. 
(d)  A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater. 
(e)  A cap containing not more than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture, if the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device that prevents direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion. 
(f)  A toy snake that contains no mercury. 
(g)  A model rocket engine. 
(h)  Tobacco and a tobacco product. 
(i)  A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in length that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or to produce audible and visible effects. 
(j)  A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture. 
(k)  A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or audible and visible effects, and that contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture. 
(l)  A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smoke-producing mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible or visible effects, or audible and visible effects. 
(m)  A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50. 
(n)  A cone fountain that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50. 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(a)) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(1).  
Sec. 11-186. - Sale. 
No person may sell or possess with intent to sell fireworks, except: 
(a)  To a person holding a permit under Section 11-189; 
(b)  To a municipality; or 
(c)  For a purpose specified under Section 11-188(a)(1)—(6). 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(b)) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(2).  
Sec. 11-187. - Permit required for possession and use. 
No person may possess or use fireworks without a user's permit from the Village President or from an official or employee of the Village as designated by the Village Board. No person may use fireworks or a device listed under Section 11-185(e)—(g) and (i)—(n) while attending a fireworks display for which a permit has been issued to a person listed under Section 11-189(a)(1)—(5) or under Section 11-189(a)(6) if the display is open to the general public. The applicant shall meet the requirements of Section 11-1. 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(c)(1))  
Sec. 11-188. - Permit exceptions. 
(a)  Section 11-187 above does not apply to: 
(1)  The Village, except that Village fire and law enforcement officials shall be notified of the proposed use of fireworks at least two days in advance. 
(2)  The possession or use of explosives in accordance with rules or general orders of the Wisconsin Department of Commerce. 
(3)  The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with rules adopted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(4)  The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in any manufacturing process. 
(5)  The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in connection with classes conducted by educational institutions. 
(6)  A possessor or manufacturer of explosives in possession of a license or permit under 18 USC 841 to 848 if the possession of the fireworks is authorized under the license or permit. 
(7)  Except as provided in Subsection (b) of this Section, the possession of fireworks in the Village while transporting the fireworks to a city, town or village where the possession of the fireworks is authorized by permit or ordinance. 
(b)  Section 11-187 applies to a person transporting fireworks under Subsection (a)(7) of this Section if, in the course of transporting the fireworks through a city, town or village, the person remains in that city, town or village for a period of at least 12 hours. 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(c)(2)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3)(b).  
Sec. 11-189. - Who may obtain permit. 
(a)  Issuance. A permit under this Article may be issued only to the following: 
(1)  A public authority. 
(2)  A fair association. 
(3)  An amusement park. 
(4)  A park board. 
(5)  A civic organization. 
(6)  An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory birds or animals. 
(b)  Crop protection signs. A person issued a permit for crop protection shall erect appropriate warning signs disclosing the use of fireworks for crop protection. 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(c)(3), (4)) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3)(c), (d).  
Sec. 11-190. - Bond. 
The Village President issuing a permit under this Article shall require an indemnity bond with good and sufficient sureties or policy of liability insurance for the payment of all claims that may arise by reason of injuries to person or property from the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under the permit. The bond or policy shall be taken in the name of the Village, and any person injured thereby may bring an action on the bond or policy in the person's own name to recover the damage the person has sustained, but the aggregate liability of the surety or insurer to all persons shall not exceed the amount of the bond or policy. A permit shall be issued only upon condition that the applicant submit to the Village Clerk-Treasurer satisfactory written evidence that applicant has in force and will maintain during the time the permit is in effect public liability insurance of not less than $500,000.00 per one person, $500,000.00 for one accident and property damage coverage of not less than $500,000.00. The policy shall name the Village as the third party insured." 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(c)(5); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 123, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 103, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Bond, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3)(e).  
Sec. 11-191. - Required information for permit. 
A permit under this Article shall specify all of the following: 
(a)  The name and address of the permit holder. 
(b)  The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased. 
(c)  The kind and quantity of fireworks which may be purchased. 
(d)  The date and location of permitted use. 
(e)  Other special conditions prescribed by ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(c)(6)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3)(f).  
Sec. 11-192. - Copy of permit. 
A copy of a permit under this Article shall be given to the Fire/EMS Chief and Police Department at least two days before the date of authorized use. 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(c)(7); Ord. No. 2013-14, § 10, 11-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3)(g).  
Sec. 11-193. - Permit to minors prohibited. 
A permit under this Article may not be issued to a minor. 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(c)(8)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3)(h).  
Sec. 11-194. - Storage and handling. 
(a)  Fire extinguishers required. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store or handle fireworks on the premises unless the premises are equipped with fire extinguishers approved by the Fire/EMS Chief. 
(b)  Smoking prohibited. No person may smoke where fireworks are stored or handled. 
(c)  Fire/EMS Chief to be notified. A person who stores or handles fireworks shall notify the Fire/EMS Chief of the location of the fireworks. 
(d)  Storage distance. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store fireworks within 500 feet of a dwelling. 
(e)  Restrictions on storage. No person may store fireworks within 500 feet of a public assemblage or place where gasoline or volatile liquid is sold in quantities exceeding one gallon. 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(d); Ord. No. 2013-14, §§ 11, 12, 11-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Storage and handling, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(5).  
Sec. 11-195. - Parental liability. 
A parent, foster parent, treatment foster parent, family-operated group home parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the minor is liable for damages caused by the minor's use of the fireworks. 
(Code 1998, § 7-6-1(e)) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(7).  
Sec. 11-196. - Municipal liability. 
The Village or any committee, official, or employee of the Village is not civilly liable for damage to any person or property caused by fireworks for the sole reason that the Village issued a permit in accordance with the requirements of this Article and any applicable requirements authorized under Wis. Stats. § 167.10(5), that authorized the purchase, possession, or use of the fireworks. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 167.10(7m).  
Secs. 11-197—11-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - NONMETALLIC MINING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Nonmetallic Mining, Wis. Stats. § 295.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-216. - Statutory provisions adopted. 
This Article is adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 295.13, which is adopted by reference and made a part of this Article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to enact ordinance that complies with state law, Wis. Stats. § 295.14.  
Sec. 11-217. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Environmental pollution. Has the meaning specified under Wis. Stats. § 291.01(3). 
(b)  Nonmetallic mining or nonmetallic mining operation. All of the following: 
(1)  Operations or activities for the extraction from the earth for sale or use by the operator of mineral aggregates such as stone, sand and gravel, fill material and nonmetallic minerals such as asbestos, beryl, clay, feldspar, peat, talc and topsoil, including such operations or activities as excavation, grading and dredging. 
(2)  On-site processes that are related to the extraction of mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals, such as stockpiling of materials, blending mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals with other mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals, crushing, screening, scalping and dewatering. 
(c)  Nonmetallic mining refuse. Waste soil, rock, mineral, and other natural material resulting from a nonmetallic mining operation. This term does not include merchantable by-products resulting directly from or displaced by the nonmetallic mining operation. 
(d)  Nonmetallic mining site or site. 
(1)  All of the following except as provided in Subsection (2) of this definition: 
a.  The location where nonmetallic mining is proposed or conducted. 
b.  Storage and processing areas that are in or contiguous to areas excavated for nonmetallic mining. 
c.  Areas where nonmetallic mining refuse is deposited. 
d.  Areas disturbed by activities such as the construction or improvement of private roads or haulageways for nonmetallic mining. 
e.  Areas where grading or regrading is necessary to conduct nonmetallic mining or to achieve a land use specified in an approved nonmetallic mining reclamation plan. 
(2)  The term does not include any area described in Subsection (1)a.—(1)e. of this definition that is not used for nonmetallic mining or for purposes related to nonmetallic mining on or after October 14, 1997. 
(e)  Operator. Any person who is engaged in a nonmetallic mining operation or nonmetallic mining site reclamation or who applies for or holds a nonmetallic mining permit issued under this Article whether individually, jointly or through subsidiaries, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors. 
(f)  Reclamation. The rehabilitation of a nonmetallic mining site to achieve a land use specified in an approved nonmetallic mining reclamation plan, including, but not limited to, removal or reuse of nonmetallic mining refuse, grading of the nonmetallic mining site, removal, storage and replacement of topsoil, stabilization of soil conditions, reestablishment of vegetative cover, control of surface water and groundwater, prevention of environmental pollution, and, if practical, restoration of plant, fish and wildlife habitat. 
(g)  Replacement of topsoil. The replacement of the topsoil that was removed or disturbed by a nonmetallic mining operation or the provision of material to substitute for the topsoil that was removed or disturbed, for the purposes of providing adequate vegetative cover and stabilization of soil conditions to achieve a land use specified in an approved nonmetallic mining reclamation plan. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-2) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 295.11.  
Sec. 11-218. - Existing nonmetallic mining operations. 
This Article shall apply to any portion of a nonmetallic mining site, including unreclaimed portions of a site that were mined prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-3)  
Sec. 11-219. - Exempt activities. 
This Article shall not apply to the activities that are exempt as provided in Wis. Stats. § 295.16(4). 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-4)  
Sec. 11-220. - Permit required. 
No person shall operate any nonmetallic mining site or operation within the Village unless the person obtains a nonmetallic mining permit from the Village Board. The fee for such permit shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code plus any actual Village administrative expenses, payable by certified check. Operators of existing nonmetallic mining operations shall apply for such permit within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-5(a))  
Sec. 11-221. - Required permit information. 
An application for a nonmetallic mining permit shall be submitted by the operator and shall include: 
(a)  An adequate description of the operation, including a legal description of the property; 
(b)  A plan of the site showing the proposed and existing roads and drives, and the sources, quantity and disposition of water to be used, if any; 
(c)  Estimated dates for completion of the extraction and commencement and completion dates for the reclamation; 
(d)  A reclamation plan and such other information as may be necessary to determine the nature of the operation and the effect on the surrounding area; 
(e)  Methods of screening from adjacent properties; 
(f)  Hours of operation; 
(g)  Dust and noise control; 
(h)  Maximum depth; 
(i)  Blasting procedures; 
(j)  Location and height of stockpiles; and 
(k)  Such other information the Village Board deems pertinent to the operation. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-5(b))  
Sec. 11-222. - Reclamation plan. 
The reclamation plan shall contain adequate provision that: 
(a)  All final slopes around the area be flatter than a three to one horizontal slope in a sand, gravel or borrow pit operation, or in a safe angle or repose in a quarrying operation; 
(b)  Excavations below the grade of the nearest abutting public street or highway shall be set back from the street or highway a distance not less than that required for buildings and structures in the same zoning district; 
(c)  Excavations made to a water-producing depth shall be not less than three feet measured from the low water mark; 
(d)  All final slopes shall be covered with adequate topsoil and seeded to prevent erosion; 
(e)  The plan shall require that, after completion of the anticipated operation, the area shall be cleared of all debris and be left in a workmanlike condition, subject to the approval of the Village Board; 
(f)  There is a timetable for completion of various stages of reclamation of the nonmetallic mining site. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-5(c))  
Sec. 11-223. - Applications. 
(a)  Required. All applications for a permit hereunder shall be made in writing upon the written form provided by the Village and distributed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. All applications for permits hereunder shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer at least 60 days prior to the licensing period. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately refer all applications for a license hereunder to the Village Board for public hearing and approval. The license shall be for a period of time as stated in the application or as modified by the Village Board. Modification of the application or reclamation plan may be permitted or additional conditions may be required upon application. The Village Board shall consider the effect of the operation and the proposed reclamation upon existing and future conditions, including streets, neighboring land development, land use drainage, water supply, water pollution, air pollution, soil erosion, natural beauty and land value of the locality. The Village Board may approve, approve conditionally or reject the application and reclamation plan. The applicant shall satisfy the requirements of Section 11-1. 
(b)  Financial assurance. Before a license and reclamation plan is approved by the Village Board, the operator shall submit an agreement and performance bond or cash escrow agreement to assure the following: 
(1)  The operator shall pay for the cost of all improvements required in the reclamation plan by the Village Board. 
(2)  Guaranteed completion of the required reclamation within a period determined by the Village Board. 
(3)  Payment by the operator for all costs incurred by the Village for review and inspection. This would include preparation and review of plans and specifications by the Village Engineer and Village Attorney, as well as other costs of a similar nature. 
(4)  The Village may elect to have stages of the reclamation plan performed under the terms of a cash escrow agreement. 
(5)  The required performance bond or cash escrow agreement shall be equal to 1¼ times the Village Engineer's estimated cost of the required improvements. 
(6)  If the required reclamation is not complete within the designated period, all amounts held under the escrow agreement or performance bond shall be turned over and delivered to the Village and applied to the cost of the required reclamation. Any balance remaining after such reclamation has been done shall be returned to the operator. The Village Board, at its option, may extend the bond period for additional periods. 
(c)  Fences. Prior to reclamation, nonmetallic mining sites abutting areas zoned residential shall be enclosed by a security fence of not less than four feet in height. Fence gates shall be locked or secured when the site is unattended so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children to the site. 
(d)  Inspection. An authorized agent of the Village may enter the premises of a nonmetallic mining operation in the performance of official duties by permission of the property owner or operator or pursuant to a special inspection warrant issued under Wis. Stats. § 66.122, in order to inspect those premises and to ascertain compliance with this Article. 
(e)  Prohibitions and orders. Nonmetallic mining operations within the Village are prohibited if the nonmetallic mining site cannot be reclaimed in compliance with the standards of this Article or if other requirements of this Article are not met. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-5(d)—(h); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 129, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 104, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-224. - Permit revocation. 
If any permit is revoked, cancelled, rescinded or terminated, the operator shall be given written notice of any charges or violations against such operator or the reasons proposed for revocation and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-6)  
Secs. 11-225—11-241. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - BLASTING AND/OR ROCK CRUSHING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Mines, quarries and pits, Wis. Stats. § 101.15. 
 
Sec. 11-242. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Blasting. A method of loosening, moving or shattering masses of solid matter by use of explosive compounds to prepare stone for crushing, to prepare stone for building and/or ornamental use, or to prepare property for development. 
(b)  Rock crusher. Any device, machine, apparatus or equipment used either individually or in conjunction with any other device, machine, apparatus or equipment for the purpose of crushing, grinding, breaking or pulverizing rock or stone. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(a))  
Sec. 11-243. - Operation. 
No person within the Village shall operate a rock crusher or perform blasting in such a manner so that any dust, dirt or vibration from such operation shall, in any way, damage or injure any person or property within the Village. All blasting within the Village shall be performed according to the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 7, Explosive Materials, and all subsequent amendments thereto. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(b))  
Sec. 11-244. - Permit required. 
No person within the Village shall operate a rock crusher or perform blasting who does not possess a proper permit from the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(c)(1))  
Sec. 11-245. - Applications. 
All applications for permits hereunder shall be made in writing upon the written form provided by the Village and distributed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. All applications for permits hereunder shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the Village Clerk-[Treasurer] at least 60 days prior to the licensing period. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately refer all applications for permits hereunder to the Village Engineer. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a permit hereunder only after first receiving the recommendation of the Village Engineer, the duly executed certified check for the permit fee as hereinafter provided and the submittal of the plan of operation, if required, as approved by the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(c)(2); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 130, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 105, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-246. - Certified check. 
Each application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a certified check in the sum of the required permit fee as hereinafter provided, or a renewal thereof, the same to be payable to the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(c)(3))  
Sec. 11-247. - Plan of operation. 
Each application to permit a rock crusher hereunder or renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a plan of operation which shall include: methods of screening from adjacent properties, hours of operation, hours of blasting and operation of rock crusher, dust and noise control, blasting procedures, location and height of stockpiles, whether a rock crusher will be needed and how often, water supply, drainage course, maximum depth, legal description of property in question and other information the Village Engineer deems pertinent to the proposed operation. Such plan of reorganization shall be approved by the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(c)(4))  
Sec. 11-248. - Insurance. 
Each application for a blasting permit shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance identifying the Village as a party insured in the amount of $500,000.00 for damage to property, and $500,000.00 for injury to one person and $1,000,000.00 for injury to more than one person caused by the blasting. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(c)(5))  
Sec. 11-249. - Renewals. 
All requests for renewals of permits hereunder shall be made at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the permit and must comply with all requirements of Sections 11-244—11-248. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(d))  
Sec. 11-250. - Blasting procedures and controls. 
(a)  Energy ratio. The allowable vibration of any blast at the nearest occupied or used building off the subject premises shall not exceed an energy ratio of 0.5 or resultant particle velocity of 1.35" per second based on the following formula: 
Energy ratio = 0.5 = 10.823 f 2 A 2 
where: f = frequency in cycles per second, A = amplitude or displacement in inches 
Energy ratio = 0.274 V 2 
(V = resultant particles velocity expressed in inches per second) 
(b)  Measurement of blasts. The operator of the quarry operation, when requested to do so by the Village Engineer, shall measure and submit data to substantiate compliance with the formula listed in Subsection (a) of this Section and the operator of the quarry operation, when requested to do so by the Village Engineer, shall measure air blast. This verification shall be performed by a seismological engineering firm acceptable to the Village or by the Village Engineer. Instrumentation shall be by seismograph similar to VME Seismolog Model "B" and approved seismograph sound measuring equipment or approved equivalents. All expenses for these tests shall be paid by the quarry operator. 
(c)  Blasting log. A log in duplicate shall be kept of each blast on forms similar to the one on file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The original copy of this blasting log shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer within 48 hours after the blast, and a copy shall be kept on file at the quarry office. 
(d)  Cover material. Operators of quarries for building and/or ornamental stone removal shall cover Primacord, other detonating cord or surface-laid blasting devices with at least one foot of dirt or other suitable cover material. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(e); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 131, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 106, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-251. - Permit fee. 
The permit fees for any permit issued pursuant to this Section are established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. No permit fee shall be prorated. All permits issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 following the date of issue. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(f))  
Sec. 11-252. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-16. However, upon conviction for the violation of any of the provisions of this Section by the holder of a permit issued hereunder, and in addition to the forfeiture provided, such permit shall thereupon be cancelled, revoked, rescinded and terminated. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(g))  
Sec. 11-253. - Enforcement. 
Before renewal of any license issued under this Section is refused or any license is revoked, cancelled, rescinded or terminated, the licensee shall be given written notice of any charges or violations against such licensee or the reasons proposed for nonrenewal or revocation and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 7-8-7(h))  
Secs. 11-254—11-259. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
 
Sec. 11-260. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  It is a lawful purpose of the Village Board to enact rules and regulations as are necessary for the preservation of health and to prevent the spread of communicable and sexually transmitted diseases. It has been found by municipalities through the State of Wisconsin, particularly Milwaukee, Racine, Waukesha, Delafield, Kenosha, Middleton, West Allis, Dane County and St. Croix County, as well as communities around the country, including Cleveland, Ohio; Phoenix; Arizona; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Indianapolis, Indiana; Austin, Texas; Belleview, Washington; Houston, Texas; Cleburne, Texas; Denver, Colorado; and Kansas City, Missouri; as well as other communities around the country, that sexually oriented adult entertainment establishments are predisposed to the creation of unsafe and unsanitary conditions; that operators and employees of such businesses tend to participate in sex-related offenses on the premises, creating substantial law enforcement problems, and that the such businesses have a deleterious effect on surrounding areas, resulting in neighborhood blight and reduced property values, especially when such businesses are concentrated in one area. Many of such establishments install movie viewing booths with doors in which patrons view videotapes, movies, films and other forms of entertainment characterized by their emphasis on depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and that such booths have been and are being used by patrons to engage in sexual acts resulting in unsanitary, unhealthy and unsafe conditions in said booths and establishments. This Article is intended to establish standards in order to prevent the spread of AIDS and other communicable or sexually transmitted diseases, and to eliminate the deleterious effects described above in the Village of McFarland. 
(b)  The Village Board has explicit authority under Wis. Stats. § 125.10(1) to adopt regulations governing the sale of alcohol beverages which are in addition to those set forth under Wis. Stats. Ch. 125. 
(c)  The Village Board finds a likelihood exists for commercial exploitation of human sexuality by owners of premises holding "Class B" and Class "B" alcohol beverage licenses in the State of Wisconsin in the form of employing or permitting persons to perform or exhibit their nude or semi-nude bodies to other persons as an inducement to other persons to purchase alcohol beverages. The direct result of such exploitation is criminal activity, moral degradation and disturbance of the peace and good order of the community. In addition, this commercial exploitation of such nude and semi-nude acts is adverse to the public's interest in the quality of life, commercial activity and total community environment in the Village of McFarland. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 1-10-2011)  
Sec. 11-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Adult bath house means an establishment or business which provides the service of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy, that is not operated by a medical practitioner or a professional physical therapist licensed by the State of Wisconsin and which establishment provides to its patrons an opportunity for engaging in specified sexual activities as defined in this Section. 
(b)  Adult body painting studio means an establishment or business wherein patrons are afforded an opportunity to paint images on a body which is wholly or partially nude. For purposes of this Section, an adult body painting studio shall not be deemed to include a tattoo parlor. 
(c)  Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial portion of its business the sale of books, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or may in conjunction therewith have facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment, including adult-oriented videotapes, films, motion pictures or other offered entertainment for observation by patrons therein. 
(d)  Adult business means a business providing adult entertainment or operating as an adult oriented establishment. 
(e)  Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities, or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, appearing unclothed, or the removal of articles of clothing to reveal specified anatomical areas. 
(f)  Adult modeling studio means an establishment or business which provides as a substantial business purpose modeling services for the purpose of reproducing the human body wholly or partially nude by means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing or otherwise. 
(g)  Adult motel means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers as a principle business purpose, accommodations to the public for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and which may have a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
(h)  Adult motion picture theater means an establishment, including establishments that have coin-operated video or motion picture booths, which has as a substantial business purpose the presentation of material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(i)  Adult novelty shop means an establishment or business having as a substantial business purpose the provision of novelty or other items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on, or designed for, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, or stimulating such activity. 
(j)  Adult oriented establishment means an establishment which includes, but is not limited to, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult bath houses, adult body painting studios, adult motels or adult novelty shops, and further means any premises to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged and have as a substantial business purpose to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, regardless of whether such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for profit, direct or indirect. An adult oriented establishment further includes, without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, modeling studio or any other term of like meaning. 
(k)  Booth, room or cubicle means such enclosures as are specifically offered to the public or members of an adult oriented establishment for hire or for a fee as part of a business operated on the premises which offers as part of its business the entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure; which shall include, without limitation, such enclosures wherein the entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but a fee is not charged for mere access to the enclosure. However, booth, room, or cubicle does not mean such enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee, and are not open to anyone other than employees; nor shall this definition apply to hotels, motels or other similar establishments licensed by the State of Wisconsin pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 50. 
(l)  Church means a building whether situated within the Village or not, in which people regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
(m)  Customer means any individual who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter an adult oriented establishment in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or 
(2)  Enters an adult oriented business and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Is a member of and on the premises of an adult oriented establishment operating as a private club. 
(n)  Day care center means a facility licensed by the State of Wisconsin pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 48.65, regardless of whether it is situated within the Village of McFarland. 
(o)  Door, curtain or portal partition means a nontransparent closure device which prevents activity taking place within a booth, room or cubicle from being seen or viewed from outside the booth, room or cubicle. 
(p)  Employee means any and all individuals, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly or indirectly related to the operation of an adult oriented establishment. 
(q)  Entertainer means any person who provides entertainment within an adult oriented establishment as defined in this Article, regardless of whether a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and regardless of whether entertainment is provided as an employee or independent contractor. 
(r)  Harmful to minors means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, which taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex, which taken as a whole portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and which taken as a whole does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. Whether a work appeals to the prurient interest and whether it depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and whether it has serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value are to be determined by applying contemporary community standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors. 
(s)  Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both: 
(1)  The character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably suspect under this Section; and 
(2)  The age of a minor, provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor. 
(t)  Knowledge of minor's age means: 
(1)  Knowledge or information that the individual is a minor; and 
(2)  Reason to know, or a belief or grounds for belief, which warrants further inspection or inquiry of the age of the minor. 
(u)  Manager means the operator or agent licensed under this Article. 
(v)  Minor means any individual under the age of 18 years. 
(w)  Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state. 
(x)  Operator means any person operating, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment or massage establishment. 
(y)  Person means any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, association or other entity recognized by the State of Wisconsin as being capable of owning property or engaging in business operations. 
(z)  Residential means, a use of land, whether situated within the Village or not, for premises such as homes, townhouses, duplexes, condominiums, apartments and mobile homes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein. A premises which is designed primarily for living, sleeping, working and eating therein shall be deemed to be residential in character unless it is actually occupied and used exclusively for other purposes. Hotels, motels, boarding houses, nursing homes and hospitals shall not be considered to be residential uses. 
(aa)  Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture generally by an individual clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
(bb)  School means a building, whether situated within the Village or not, where people regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, together with playgrounds, stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term is limited to: 
(1)  Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education in which any regular kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught; and 
(2)  Special educational facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes in kindergarten or any of grades one through 12. 
(cc)  Sexual conduct means the commission of any of the following: sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, human excretion, masturbation, sadism, masochism, fellatio, cunnilingus or lewd exhibition of human genitals. 
(dd)  Sexual intercourse means physical sexual contact between individuals that involves the genitalia of at least one person including, but not limited to, heterosexual intercourse, sodomy, fellatio, or cunnilingus. 
(ee)  Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1)  Human genitals, pubic region; 
(2)  Buttock; or 
(3)  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(ff)  Specified sexual activities means simulated or actual: 
(1)  Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breasts. 
(gg)  Substantial means, as used in various definitions, 35 percent or more of a business' stock in trade, display space, floor space, or value thereof, revenues or retail sales in any 30-day period during the license year. 
(hh)  Waiting area means an area adjacent to the main entrance that is separate from any area where massages are given. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 1-10-2011)  
Sec. 11-262. - Prohibitions applicable to premises holding alcohol beverage licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of premises holding a Class "A," "Class A," Class "B," "Class B," Reserve "Class B" or "Class C" alcohol beverage license to permit any person to: 
(1)  Expose to public view on the licensed premises any specified anatomical area as defined in this Article; 
(2)  Appear in a state of nudity; 
(3)  Employ any device which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such specified anatomical areas; or 
(4)  Publicly display or perform any specified sexual activities on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Any licensee who permits a violation of subsection (a), above, shall be subject to revocation or suspension of all alcohol beverage licenses issued by the Village to the licensee. 
(c)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to live theatrical, musical or dance performances occurring or conducted at a theater, playhouse, community center, civic center, or performing arts center where the predominant business attraction is not the offering to patrons of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such patrons and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on or the advertising or promotion of employees engaging in nude erotic dancing. This exception shall only apply to establishments whose receipts from alcohol beverage sales do not exceed 15 percent of gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 1-10-2011)  
Sec. 11-263. - License. 
(a)  Applicability. No person shall open any adult business without obtaining a license from the Village Clerk-Treasurer. A license may be issued for only one Adult Business located at a fixed and certain premises. Any person operating more than one adult business shall obtain additional licenses for each premises. This Section shall not apply to live theatrical, musical or dance performances occurring or conducted at a theater, playhouse, community center, civic center, or performing arts center where the predominant business attraction is not the offering to patrons of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on or the advertising or promotion of employees engaging in nude erotic dancing, and whose receipts from food and beverage sales do not exceed 15 percent of gross receipts. 
(b)  Application. Applications for an annual adult business license shall be made to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the Chief of Police, Building Inspector, and Fire/EMS Chief of the license application, publish a Class II notice of such application and have the license application submitted to the Public Safety Committee within 30 days of application. Investigating officials shall submit written reports and recommendations to the Public Safety Committee prior to the Public Safety Committee's review of the application. A public hearing shall be held on the application, preceded by a Class II notice. The Public Safety Committee may take any testimony regarding the granting or denial of such license. The Public Safety Committee shall make a report of its findings and recommendations to the Village Board within 60 days of the filing of a complete application. 
(c)  Action. The Village Board shall either approve, modify or reject the application within 90 days of the application; the reasons for the action taken shall be specified in the written findings of fact of the Village Board. 
(d)  Denial of application. Whenever an initial application is denied, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall, within 14 days of the denial, advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. if the applicant requests a hearing within ten days of receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held before the Village Board within 30 days of the denial of the application. 
(e)  Probationary period. If license issuance is approved by a majority of the Village Board, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall grant an initial applicant a probationary license that, absent any revocation or suspension, shall be valid until the first regular meeting of the Village Board after the expiration of six months from issuance of the probationary license. An annual license shall be granted by approval of the Village Board at its first meeting after the expiration of the six-month probationary period if, no violations under this Article occur and the applicant corrects any deficiencies or problems that the applicant is directed to correct. If, however, for any reason, the application is denied by the Village Board, the Village shall specify the findings made that support that denial. The applicant may request a hearing pursuant to subsection. 
(f)  License term. The license granted under this section shall expire on June 30 of each year and each license shall be subject to suspension or revocation as hereinafter provided. 
(g)  Application form. The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. An applicant for a license, which shall include all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant, all officers or directors of a corporate applicant, all members of any limited liability company applicant, and any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business, shall furnish the following information under oath. Failure or refusal of the applicant to provide any information for the investigation of the application, or the applicant's refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application, or refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this subsection, shall constitute an admission by the applicant of ineligibility for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof. 
(1)  Name, including all aliases, address and date of birth of applicant; 
(2)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age; 
(3)  All residential addresses of the applicant for the past ten years; 
(4)  The business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for ten years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(5)  The exact nature of the activities to be conducted at the adult business; 
(6)  Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other state, county or municipality under an adult business license or similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation; 
(7)  All criminal or civil forfeiture convictions, whether federal or state, or municipal ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges, except traffic offenses for which no jail or prison sentence may be imposed as a penalty for violation; 
(8)  Fingerprints and two portrait photographs of at least two inches by two inches of the applicant; 
(9)  The address of the adult oriented establishment to be operated by the applicant; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, and the name and address of the registered agent of the corporation; 
(11)  Zoning district in which the proposed business is located; 
(12)  A statement regarding whether the business complies with Section 11-264(e), including the specific distances from each specified zoning district or use. 
(h)  Eligibility. To receive a license to operate an adult business, an applicant must meet the following standards: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual: 
a.  The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age; 
b.  Subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, the applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony, any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction, or two or more convictions of any kind, excluding traffic violations, within five years immediately preceding the date of the application; and 
c.  The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this Section within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation each officer, director and any other individual required to be identified in the application shall meet the same requirements as those for an individual applicant. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, limited liability company or any other type of organization, all persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture, limited liability company or other type of organization shall meet the same requirement as those for an individual applicant. 
(4)  Investigation. No license shall be issued unless the Police Department has investigated the applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The results of that investigation shall be filed in writing with the Village Clerk-Treasurer no later than 14 days after the application. 
(5)  Inspection. The Community Development Director, Building Inspector, Fire/EMS Chief, and Chief of Police or their designees shall inspect the premises proposed to be licensed to verify compliance with all applicable regulations under their purview, and shall report compliance findings to the Village Clerk-Treasurer within 14 days of the date of application. 
(i)  Fee. Each application for a new license shall be accompanied by a fee of $1,000.00. If for any reason the license is denied, one-half of the license fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, the entire fee will be kept by the Village. Renewal applications shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.00. 
(j)  Number of licenses limited. No more than two annual licenses shall be issued to license holders within the Village of McFarland at one time for adult businesses that provide adult entertainment to be viewed or enjoyed on the business premises. This number shall increase to three when the population of the Village exceeds 10,000 persons and shall increase by one additional license upon each additional increase in population of 5,000 persons, but shall not exceed five licenses except by amendment of this subsection. This limitation does not apply to adult bookstores, video stores or novelty shops where the viewing of adult content is strictly and clearly incidental to the sale of merchandise for viewing or enjoyment off the premises. 
(k)  Renewals. The holder of an annual license granted under this Section shall submit an application for renewal at least 60 days before the expiration of the license. Such license may be renewed pursuant to the provisions of subsections (b), (c) and (d) with respect to notice, publication requirements and action by the Public Safety Committee and Village Board. 
(l)  Transfer of license. 
(1)  A license is personal to the licensee designated in the application and may be transferred only pursuant to this subsection. A transfer application must be filed no less than 30 days before any change of the owner or operators designated on the application. In the event that a transfer application is not filed in a timely manner, then the license shall be invalid for any purpose relating to the operation of the adult business, and the conduct of any adult business activities shall require the filing of an original application and be subject to the regulations applicable thereto. 
(2)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall prescribe a form on which license transfer applications shall be made. The form shall include a statement under oath that the original application remains correct as previously submitted in all respects except those that are amended by the transfer application. The transfer application shall contain a statement under oath that the individual signing the transfer application has personal knowledge of the information contained therein and that the information is true and correct and shall not be complete unless accompanied by a nonrefundable transfer fee of $500.00. Transfer applications shall be filed in the same place and at the same time as original applications, and the fee shall be payable in the same manner as for original applications. 
(3)  Transfer applications shall be reviewed, issued and subject to appeal in the same manner as original applications, and they shall be issued for the remaining term of the license to be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 2013-14, §§ 13, 14, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 107—111, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-264. - Regulations. 
All license holders shall comply with the following regulations as each apply to the activities permitted under the license issued: 
(a)  Live adult entertainment. 
(1)  No dancing shall be permitted by any performers under the auspices of the management, whether paid or not, within six feet from any location from which patrons are directly served, while so entertaining the patrons. 
(2)  No dancer, performer, or any individual, who is performing, singing, or dancing, shall have either direct or indirect physical contact with any patron. 
(3)  While dancing is in progress, the establishment shall be adequately illuminated as determined by the fire and/or building inspector so as to permit safe entry and exit from the premises. 
(4)  Good order shall be maintained at all times. Without limitation due to enumeration, a lack of "good order" for purposes of this Section shall be deemed to include persistent loud noises to the annoyance or detriment of surrounding property owners, patrons urinating in public, profane language and/or fighting. 
(5)  The premises shall close and all customers shall vacate the premises between 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 2:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday. 
(6)  The license holder shall comply at all times with building capacity limits as set by the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department or Building Code. 
(7)  The license holder shall comply with all applicable state statutes and regulations and all Village Ordinances. 
(8)  The management, license holder and employees shall obey all reasonable orders or directions of any law enforcement officer. 
(9)  The performance of any dance by performers under the auspices of the management shall be given only on a raised portion of the floor separated by a railing or other device from the patrons so as to deter patrons from participating in the dance. No performances may be given in any separate room, cubicle or booth not immediately accessible and generally in full view of other areas of the business open to all other patrons. 
(10)  The license holder shall not permit any person to publicly perform specified sexual activities on the licensed premises. 
(11)  The license holder shall not permit any person to touch any performer's specified anatomical areas during a public performance. 
(12)  Engaging in intercourse with simulated sexual organs during dances or performances is prohibited. 
(13)  No license holder shall permit any amateur dancing, entertainment, or performances on the license holder's premises. 
(b)  Physical layouts of adult oriented establishments. Any adult oriented establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any motion picture, videotape, DVD, digital video image, compact disc or any other video technology in which a significant or substantial portion of the material presented is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the adult oriented establishment and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms, cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than eight feet, and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use, shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of specified sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No person shall alter, damage or deface any portion of any such booth, room or cubicle in such a manner that it no longer complies with the provisions of this Section. 
(c)  Responsibilities of operators. 
(1)  An operator, licensed under this Article, shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the name and aliases used by the employee, home address, birth date, sex, telephone numbers, Social Security Number, and date of employment and termination. The above information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises of a period of three years following termination. 
(2)  The operator shall make the register of employees available immediately for inspection by law enforcement officers upon demand of a member of a law enforcement agency at all reasonable times. 
(3)  Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(4)  Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended, or renewed. 
(5)  No employee of an adult business shall allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent the adult business or to allow any minor to view sexually-explicit live adult entertainment or materials containing depictions of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(7)  The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this Section. 
(8)  The operator shall ensure there is conspicuously posted inside each booth, room or cubicle an unmutilated and undefaced sign or poster supplied by the Village which contains information regarding sexually transmitted diseases and the telephone numbers to call to obtain additional information. 
(9)  The operator shall ensure there is conspicuously displayed at a place near the main entrance of the establishment, or portion thereof, any information, brochures, or pamphlets supplied by the Village pertaining to sexually transmitted diseases. 
(10)  The operator shall ensure there are posted regulations concerning booth occupancy on signs, with lettering at least one inch high, placed in conspicuous areas of the establishment and in each of the booths, rooms or cubicles. 
(d)  Registration of employees. 
(1)  All operators and employees working in any adult business hereunder shall, prior to beginning employment or contracted duties, register with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Such registration shall include the following: 
a.  Name, address, birth date, any aliases used, telephone numbers, date of employment and name of employer; and 
b.  Fingerprints and two portrait photographs of the applicant of at least two by two inches. 
(2)  Upon registration, the Village will provide to each registered employee an identification card containing the employee's photograph identifying the employee as such, which shall be kept available for production upon request of all inspecting officers while on duty at such adult oriented establishment. 
(3)  All registrations hereunder are valid for a period of one year. 
(4)  The registration fee of $10.00 shall be paid per registration, which shall be paid to the Village to cover costs of the identification card. 
(e)  Location. 
(1)  No adult business may be conducted within 500 feet of any area zoned for residential, church, school, nursing home, public park, or day care center uses or within 500 feet of any public library, or non-profit or government operated youth center, senior center or community center. 
(2)  No adult business shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other adult business, or within 1,000 feet of any business holding an alcohol beverage license. 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection, distances are to be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the adult business to the nearest property line of another adult business, area zoned for residential, church, school, nursing home, public park, or day care center uses, business holding an alcohol beverage license or nonprofit or government operated youth center, senior center or community center. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 15, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 112, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-265. - License suspension, revocation or nonrenewal. 
(a)  In general. Any license granted herein may be revoked, suspended, or not be renewed by the Village Board as follows: 
(1)  If the applicant has made or recorded any statement required by this Article knowing it to be false or fraudulent. 
(2)  For the violation of any provision of this Article, except for license matters involving a violation of Building Codes, in such case the license shall be revoked or not renewed after conviction of a second offense occurring within any license year. 
(3)  After one conviction of any establishment employee of an offense under Wis. Stats. Ch. 944, or of an offense against the person or property of a patron or customer of the establishment or of an offense involving substances scheduled in Wis. Stats. Ch. 961, Subch. II, where there is shown the participation or knowledge of any other establishment employee or of any individual within the business structure of the licensee. 
(4)  If the business premises becomes or is maintained as a disorderly, riotous, indecent or improper house. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. No license shall be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by the Village Board except upon due notice and hearing to determine whether grounds for such action exist. Such hearing shall be held before the Village Board. Notice of such hearing shall be in writing and shall state the grounds of the complaint against the licensee. The notice shall be served upon the licensee at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing and shall state the time and place thereof. 
(c)  Hearing. The licensee shall be entitled to be heard, to be represented by counsel, to cross-examine opposing witnesses, to present witnesses on the licensee's own behalf under subpoena by the Village Board if such is required, and the hearing may be stenographically recorded at the licensee's option and expense. At the conclusion of such hearing, the Village Board shall prepare findings of fact and conclusions of law as to what, if any, action the Village Board will take with respect to the license. The Village Board shall provide the complainant and licensee with a copy of the report. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 1-10-2011)  
Sec. 11-266. - Penalty. 
In addition to any other actions allowed by law or taken by the Village Board, including the action of license revocation or nonrenewal, anyone who violates any of the provisions of this Section shall forfeit not less than $150.00 nor more than $2,000.00 for each and every offense, together with the costs of prosecution and any applicable costs and assessments. If such penalty is not paid, such person so convicted shall be subject to any civil penalties or other penalties available by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 1-10-2011)  
Sec. 11-267. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Section is deemed invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this Section to any person or circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 1-10-2011)  
Secs. 11-268—11-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
 
Sec. 11-300. - Purpose and authority. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 98.04(1), the Village of McFarland is required to enforce the consumer protection provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 98 regarding weights and measures. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 98.04(2), the Village is hereby authorized to contract with the Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection (the "Department") to provide inspection and enforcement services. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-23-2013)  
Sec. 11-301. - Definitions. 
All terms under this section shall have the same meaning as set forth under Wis. Stats. § 98.01 and Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 92.01. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-23-2013)  
Sec. 11-302. - Licensing and inspection. 
(a)  All businesses engaged in the sale of any commodities, the use of weights and measures, liquid measuring devices, scales, weighing, measuring or price verification systems, timing devices, or linear measuring devices, shall obtain a license under this section and submit to inspection by the Department in accordance with Wis. Stats. Ch. 98 and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. ATCP 92. It shall be a violation of this section to fail to obtain a license, submit to inspection, to fail to comply with any lawful order of the Department, or to continue any business activity governed by this section without timely payment of the required fee. 
(b)  A license shall be valid for one year and shall expire on December 31. New licenses shall be issued annually by the Village Clerk-Treasurer unless it is determined that testing service fees under Section 11-304 have not been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 113, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-303. - Application. 
The application for a license under this section shall be made in writing on a form provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and signed by an authorized representative for the applicant. Such application shall state the type and number of weighing and measuring devices to be licensed, the location of the devices, the applicant's full name and post office address and whether such person is an individual, partnership, limited liability company or corporation. If a partnership, the application shall state the names of partners, together with their addresses. If a corporation or limited liability company, the application shall state the names and addresses of all officers and agents of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 114, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-304. - Application and testing service fees. 
(a)  An application fee at the time of initial application shall be charged in the amount of $10.00. Thereafter, licensees shall pay only the testing service fee. 
(b)  A testing service fee is hereby established to recover the Village's costs associated with any contract entered into with the Department under Wis. Stats. § 98.04. The testing service fee shall be charged to each business receiving testing services as reflected in the Department's invoice and contract work report in an amount equal to the proportionate share of time spent testing devices for the subject business. 
(c)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer, upon receipt of the invoice and contract work report from the Department, shall determine the base service fee by dividing the number of hours spent at each business by the total number of hours in Department report multiplied by the invoice amount from the Department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1, 9-26-2016; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 115, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-305. - Procedure. 
(a)  Upon determination of the appropriate testing service fees to be charged, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare an invoice for each business reflecting the tests or measurements performed and the total fee to be charged to the business. 
(b)  The invoice shall be sent by regular mail to the address reflected in the Department's report. 
(c)  The invoice shall state that payment is due within 30 days. If the payment is not timely received in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall cause notice of violation to be served personally upon the person appearing to be in charge of the business premises at the time of service. Such notice shall inform the business that the required fee payment was not timely received and that if payment is not received within five business days of service of the notice of violation, the business shall discontinue all operations requiring the use of inspected devices or the sale of any commodities or be found in violation of this section. 
(d)  The Village's failure to follow any procedure hereunder shall stay any enforcement action until such procedures are satisfied, but shall not affect the validity of any fee. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 116, 117, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-306. - Appeal. 
Any person who is charged a fee under this Article and is not liable for the fee under the terms of this Article or can demonstrate the charged fee has been miscalculated, may appeal the charge in writing to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. No appeal may be considered if it is not actually received by the Village Clerk-Treasurer prior to the expiration of the five days set forth in the notice of violation under Section 11-304 above. The Village Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to correct any manifest clerical or mathematical error. Fees properly charged under this section may not be waived or refunded. Receipt of a notice of appeal shall toll the time periods set forth in Section 11-304 above. Fees paid under protest and later found to be charged in error pursuant to a timely appeal may be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 118, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 11-307. - Penalty. 
Any person or business found in violation of this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture as prescribed in Section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-23-2013)  
Secs. 11-308—11-349. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - TOURIST ROOMING HOUSES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2017, amended Art. XI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XI, §§ 11-350—11-363 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 1, adopted March 13, 2017. 
 
Sec. 11-350. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to ensure that the quality of tourist rooming houses operating within the Village is adequate for protecting public health, safety and general welfare, including establishing minimum standards of space for human occupancy and for an adequate level of maintenance; determining the responsibilities of owners, operators and property managers offering these properties for tourists or transients, to protect the character and stability of residential areas of the Village; to provide minimum standards necessary for the health and safety of persons occupying or using buildings, structures or premises; and provisions for the administration and enforcement thereof. The Village Board specifically finds that use of single family residences in the Village for short term rental creates the increased potential for adverse impacts on single family neighborhoods. The increased potential for adverse impacts is due to a higher degree of residential use and occupancy by vacationers who may tend to more frequently keep different hours engaging in recreational and social activities than the permanent residents in the surrounding neighborhood. Further, lacking any connection to the surrounding neighborhood, are less likely to be sensitive to the needs and concerns of neighbors. Finally, the lake side neighborhoods in which tourist rooming houses may be most likely to operate in the Village typically have small lots with homes very close to one another thereby increasing the potential for conflicts or disturbances. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-351. - Definitions. 
In this Article: 
Bed and breakfast establishment means any place of lodging that satisfies all of the following: 
(1)  Provides eight or fewer rooms for rent to no more than a total of 20 tourists or transients. 
(2)  Provides no meals other than breakfast and provides the breakfast only to renters of the place. 
(3)  Is the owner's primary place of residence. 
(4)  Is occupied by the owner at the time of rental. 
(5)  Was originally built and occupied as a single-family residence, or, prior to use as a place of lodging, was converted to use and occupied as a single-family residence. 
Dwelling unit means a structure consisting of one or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking, sanitary, and sleeping facilities and a bathroom designed for or suited to the exclusive use by one person or one family. 
Hotel means all places wherein sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to transients, in five or more rooms, and all places used in connection therewith. "Inn", "motel" and "hotel" are synonymous. 
Local agent means a person that, subject to the conditions established in Section 11-352, is authorized by the owner of a tourist rooming house to manage a tourist rooming house. 
Short term rental means the rental of a dwelling unit for a period of less than 29 consecutive days. 
Tourist rooming house means any dwelling unit where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay on a short term rental basis to tourists or transients except that the following are expressly excluded: 
(1)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(2)  Hotels. 
(3)  Any private boarding or rooming houses, ordinarily conducted as such, that do not accommodate tourists or transients. 
Tourist or transient means a person who travels from place to place away from his or her permanent residence for vacation, pleasure, recreation, culture, business or employment. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-352. - Operation of tourist rooming houses. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to own or operate more than one tourist rooming house in the Village nor shall multiple persons residing in the same household be permitted to operate multiple tourist rooming houses. A tourist rooming house owned in the name of a corporation, limited liability company, partnership or similar entity shall be considered owned by the same person as another tourist rooming house for purposes of this subsection if any individual natural person derives any income from the operation of both tourist rooming houses. 
(b)  Every owner of a tourist rooming house shall appoint a local agent to manage the tourist rooming house if the owner resides outside a 30-mile radius from the tourist rooming house or if the owner will be absent while the property is being rented as a tourist rooming house. For purposes of this requirement, an owner shall be considered absent if he or she cannot be contacted and be present at the touring rooming house within 45 minutes. The local agent shall: 
(1)  If a natural person, keep their permanent residence within 30 miles of the tourist rooming house, or if a property management company or similar business entity, have offices within 30 miles of the tourist rooming house; 
(2)  Be authorized as owner, or on behalf of the owner of the tourist rooming house, to accept service of all notices from the Village or service of legal process relating to any and all matters relating to the tourist rooming house; 
(3)  Be authorized to allow Village officers, employees, or agents, to enter the owner's property for purposes of inspection and enforcement of this Article or any other ordinance, statute, rule or regulation the Village may have the duty or authority to enforce; 
(4)  Be authorized to act as owner, or on behalf of the owner, of the tourist rooming house in all matters relating to dealing with renters of the tourist rooming house; 
(5)  Be authorized to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any repair or act of maintenance of the tourist rooming house necessary to comply with any Village ordinance, or any applicable state building regulations. 
(6)  Subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335 has not been convicted of or have any pending charges for any offense as a felony, misdemeanor, or civil forfeiture, involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, robbery, the use or threatened use of force or violence upon the person of another, or sexual immorality under Wis. Stats. ch. 944; and 
(c)  Each tourist rooming house, in addition to the permit under this Article, shall have and maintain the following licenses and permits: 
(1)  All required permits from State of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection or authorized agent including a permit for operation of a tourist rooming house under Wis. Stats. § 97.605; 
(2)  A seller's permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue. 
(e)  No tourist rooming house shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other tourist rooming house as measured by a straight line from the nearest property line of each tourist rooming house. Any tourist rooming house lawfully operating under a permit issued pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 97.605 as of the effective date of this Article and which is located within 1,000 feet of any other such tourist rooming house shall be exempt from the 1,000-foot spacing requirement as to the other lawfully existing tourist rooming houses provided that within 120 days of the effective date of this Article, an application meeting all of the requirements of this Article is submitted and subsequently approved. Any tourist rooming house benefitting from this exemption shall lose the exemption if it fails to maintain a valid permit under this Article or Wis. Stats. § 97.605 for a continuous period of one year or longer. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-353. - Tourist rooming house permit. 
Commencing July 1, 2017, no person may operate or permit to be operated a tourist rooming house in the Village of McFarland except upon receipt of a permit under this Article and subject to all the terms and conditions thereof. Any existing tourist rooming house, lawfully operating under a permit issued pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 97.605 shall have 120 days from the effective date of this Article to submit an application meeting all of the requirements under this Article. If no such application is filed on a timely basis, or if such application is denied, the existing tourist rooming house shall cease operation after expiration of the 120 days, denial of the application, or expiration of the permit under Wis. Stats. § 97.605, whichever is sooner. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-354. - Application. 
(a)  All applications for a new tourist rooming house permit or renewal shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer on forms provided by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. All applications must be filed by the property owner. Each applicant shall certify to the Village that the tourist rooming house included in the permit is in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. No permit shall be issued unless the completed application form is accompanied by payment of the required fee. 
(b)  Each application for a new permit shall include the following information and documentation for each tourist rooming house: 
(1)  A nuisance response plan as described in Section 11-359. 
(2)  State of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection Permit for a tourist rooming house issued under Wis. Stats. § 97.605. 
(3)  A copy of a completed state lodging establishment inspection form dated within one year of the date of issuance or renewal. 
(4)  Proof of liability insurance. Such insurance shall be a commercial general liability, hotel or short-term rental policy that specifically covers liabilities arising from rental of the tourist rooming house for short-term rentals. The policy shall provide no less than $1,000,000.00 coverage, per occurrence. Claims-made coverage shall not be acceptable insurance under this Article. 
(5)  Seller's permit from the State of Wisconsin Department of Revenue. 
(6)  Floor plan and requested maximum occupancy. 
(7)  Site plan including available onsite parking. 
(8)  Local agent agreement reflecting the local agent's authority and acceptance of all responsibilities under this Article. 
(9)  Designation of the local agent. 
(10)  Any other information requested on the application form deemed necessary in the reasonable discretion of the Village Clerk-Treasurer to evaluate the application under this Article. 
(c)  Applications for renewal of a permit are not required to include the documentation for items listed in paragraphs (6) through (9) unless the information has changed from the preceding application. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-355. - Terms and filing date. 
Each permit shall run from July 1 through June 30 of the following year and shall not be transferrable to any other place or person. All applications must be filed by May 1 of each year. The filing fee shall be paid upon filing of the application. The Clerk-Treasurer may conditionally accept late applications, subject to payment of the late filing fee. Any application which does not include all of the information and documentation shall not be considered as complete. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-356. - New application review procedure. 
(a)  Committee review. When satisfied that the application is complete, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall forward initial applications for permits to the Public Safety Committee for review. The Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the owners of all properties lying within 300 feet of the property proposed as a tourist rooming house by regular mail that such application has been filed, the address of the proposed tourist rooming house and the date of the meeting at which the Public Safety Committee will review the application. Such notice shall be mailed no later than ten days prior to the meeting. If the application is filed 14 days or more prior to its next scheduled meeting, provided the application is complete, the application shall be considered at that meeting. Otherwise, the application, provided the application is complete, will be considered within 40 days of the filing date. The Public Safety Committee shall consider the application and supporting documents. If the Committee determines that the application meets the requirements of this Article it shall forward the application to the Village Board for approval. If the Committee determines that the application does not meet the requirements of this Chapter, it shall deny the application. Any denial or conditional approval by the Committee shall be in writing setting forth the reasons for the determination. 
(b)  Village Board. The Village Board shall consider the application and the recommendation of the Public Safety Committee at its next scheduled meeting. The Village Board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Any denial or conditional approval by the Village Board shall be in writing setting forth the reasons for the determination. No approval shall be effective until the tourist rooming house has been inspected by the Building Inspector and Fire Inspector and found to contain no violations affecting the health or safety of occupants within one year of the application or renewal application filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(c)  Issuance. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a permit for each tourist rooming house approved by the Village Board, subject to any required inspections under subsection (b) and payment of taxes, assessments and claims under Section 11-1. The permit shall contain all of the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the property owner. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the local agent. 
(3)  The maximum occupancy for the premises. 
(4)  The permit term. 
(5)  State lodging permit number. 
(6)  Contact information for the Village. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-357. - Renewal. 
(a)  Upon receipt of any renewal application and determination that the application is complete, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall request reports from the Police Department and the Director of Community Development regarding any complaints received, calls for service or actions taken regarding the permitted properties. The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue renewal permits within 45 days of the filing of the application unless the information provided is incomplete or otherwise not in compliance with the requirements of this Article or the reports from the Police Department and the Zoning Administrator indicate that there have been complaints or actions involving the property. 
(b)  If the Clerk-Treasurer finds that the permit should not be renewed because the application demonstrates that the requirements of Sections 11-352(b) and (c) and 11-354(a) and (b) are not met, or that due to complaints or actions during previous permit year, the application should be considered by the Public Safety Committee, the Clerk-Treasurer shall forward the application to the Public Safety Committee for action along with a written explanation of the reason for referral. Upon referral to the Public Safety Committee the procedures set forth in Section 11-356 shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-358. - Inspections. 
(a)  Each separate unit which is offered for rental as a tourist rooming house is required to be inspected annually by the State and the Village Fire Inspector. If the State fails to inspect the tourist rooming house, the applicant may request that the Building Inspector conduct the inspection. 
(b)  If the Building Inspector conducts the inspection, the holder of the permit shall be responsible for payment of the inspection fees. 
(c)  If the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector at any time is unable to conduct an inspection due to denial of access, the tourist rooming house shall not operate until it has passed the inspection. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-359. - Content of nuisance response plans. 
Each nuisance response plan accompanying an application for a permit required by this chapter shall contain the following information and otherwise be in a form required by the Village Clerk-Treasurer: 
(a)  The mailing address and telephone number of the owner or owners of the residential dwelling unit or units to be used as a short-term vacation rental pursuant to the permit; 
(b)  The name, address and telephone number of the local agent(s) who will be available by telephone, and who will be responsible for promptly responding to or causing a prompt response to a nuisance complaint arising out of the occupancy or use of the short term rental by tenants, their visitors or their guests. For the purposes of this Section, a return telephone call to a complainant within 45 minutes of the initial complaint shall be deemed "prompt." 
(1)  No more than a total of three persons shall be designated in the response plan as a person responsible for responding to or causing a response to a nuisance complaint; and 
(2)  Only one such person shall be designated as the person responsible for responding to a nuisance complaint during any particular hours of the day, different days in a week, or different weeks of the year; 
(3)  Any such person designated shall have the powers of a local agent. 
(c)  The manner of responding to or causing a response to a nuisance complaint, including but not limited to the manner in which the complainant or complainants will be notified of the response and the method of documenting prompt responses and timely corrective action. 
(d)  The manner of assuring timely corrective action to remedy the conditions that caused the nuisance complaint. For the purposes of this chapter, "timely corrective action" shall include, at a minimum, a telephone call to the primary adult occupant of the short-term vacation rental within 30 minutes of the initial nuisance complaint. 
(e)  The proposed maximum number of overnight occupants. 
(f)  The number of off-street parking spaces and number of bedrooms available at the short-term vacation rental. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-360. - Display of permit. 
Each permit shall be displayed on the inside of the main entrance door of each tourist rooming house. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-361. - Standards for tourist rooming houses. 
Each tourist rooming house shall comply with all applicable Village ordinances and all the following requirements: 
(a)  Space, occupancy and parking. Each tourist rooming house shall have: 
(1)  Not less than one bathroom for every six occupants; 
(2)  Not less than 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least an additional 100 square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof; the floor space shall be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. Floor space is determined using interior measurements of each room. Floor space does not include kitchens, bathrooms, closets, garages, or rooms not meeting Uniform Dwelling Code requirements for occupancy. 
(3)  A maximum occupancy for any premises without a separate enclosed bedroom is two people; 
(4)  Not less than one and one-quarter onsite off-street parking spaces for every four occupants based upon maximum occupancy. 
(b)  Safety requirements. Each tourist rooming house shall have: 
(1)  A safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe, open space at ground level; 
(2)  Functional smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 362; 
(3)  No accessible wood burning fireplace unless the owner provides a certificate from a licensed commercial building inspector, dated not more than 30 days prior to submission, certifying that the fireplace and chimney have been inspected and are in compliance with National Fire Prevention Association Fire Code Chapter 211 Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances. 
(4)  No hibachi, gas-fired grill, charcoal grill, or other similar devices used for cooking, heating, or any other purpose on any balcony, deck or under any overhanging structure or within ten feet of any structure. 
(c)  Orderly operation and use. 
(1)  The owner and local agent shall comply with all terms of an approved nuisance response plan. 
(2)  No tourist rooming house shall permit any number of daytime guests of renters in excess of 100 percent of the maximum occupancy limit of the tourist rooming house to be present on the property at any time. 
(3)  The owner shall require the primary overnight and daytime occupant of the tourist rooming house to be an adult 18 years of age or older. This adult shall provide a telephone number to the owner or local agent and shall be accessible to the owner or local agent by telephone at all times. 
(4)  Prior to occupancy, the owner or local agent shall obtain the name, address, and driver's license number or a copy of the passport of the primary adult occupant of the tourist rooming house. The owner shall require that adult to sign a formal acknowledgement that he or she is legally responsible for compliance of all occupants of the tourist rooming house or their guests with all provisions of this chapter. This information shall be readily available upon request of any police officer or employee of the city authorized to enforce this chapter or state law. 
(5)  Trash and refuse shall not be left stored within public view, except in proper containers for the purpose of collection. The owner of the tourist rooming house shall provide sufficient trash collection containers and service to meet the demand of the occupants. 
(6)  Each lease or rental agreement for a tourist rooming house shall include the following terms, notifications and disclosures, which shall also be posted in a conspicuous location inside the unit: 
a.  The maximum number of overnight occupants and day use visitors that are permitted. 
b.  The number of off-street parking spaces that are provided. 
c.  Notification that on-street parking is extremely limited in some areas of the Village. 
d.  The trash pick-up day and applicable rules and regulations pertaining to leaving or storing trash or refuse on the exterior of the property. 
e.  Notification that the occupant may be cited or fined by the Village or immediately evicted by the owner or local agent, in addition to any other remedies available at law, for violating any other provisions of this Article. 
f.  Notification that failure to conform to the occupancy requirements of the tourist rooming house is a violation of this Article. 
g.  Notification that amplified sound, including radios, televisions and other electronic devices are subject to the Village's noise regulations as set forth in Sections 20-58, 20-59, 20-77, 20-79 and 20-80, copies of which shall also be provided. 
h.  A recommendation that the occupant participate voluntarily in neighborhood quiet hours by avoiding parties and loud social events between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
i.  The name of the owner of the unit, local agent and a telephone number at which at least one or the other may be reached at all times. 
j.  A copy of the "Good Neighbor Guidelines" which may from time to time be prepared by the permit administrator. These guidelines may include location-specific information, such as local speed limits and parking limitations. 
k.  A copy of this Article and Sections 20-58, 20-59, 20-77, 20-79 and 20-80 of the McFarland Municipal Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(7)  Upon receipt of a nuisance complaint or upon notification that any occupant or guest of the short-term vacation rental has created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct, or committed violations of the McFarland Municipal Code or any state law, the owner or local agent shall promptly respond and take timely corrective action to prevent a recurrence of such conduct by those occupants or guests. Failure of the owner or local agent to respond promptly or to take timely corrective action regarding the condition, operation, or conduct of occupants of the tourist rooming house shall be a violation of this chapter. An owner or local agent is not required or authorized to act as a peace officer or to intervene in situations that pose a risk to personal safety. The owner, or local agent, shall maintain records of the name, violation, date, and time of each complaint, disturbance, response and corrective action. 
(8)  The owner and local agent shall keep written records documenting compliance with all elements of the performance standards and the approved nuisance response plan. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-362. - Taxes and fees. 
The owner of a tourist rooming house shall pay room tax in accordance with Chapter 23, Article II, Division 6 of the McFarland Municipal Code. Fees under this Article shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and set forth in Appendix A of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-363. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The following penalties shall be assessed for violations of this Article: 
(a)  A violation of Section 11-353 shall be punishable by a forfeiture of not less than $500.00, nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation committed hereunder. 
(b)  Any other violation of any provision of this Article shall be punishable by a forfeiture of not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.0 for each violation committed hereunder. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalty, any violation of this Article or any other applicable statute, regulation or ordinance may result in the suspension or revocation of the permit in accordance with Section 11-364 or any other procedure authorized by law. 
(d)  Penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to all other remedies of injunction, abatement or costs whether existing under this Chapter or otherwise. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 11-364. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  A permit issued under this Article may be suspended or revoked for the reasons set forth herein. For purposes of this subsection, "habitual" means two occurrences of any violation or combination of violations within any 12-month period or three such occurrences within any five-year period. Violations include those committed by the owner, local agent, or any guest of the tourist rooming house. 
(1)  Habitual violations of Sections 11-359 or 11-361(c). 
(2)  Habitual violations of Sections 20-58, 20-59, 20-77, 20-79 or 20-80 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(3)  Habitual occurrences of any conduct on the premises that could be prosecuted under Wis. Stats. chs. 940 to 967 or local ordinance substantially similar thereto. 
(4)  Habitual violations of Sections 38-94, 38-98 or 38-128 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(5)  Habitual violations of any other local ordinance arising out of or connected to the operation of the tourist rooming house and that would tend to impair the peaceful use and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the occurrence of any violation of local ordinance or state statute that causes or creates an imminent threat of death or substantial bodily harm to any person. 
(b)  A permit issued under this Article shall be suspended or revoked for any violation of this Article that establishes a fundamental conditions or prerequisite to the lawful operation of the tourist rooming house or the violation of any state or local statute, ordinance or regulation that relates to the health or safety of the occupants of a tourist rooming house. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Summary suspension. In the event the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector determines the tourist rooming house is in violation of any building or fire code that presents a substantial and imminent risk to the health or safety of occupants of the tourist rooming house an order for immediate suspension of the tourist rooming house permit shall be issued which shall be effective until such violation is corrected. Such order shall be served upon the owner or local agent in writing and shall include notice of the right to appeal such determination pursuant to Chapter 2, Article XI of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(2)  Suspension or revocation after notice and hearing. 
a.  The Building Inspector, Chief of Police, or Village Administrator may, upon determining that grounds exist for suspension or revocation of a permit under this chapter, may commence proceedings therefor by serving a complaint upon the owner or local agent setting forth the grounds for such proceedings. Service of the complaint shall be obtained in the manner for service of civil complaints pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 801.11. The complaint shall be accompanied by notice stating that the owner shall, within 20 days of the date of service, file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, an answer to the complaint admitting or denying the allegations in the complaint and if any allegations are denied, an explanation of the basis for denial. 
b.  Upon receipt of the answer, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall provide notice to the owner of the date and time of a hearing before the Public Safety Committee at which evidence will be heard on all contested issues of fact and, if grounds for suspension or revocation are admitted or found, whether the Public Safety Committee will recommend to the Village Board whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 2-996 of the McFarland Municipal Code. The Public Safety Committee shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law supporting its recommendation which shall be based upon the documents and evidence presented at the hearing. 
c.  The Public Safety Committee in making its recommendation and the Village Board, in determining whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked, shall consider the purposes of this Article which shall include specific consideration of the following factors: 
1.  The seriousness of the offense or offenses. 
2.  The owner's actions and diligence in responding to violations. 
3.  The owner and local agent's cooperativeness with Village officers, agents and employees. 
4.  The history of the tourist rooming house operation. 
d.  If the Village Board determines the permit should be suspended, such suspension shall be for no less than 30 days, nor greater than 120 days. 
e.  The permit may be revoked if the Village Board determines that the owner has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to ensure compliance with all applicable rules and regulations or the alleged violations are of such a serious nature that revocation is necessary to protect the public health or safety. 
f.  The Village Board's determination shall be considered a final determination under Section 2-997 and judicial review may be had pursuant to Section 2-998 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(3)  Costs. If the Village Board determines that the permit shall be suspended or revoked, the costs incurred by the Village in conducting the hearing shall be paid by the owner. An invoice for such costs shall be mailed to the owner at the address on the most current tax roll or as otherwise specified by the owner and if not paid, shall be placed on the tax roll as a special charge against the property upon which the tourist rooming house is operated pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(d)  This Subsection is not the exclusive procedure by which action may be taken that directly or effectively constitutes a suspension or revocation of a permit under this Article. The Village may pursue any other actions affecting the tourist rooming house authorized by law in addition to or in lieu of the remedies set forth herein. 
( Ord. No. 2017-22 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Secs. 11-365—11-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-400. - Permit required. 
No person shall operate a mobile food establishment in the Village of McFarland without obtaining a permit under this Section. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , 6-25-2018)  
Sec. 11-401. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Mobile desserts establishment means a mobile food establishment that serves individual portions of ice cream, ice milk, frozen custard, frozen yogurt, dessert mix, sundaes, or other frozen desserts that are prepackaged and totally enclosed in a wrapper or container having been manufactured, prepared or wrapped in a licensed food establishment. 
Mobile food establishment means a restaurant or retail food establishment where food is sold to members of the general public from a movable vehicle, push cart, trailer, or boat which periodically or continuously changes location including movable concession stands and similar temporary stations not operating from a permanent building licensed as a restaurant including those designed to operate as temporary food establishments or traveling retail food establishments as those terms are used in Wis. Admin. Code Chap. DHS 196 "Appendix" (the "Wisconsin Food Code"). Mobile food establishment does not include a vehicle which is used solely to transport or deliver food, a common carrier regulated by the state or federal government, or an establishment under hire, contract or special request to provide food service to a private group, organization or business and is not serving to members of the general public provided the establishment is in full compliance with all state and county food and health code requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , 6-25-2018)  
Sec. 11-402. - Application and fee. 
Applications to operate a mobile food establishment unit shall be filed by the owner of the unit with the Village Clerk on a form prescribed by the Village Clerk. 
(a)  Such form shall require the following information be provided: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that owns the unit. 
(2)  Birth date, height, weight, color of hair and eyes of the applicant. 
(3)  The length of time for which the right to conduct business is desired. 
(4)  Physical description, including make, model and license number of any mobile food establishment to be used in the operation of the unit. 
(5)  A statement as to whether the applicant has been arrested or convicted of any crime or ordinance violation as well as the nature of each offense and the place of arrest or conviction, if applicable. 
(6)  The location or locations from which the unit will be operated, including the service base address. 
(7)  Documentation of permission of the property owner. 
(8)  The Zoning District in which the establishment will be located. 
(9)  A copy of the applicant's valid food and beverage license issued by the State of Wisconsin or agent health department. 
(10)  The three locations where applicant conducted business immediately preceding the application including identification of any licenses or permits required and the governmental entity that issued such license or permit. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall present the following to the Clerk for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(2)  A photograph approximately two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of such person, which was taken no more than one year prior to the application; 
(c)  If any persons other than the applicant will be operating the unit without the presence of the applicant, such persons shall also be licensed as operators and the information required in paragraphs (a)(1) through (5) and (b)(1) through (2) shall be provided. 
(d)  Permits shall be issued on an annual basis, effective from January 1 through December 31 of the same year, or on a single event basis. 
(e)  The permit fee shall be as established by the fee schedule in Appendix A. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , 6-25-2018)  
Sec. 11-403. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the village clerk shall refer the application to the police department, or any other applicable village department, to review the application. 
(b)  Following review of the application, the village clerk shall issue the license, deny the license, or issue the license with conditions. If issued, the license shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is issued, subject to revocation in Section 11-405. Each calendar year, a person wishing to operate a mobile food business within the village shall obtain a new license. 
(c)  Permits issued on a single event basis, if operating as part of a special event permitted under Section 11-66 of the Village Code of Ordinances, pursuant to a contract with the special event permittee, shall be effective for the duration of the special event. Single event permits for operations not contractually connected to a special event under Section 11-66 may be effective for a period not exceeding 48 consecutive hours. 
(d)  The Village may refuse to issue a license if it is determined that: 
(1)  The application contains material omission or materially inaccurate statement. 
(2)  Complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant in cities, villages or towns in which the applicant conducted similar business. 
(3)  Subject to applicable state statutes, the applicant has been arrested or convicted of a crime, statutory violation, or ordinance violation. 
(4)  The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of Section 11-405. In the Village's sole discretion, there is a public safety, health or general welfare reason or reasons that support denial of the license. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , 6-25-2018)  
Sec. 11-404. - Revocation. 
(a)  A mobile food business license may be revoked by the Village after notice and hearing if the licensee: 
(1)  Made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for license. 
(2)  Made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in sale of food, drinks, or materials incidental to food or drinks. 
(3)  Violated any section of this article, including, but not limited to, Section 11-405. 
(4)  Subject to applicable state statutes, the licensee was arrested or convicted of a crime, statutory violation, or ordinance violation. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the licensee at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. The notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and a statement of the facts upon which the proposed revocation of the license is based. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , 6-25-2018)  
Sec. 11-405. - Regulations. 
Mobile food establishment units operating within the Village of McFarland shall comply with all of the following: 
(a)  Mobile food establishments shall comply with all state and county food and health code requirements applicable to the unit and related food and beverage license. 
(b)  All state, county and Village of McFarland permits shall be conspicuously displayed on the mobile food establishment while in operation. 
(c)  Mobile food establishments may operate from any space on private property where permitted by the property owner and which does not otherwise create a traffic hazard provided the zoning regulations applicable to the property do not limit the property to residential and related incidental or accessory uses. 
(d)  Mobile food establishments may operate from space on public property including parks with permission from the Village upon review and recommendation of the Public Works Department. 
(e)  Mobile food establishment units shall not obstruct any public street, sidewalk, trail access or visibility of cross walks, street corners, driveways or intersections and operators shall take affirmative steps to direct unit customers waiting for service to refrain from causing any such obstructions. 
(f)  Mobile food establishments shall provide a minimum ten-foot clearance on sidewalks and rights-of-way for pedestrian access and traffic. 
(g)  Mobile food establishments, when operating in the public right-of-way shall serve and dispense food products toward the sidewalk or terrace area immediately adjacent. 
(h)  Mobile food establishments shall not place seating within the public right-of-way for consumer consumption of products. 
(i)  Mobile food establishments shall operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(j)  Mobile food establishments shall keep the area clean and free from litter, garbage, refuse and debris at all times and shall provide at least one leakproof container for the deposit of waste. Mobile food establishment operators are required to remove or otherwise properly dispose of all waste, litter or garbage generated by their operations and patrons on a daily basis including that which may be reasonably seen from the location of operation on the ground or otherwise not in a proper disposal container. 
(k)  Mobile food establishments shall not connect to any public source of electricity, water or sewer. 
(l)  Mobile food establishments shall not use any public property such as light poles or other utility poles, flower planters, trees or other amenities to attach any ropes, posters, signs, electrical cords or other objects used in its operations. 
(m)  A licensed mobile food establishment operator must be present at all times when the unit is in operation. 
(n)  All mobile food establishment units must have signage posted, in lettering not less than three inches in height, in plain view to all patrons that provides the name of the operator and a valid telephone number. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , 6-25-2018)  
Sec. 11-406. - Exemptions. 
No fee shall be required for a mobile food establishment operating as identified in this subsection. Notwithstanding this subsection, mobile food establishments shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in subsections (3) and (4) unless the regulation is inconsistent with any approval granted by the Village of McFarland for the authorized event triggering the exemption. Mobile food establishments exempt from the fee requirement of this section are those mobile food establishments: 
(a)  Operated by tax-exempt, non-profit organizations granted exemption under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Service Code or other educational institutions, churches, religious, educational or benevolent associations or youth organizations operating not for profit for local benefit for the area including, but not limited to, the Village of McFarland, to raise funds for such purposes; or operated by the Village of McFarland. 
(b)  That are mobile desserts establishments provided they apply for and receive a direct sellers permit under Chapter 11, Article IV of the Village Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05 , 6-25-2018)  
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Minimum acreage for cemeteries. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 157.128(3a) and 157.129(1), the minimum acreage for cemeteries dedicated in the Village shall be three acres. 
(Ord. No. 2006-31, § 16-1-1, 12-11-2006)  
Chapter 17 - EMERGENCY SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 17-1—17-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire alarm systems, Wis. Stats. § 101.14(4)(G). 
 
Sec. 17-19. - Declaration of purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar, fire and holdup alarm systems, alarm business and alarm users. Both society in general and public safety in particular will be aided by providing a useful and usable system of private security, which properly balances quick response by law enforcement with minimization of law enforcement time spent on alarms which are false or otherwise not the intended function of private security systems. 
(Code 1998, § 5-4-2)  
Sec. 17-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Alarm business. Any business in which the owners or employees engage in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, or servicing alarm systems. 
(b)  Alarm system. An assembly of equipment and devices or single device such as a solid state unit that plugs directly into an AC line or otherwise receives electrical energy arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department is expected to respond. In this Article, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic holdup alarm systems," "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarm systems" and "manual holdup alarm systems" as those terms are hereinafter defined, and fire alarm systems that monitor temperature, humidity or any other condition directly related to the detection of fire. Excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this Article are alarm systems used to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located of an attempted, unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt or fire. 
(c)  Annunciator. The instrumentation of an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line through which both visual and audible signals show when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated or which, in the event of malfunction, may also indicate line trouble. 
(d)  Answering service. A telephone answering service providing among its services the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained employees emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the dispatch center of the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. 
(e)  Automatic holdup alarm system. An alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber. 
(f)  Automatic signaling device. An alarm system that automatically sends over access lines by direct connection or otherwise a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
(g)  Burglar alarm system. An alarm system that signals an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
(h)  Central station. An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits. 
(i)  Direct connect. An alarm system that has the capability of transmitting system signals to the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. 
(j)  False alarm. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of the owner or lessee's employees or agents or other undetermined cause. The term does not include alarms caused by tornadoes or other violent climatic conditions. 
(k)  Interconnect. To connect an alarm system to a voice grade telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
(l)  Manual holdup alarm system. An alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attached or by an observer thereof. 
(m)  Primary trunk line. A telephone line leading directly into the dispatch center of the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person to person basis and which is identified as such by a specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone directory or numbers in sequence therewith. 
(n)  Subscriber. A person who buys or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm system. 
(Code 1998, § 5-4-3; Ord. No. 2013-14, §§ 16—19, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 17-21. - Administrative rules. 
The Chief of Police shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this Article. Such rules shall require the approval of the Village Board and shall be open to inspection by the public. 
(Code 1998, § 5-4-4)  
Sec. 17-22. - Automatic dialing devices. 
No person shall interconnect any automatic dialing device to a Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department primary trunk line. No person shall permit such devices, which were installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived, to remain interconnected from any property owned or controlled by that person. Such devices may be connected to a central station or an answering service. Relaying messages so received to the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall only be done person to person on the telephone line. 
(Code 1998, § 5-4-5; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 20, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 17-23. - Direct connections to the Police Department. 
Direct connections to the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department are prohibited, but may be authorized pursuant to the direct connection policies of the Police Department and the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, a copy of which is on file with the Chief of Police and Fire/EMS Chief. 
(Code 1998, § 5-4-6; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 21, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 17-24. - Testing. 
(a)  No alarm business or alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages to the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall be tested or demonstrated without prior notification and approval of the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. Alarm businesses or alarm system owners or lessors will be advised on proper test procedure. 
(b)  No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department will be tested to determine the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department's response without first notifying the appropriate authority. However, the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department may inspect or test on-site alarm systems authorized under this Article. 
(c)  Alarm systems shall be in compliance with all pertinent response policies of the Police Department or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. 
(Code 1998, § 5-4-7; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 22, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 17-25. - Notification. 
When the service provided by an alarm business to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason by the alarm business or the alarm business becomes aware of such disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscribers by telephone that protection is no longer being provided. If, however, the alarm business has written instructions from its subscriber not to make such notification by telephone during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with such instructions. 
(Code 1998, § 5-4-8)  
Sec. 17-26. - Fee for answering alarms. 
(a)  Generally. Each false alarm requires response of public safety personnel, involves unnecessary expense to the Village, increases the risk of injury to persons or damage to property and dilutes the overall public safety protection to the Village. Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance and must be abated. 
(b)  Intentional. No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a burglar/fire alarm device knowing that no criminal activity, fire or other emergency exists. 
(c)  False alarms; administrative charges. 
(1)  Any person, business, corporation or other entity having permissible alarm system with alarm devices at one or more locations in accordance with this Article shall pay to the Village a charge for false alarms responded to by the Police or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department according to the number of false alarms within any continuous 12-month period. Separate accounts shall be kept for false alarms as to criminal activity and false alarms for fire or other emergencies. These charges are as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  This Subsection is intended to impose a strict liability on the person, business, corporation or other entity responsible for alarm connection to either the police alarm panel or to alarm receiving firm to which the Police or Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department have responded and shall be applied regardless of the cause of the false alarm excepting those alarms excluded from the definition of "false alarm." The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall be responsible for determining whether a fee shall be charged under this Section and shall notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer of all fees to be charged. 
(d)  Other violations. Any person, corporation or other entity violating this Article in any manner, other than for collection of unpaid administrative charges treated in the preceding Subsection (c) of this Section, shall be subject to forfeiture as provided in Section 1-16. When any premises located in the Village is owned, leased or occupied by two or more persons as joint tenants, tenants in common, joint lessees, or in any other manner, each person shall see that the provisions of this Article are complied with, and each person may be subjected to a penalty on violation of this Section. 
(e)  Payment of fees. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall promptly send an invoice by regular mail to the subject person, corporation or other entity for all false alarm charges reported by the Police Department. Payment of all false alarm charges shall be due 30 days from the date of the invoice. Upon nonpayment of the fee, the amount due plus an additional ten percent administrative fee, may be placed on the tax roll as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1998, § 5-4-9; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-14-2010; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 23, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 119, 120, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 17-27. - Village liability. 
The Village shall be under no duty or obligation to a subscriber or to any other person concerning any provision of this Article, including, but not limited to, any defects in an alarm system or any delays in transmission or response to any alarm; however, this provision in no way shall be construed to mean that it is not the proper function of law enforcement to respond to alarms. 
(Code 1998, § 5-4-10)  
Secs. 17-28—17-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 24 of Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, changed the title of Art. III from "Emergency Medical Service" to "Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department." 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, Wis. Stats. §§ 146.50—146.58; civil liability, Wis. Stats. § 895.48. 
 
Sec. 17-58. - Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department established. 
(a)  There is hereby created the McFarland Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, which shall be established for the purpose of providing firefighting and emergency medical service to the Village area. The Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall be governed and operated according to the provisions of this Section, Village Board directives and the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department bylaws. The ambulance shall be operated by Village employees and paid on-call volunteers on a 24-hour per day basis. 
(b)  The volunteer fire company organized under the Wisconsin Statutes under the title of McFarland Volunteer Fire Department is hereby disbanded pursuant to state law. In lieu thereof, the McFarland Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall consist of Village employees and paid-on-call volunteers. 
(Code 1998, § 5-5-1; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 25, 11-11-2013) 
Editor's note— Section 25 of Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, changed the title of § 17-58 from "Village Emergency Medical Service established" to "Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department established."  
Sec. 17-59. - Response and user fees. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide for fees to reimburse in part or in whole the Village for emergency responses by the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department to traffic accidents, ambulance calls and other incidents that occur on public highways and elsewhere in the Village. 
(b)  Reimbursement. 
(1)  The Village shall charge a fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for reimbursement of response costs for any fire call on any public highway for any emergency response by the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department requiring the deployment of any Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department personnel or equipment. The fee shall be collected from the insurer of the person to whom the fire call was provided or the person to whom the fire call was provided. Where a fire call involves a multiple vehicle accident the Village shall collect costs from the person determined to be at fault for the accident. 
(2)  For any fire call to a state trunk highway or any highway that is part of the national system of interstate highways, if reasonable collection efforts have failed, the Village may seek reimbursement of costs from the Department of Transportation pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.65(8). 
(c)  Compensation. The officers and members of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall receive such compensation from the Village as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Village Board. 
(d)  Resident ambulance charges. The fee for the use of the services of an ambulance provided by the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department when that service is provided to a resident of the Ambulance Service District shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and set forth in Appendix A to this Code. 
(e)  Nonresident ambulance charges. The fee for the use of the services of an ambulance provided by the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department when that service is provided to a nonresident of the Ambulance Service District shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and set forth in Appendix A to this Code. 
(f)  Medical supplies. An account of the expenses incurred by the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall be kept and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the individual for whom such services have been provided. The fee for the use of medical supplies supplied to an individual who uses the services of an ambulance used by the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall be the actual cost incurred by the Village when obtaining said supplies. 
(g)  Loaded mileage fee. The per-mile fee for the use of the services of an ambulance used by the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and set forth in Appendix A to this Code per loaded mile. 
(h)  No transport. The fee for the use of the services of an ambulance used by the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department in the event the ambulance dispatched does not transport the individual for whom services were requested to a hospital, clinic or other health care provider shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and stated in Appendix A to this Code. 
(i)  Advanced life support intercept. Whenever an Advanced Life Support is dispatched to render services over and above the services rendered by the Village Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, the fee for the service of the paramedic shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and stated in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 5-5-3; Ord. No. 98-20, § 1, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 2004-26, §§ 1—4, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 2006-01, §§ 2, 3, 2-23-2006; Ord. No. 2007-03, §§ 1—3, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2008-04, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-2008; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 26, 11-11-2013) 
Editor's note— Section 26 of Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, changed the title of § 17-59 from "User fee" to "Response and user fees."  
Sec. 17-60. - Appropriations. 
The Village Board shall appropriate funds for Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department operations and for such apparatus and equipment for the use of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department as the Village Board may deem expedient and necessary to maintain efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire and from health emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 27, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 17-61. - Department equipment. 
(a)  The Fire/EMS Chief shall have control of all apparatus used by the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department and shall be responsible for its proper maintenance. Emergency repairs may be authorized by the Fire/EMS Chief. 
(b)  The Fire/EMS Chief shall ensure that all department apparatus is used for proper firefighting and emergency medical purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 28, 11-11-2013)  
Chapter 20 - ENVIRONMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 20-1—20-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public nuisances, Wis. Stats. § 29.927; nuisances regarding navigable waterways, Wis. Stats. §§ 30.03, 30.294, 31.25; dilapidated buildings, Wis. Stats. § 66.0413; regulation of junkyards, Wis. Stats. § 84.31; alcohol beverage establishments, Wis. Stats. § 125.14(5); nuisances, Wis. Stats. § 823.01 et seq.; certain fences exceeding six feet, Wis. Stats. § 844.10. 
 
Sec. 20-21. - Health nuisances. 
(a)  Defined. A health nuisance is any source of filth or cause of sickness. 
(b)  Duty to abate. The Village Board shall abate health nuisances pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 823.01 et seq., which is adopted by reference and made a part of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 8-1-2) 
State Law reference— Nuisances, Wis. Stats. § 823.01 et seq.  
Sec. 20-22. - Keeping of livestock; sanitary requirements. 
All structures, pens, buildings, stables, coops or yards wherein animals or fowl are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of rodents, vermin and objectionable odors, and shall only be kept in properly zoned areas. 
(Code 1998, § 8-1-3(a))  
Sec. 20-23. - Animals excluded from food handling establishments. 
No person shall take or permit to remain any dog, cat or other live animal on or upon any premises where food is sold, offered for sale or processed for consumption by the general public. Service animals permitted under Wis. Stats. § 106.52(1)(fm) are exempt from the provisions of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 8-1-3(b))  
Sec. 20-24. - Deposit of deleterious substances prohibited. 
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any public street or on any public ground or on any private property not owned by such person any refuse, garbage, litter, waste material, compost or liquid or any other objectionable material or liquid. When any such material is placed on the person's own private property, it shall be properly enclosed and covered so as to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance. 
(Code 1998, § 8-1-4)  
Sec. 20-25. - Regulations concerning noxious weeds and lawn height. 
(a)  Definition of Noxious Weeds. Noxious weeds, as used in this Section, includes the following: 
1.  Alliaria petiolata (Garlic Mustard). 
2.  Ambrosia artemisiifolia (Common Ragweed). 
3.  Ambrosia trifida (Giant Ragweed). 
4.  Arctium minus (Burdock). 
5.  Cannabis sativa (Hemp). 
6.  Cirsium arvense (Canada Thistle). 
7.  Cirsium vulgaries (Bull Thistle). 
8.  Convolvulus arvensis (Creeping Jenny) (Field Bindweed). 
9.  Cornilla varia (Crown Vetch). 
10.  Dipsacus lacinatus (Cut-leaved Teasel). 
11.  Dipsacus slyvestris (Common Teasel). 
12.  Euphorbia esula (Leafy Spurge). 
13.  Lythrum salicara (Purple Loosestrife). 
14.  Pastinaca sativa (Wild Parsnip). 
15.  Plantago lanceolata (English Plantain). 
16.  Polygonum cuspidatum (Japanese Knotweed). 
17.  Rumex crispus (Curled Dock). 
18.  Toxicodendron diversilobrum (Poison Oak). 
19.  Toxicodendron radicans (Poison Ivy). 
20.  Tragopogon dubius (Goat's Beard). 
21.  Xanthium strumarium (Cocklebur). 
22.  The following grasses: Agrostis alba (Redtop), Dactylis glomerata (Orchard), Phleum pratensis (Timothy), Phragmites australis (Common reed grass), Poa pratensis (Kentucky Blue), Sorghum halepense (Johnson), and Setaria (Foxtail species). 
23.  Dandelions over eight inches in height. 
24.  Any yard grass or lawn over eight inches in height. 
25.  Any plant listed under Wis. Stats. §§ 23.235(1)(a) and 66.0407(1)(b) or prohibited under Wis. Admin. Code NR 40. 
(b)  Duty to destroy noxious weeds and maintain lawn. Except as otherwise provided, every person shall destroy or otherwise eliminate noxious weeds on lands that he or she owns or controls. All noxious weeds shall be destroyed or eliminated prior to the time in which such plants would mature to the bloom or flower state. Every person shall keep all yard grass and lawns on lands that he or she owns or controls under eight inches in height. 
(c)  Abatement process. The Village may provide written notice to any person failing to comply with this Section by sending notice to the property owner by first class mail or by electronic mail if the property owner provides an electronic mail address to the Village. In addition, the Village may post said notice at the subject property in a conspicuous location, such as the front door, and provide the notice personally to the owner or adult occupant of the property. 
The notice shall state that the Village, after the expiration of a five-day period, will destroy or cause to be destroyed all such noxious weeds growing upon said lands, and/or will mow or cause to be mowed the grass or lawn upon said lands, and that the cost thereof, including chemical treatments, will be billed to the person and may be imposed as a special charge upon said lands if not paid. The notice shall also provide that the Village may repeat such action for future violations without additional notice. The notice shall also provide the Village's decision to issue the notice and take action to abate the nuisance is subject to administrative review pursuant to Article XI of this Code. 
No additional notice is required for subsequent violations of this Section involving the same property if the same person has received a similar notice in the previous six months and failed to correct the violation. 
After the five-day notice period has expired, or as soon as practicable if no notice is required, the Village or its designee may enter the lands and destroy the noxious weeds and/or mow the grass or lawn, the expense of which shall be billed and payable within 30 days of invoicing. Any unpaid charge may be imposed as a special charge against the property, as determined by the Village Board. 
(d)  The Weed Commissioner shall enforce this Section. 
(e)  Section 20-25(a)(24) does not apply to property located in a designated floodplain area and/or wetland area, or where the land is zoned A-1 Agriculture—Transition or RH-1 Rural Home Districts. 
(f)  Any person violating paragraph 20-25 (b) of this Section shall forfeit not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00 for a first offense, and not less than $200.00 nor more than $300.00 for a second or subsequent offense occurring within the same calendar year. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. Citations may be issued irrespective of any abatement action commenced by the Village under paragraph 20-25 (c) of this Section, or other lawful remedies pursued by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 2020-14 , § 2, 4-27-2020) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-14 , § 2, adopted April 27, 2020, amended § 20-25 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 20-25 pertained to destruction of noxious weeds and derived from Code 1998, § 8-1-5; Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, adopted Oct. 12, 1998; Ord. No. 2003-05, §§ 26, 27, adopted March 24, 2003; and Ord. No. 2017-18 , § 1, adopted Aug. 14, 2017.  
Sec. 20-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-14 , § 3, adopted April 27, 2020, repealed § 20-26, which pertained to height of grasses and derived from Code 1998, § 8-1-6; Ord. No. 2002-06, § 1, adopted April 22, 2002; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 133—135, adopted Jan. 27, 2003; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 28, adopted March 24, 2003; Ord. No. 2014-04, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 31, 2014; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 121, adopted June 26, 2017; and Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 13, adopted March 26, 2018.  
Sec. 20-27. - Smoking prohibited. 
(a)  Wis. Stats. § 101.123 is hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Any structures erected for the purpose of providing an outdoor smoking area shall comply with all applicable regulations, including, but not limited to, all zoning and building codes. 
(c)  The owner, occupant or operator of any property shall be responsible for the actions of employees, agents, guests, customers and invitees who are permitted to smoke, congregate or linger outdoors with respect to any nuisances which may be caused by such activity. Further, the owner, occupant or operator of any property may be issued a citation for any violation of this chapter committed by such employees, agents, customers, guests or invitees. This section is intended to express the responsibility of owners, occupants or operators with regard to problems that may arise whenever smokers and non-smokers alike are permitted to congregate or linger outdoors. This section is not intended to alter any legal responsibility or liability imposed by any ordinance, statute or common law that may exist independent of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2010-09, adopted June 14, 2010, repealed the former § 20-27 and enacted a new § 20-27 as set out herein. The former § 20-27 pertained to smoking prohibited in certain enclosed indoor areas. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation.  
Secs. 20-28—20-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 20-58. - Loud and unreasonable noise prohibited. 
No person shall make or assist in making any noise tending to unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of persons in the vicinity thereof unless the making and continuing of the same cannot be prevented and is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or of the health, safety, life, or limb of some person. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-9(a))  
Sec. 20-59. - Types of loud and unreasonable noises. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unreasonable noises in violation of this Section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, nor a limitation upon the prohibition in Subsection (a): 
(a)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the Village for longer than three seconds in any period of one minute or less, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound by means of any signaling device and the sounding of any plainly audible device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(b)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set; musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a loud and unreasonable manner. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section. 
(c)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting attention of the public to any building or structure. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(d)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird that causes frequent or long continued unnecessary noise. 
(e)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper Village authorities. 
(f)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor boat except through a muffle or other device, which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(g)  Construction or repair of buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or any other similar equipment attended by loud or unusual noise, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; provided, however, the Building Inspector shall have the authority, upon determining that the loss of inconvenience, which would result to any party in interest, would be extraordinary and of such nature as to warrant special consideration, to grant a permit for a period necessary within which time such work and operation may take place within the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(h)  Schools, courts, houses of worship, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, house of worship or court while in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, hospital or court street. 
(i)  Exceptions. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the Village while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets or other public construction by or on behalf of the Village, county, or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in nature. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-9(b))  
Secs. 20-60—20-76. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STATIONARY NOISE LIMITS 
 
Sec. 20-77. - Maximum permissible sound levels. 
(a)  Noise from a stationary source shall not exceed the following standards for maximum sound pressure levels measured at the property line. 
Zone 	Noise Rating 
Daytime 	Noise Rating 
Nighttime 
Urban Residential 	60 dB 	50 dB 
Commercial 	70 dB 	70 dB 
All other zones 	75 dB 	75 dB 
 
(b)  Ambient noise is the all-encompassing noise associated with a given source, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far, but excluding the noise source being measured. Ambient noise is a factor and the subject noise shall exceed the ambient noise by five db in any octave band to be designated excessive. 
(c)  Pure tones and impulsive noises are factors. Five noise rating numbers shall be taken from the table in Subsection (a) of this Section, if the subject noise consists primarily of a pure tone or if it is impulsive in character. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-9(c)(1); Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 14, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 20-78. - Construction noise. 
Construction equipment in any zone may be operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., provided that said equipment does not exceed a maximum sound level of 80 db(a) measured at the property line of the location at which said equipment is in use. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-9(c)(2))  
Sec. 20-79. - Noise in Residential Districts. 
In Residential Zones, the person in violation of this Article shall be ordered to reduce the sound pressure to acceptable levels immediately by the monitoring officer. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-9(c)(3))  
Sec. 20-80. - Operation of certain equipment. 
Lawnmowers, chainsaws, powered garden equipment, electric insect killing/repelling devices, and other nonconstruction maintenance equipment shall be operated only during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. unless within the specified noise levels measured at the property line of the location at which said equipment is in use. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-9(c)(4))  
Sec. 20-81. - Exemptions. 
Operations of emergency equipment shall be exempt from this Article. Snow blowers not operated on a commercial basis shall be exempt from this Article when used to gain access to a Village street or clear a sidewalk. Emergency equipment shall include ambulance, police, fire, snow removal, civil defense sirens, etc., necessary for the health, safety, and protection of the citizens of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-9(c)(5))  
Sec. 20-82. - Methods of measuring noise. 
(a)  Equipment. Noise measurement shall be made with a sound level meter. 
(b)  Location of noise meter. Noise measurement shall be made at the nearest lot line of the premises from which a noise complaint is received. The noise meter shall be placed at a height of at least three feet above the ground and at least three feet away from walls, barriers, obstructions, and all other sound reflective surfaces. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-9(c)(6))  
Sec. 20-83. - Appeals. 
The Village Board may grant an exemption to individuals proving evidence of substantial hardship. Evidence that reasonable technological attempts have been made to correct the problem shall be considered grounds for granting an exemption to this Article for existing industries. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-9(c)(7))  
Secs. 20-84—20-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public nuisances, Wis. Stats. § 29.927; nuisances regarding navigable waterways, Wis. Stats. §§ 30.03, 30.294, 31.25; dilapidated buildings, Wis. Stats. § 66.0413; regulation of junkyards, Wis. Stats. § 84.31; alcohol beverage establishments, Wis. Stats. § 125.14(5); nuisances, Wis. Stats. § 823.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 20-110. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "public nuisance" means a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property that shall continue for such length of time as to: 
(a)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
(b)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; 
(c)  Greatly offend the public morals or decency; 
(d)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use of public property. 
(Code 1998, § 11-6-2)  
Sec. 20-111. - Public nuisances prohibited. 
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 11-6-1)  
Sec. 20-112. - Public nuisances affecting health. 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of Section 20-110: 
(a)  Adulterated food. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(b)  Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or foods, which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(c)  Breeding places for vermin, etc. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed. 
(d)  Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(e)  Garbage cans. Garbage cans that are not fly-tight. 
(f)  Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation. 
(g)  Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances. 
(h)  Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the Village or within four miles thereof or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons, which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the Village. 
(i)  Street pollution. Any use of property that shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the Village. 
(j)  Animals at large. All animals running at large. 
(k)  Accumulations of refuse. Accumulations of old cans, lumber, elm firewood and other refuse. 
(l)  Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the limits or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property. 
(Code 1998, § 11-6-3)  
Sec. 20-113. - Public nuisances offending morals and decency. 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of Section 20-110: 
(a)  Disorderly houses. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling. 
(b)  Gambling devices. All gambling devices and slot machines. 
(c)  Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by the ordinances of the Village. 
(d)  Continuous violation of Village ordinances. Any place or premises within the Village where Village ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. 
(e)  Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the state or ordinances of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 11-6-4)  
Sec. 20-114. - Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. 
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of Section 20-110: 
(a)  Signs, billboards, etc. All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
(b)  Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the Village relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within the Village. 
(c)  Unauthorized traffic signs. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing that purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which, because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation, interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal. 
(d)  Obstruction of intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(e)  Tree limbs. All limbs of trees that project over a public sidewalk less than ten feet above the surface thereof and all limbs that project over a public street less than 14 feet above the surface thereof. 
(f)  Dangerous trees. All trees that are a menace to public safety or are the cause of substantial annoyance to the general public. 
(g)  Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the state and ordinances of the Village. 
(h)  Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use. 
(i)  Wires over streets. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds that are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof. 
(j)  Noisy animals or fowl. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl that, by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within the Village. 
(k)  Obstructions of streets; excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the Village or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished, or which do not conform to the permit. 
(l)  Open excavations. All open and unguarded pits, wells, holes, trenches or unimproved building excavations which have been judged as an immediate and significant safety hazard. 
(m)  Abandoned refrigerators. All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside. 
(n)  Flammable liquids. Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the Village or laws of the state relating to the storage of flammable liquids. 
(o)  Unremoved snow. All snow and ice not removed or sprinkled with salt, sawdust, sand or other chemical removers, as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 11-6-5; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 3-23-2009)  
Sec. 20-115. - Abatement of public nuisances. 
(a)  Enforcement. The Chief of Police, the Fire/EMS Chief, the Health Officer and the Building Inspector shall enforce those provisions of this Article that come within the jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this Section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and is satisfied that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(b)  Summary abatement. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within the Village and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Village President, upon the recommendation of the appropriate department head, may direct the proper officer to cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(c)  Abatement after notice. If the inspecting officer shall determine that public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the inspecting officer shall serve notice on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within such ten days, the proper officer shall cause the nuisance to be removed as provided in Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(d)  Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Code 1998, § 11-6-6; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 29, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 20-116. - Cost of abatement. 
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Article for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
(Code 1998, § 11-6-7)  
Secs. 20-117—20-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - POLLUTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 20-146. - Cleanup of spilled or accidentally discharged wastes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Disposal. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any hazardous material or waste into or on any land or water so that the hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment, be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters. 
(2)  Generation. The act or process of producing hazardous waste. 
(3)  Hazardous material. Any element, compound or combination thereof that is flammable, corrosive, etc., and which, because of handling, storage, processing or packaging, may have detrimental effects on operating and emergency personnel, the public, equipment and/or the environment. 
(4)  Hazardous waste. Any waste or combination of wastes of a liquid, gaseous or semi-solid form which, because of its quantities, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise managed. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, those that are toxic, carcinogenic, flammable, irritants, strong sensitizes or which generate pressure through decomposition, heat or other means, as well as containers and receptacles previously used in the transportation, storage, use or application of substances described as hazardous waste. 
(5)  Storage. Containment in such manner as not to constitute disposal. 
(6)  Transport. The movement from the point of production, generation or use to any intermediate site and finally to the point of ultimate storage or disposal. 
(7)  Treatment. Any method, technique or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of hazardous waste so as to neutralize or render it nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery or storage, or reduced in volume. 
(8)  Treatment facility. A location for treatment, including an incinerator or a facility where generation has occurred. 
(b)  Purposes. The purpose of this Section is: 
(1)  To ensure safe and effective hazardous materials and hazardous waste management; and 
(2)  To establish a program of regulation over the storage, transportation, treatment and disposal of hazardous materials and waste in the Village. 
(c)  Findings. The Village finds that: 
(1)  Increasing production and consumption rates, continuing technological development and energy requirements have led to the generation and use of greater quantities of hazardous materials and associated hazardous waste; 
(2)  The problems of disposing of hazardous waste are increasing as a result of air and water pollution controls and a shortage of available landfill sites; 
(3)  While it is technologically and financially feasible for hazardous waste generators to dispose of their waste in a manner that has a less adverse impact on the environment then current practices, such knowledge is not being utilized to the extent possible; 
(4)  Even though the Village is not heavily industrialized, there is significant daily hazardous waste disposal problems; and 
(5)  The public health and safety and the environment are threatened where hazardous materials and wastes are not managed in an environmentally sound manner. 
(d)  Prohibited discharge. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, leak, leach or spill upon any public street, alley or public property, or onto the groundwaters, surface waters, subsurface waters, aquifers or on any private property, except those areas specifically licensed for waste disposal or landfill activities within the Village as defined by Subsection (c) of this Section. 
(e)  Containment cleanup and restoration. 
(1)  All persons, firms or corporations delivering, hauling, disposing, storing, discharging or otherwise handling potentially polluting substances, solid, liquid or gas shall be immediately reported to the Fire/EMS Chief and County Emergency Government Director. 
(2)  Any person in violation of this Section must, upon authorization by the Fire[/EMS] Chief and County Emergency Government Director, begin immediate actions to contain, clean up and remove to an approved repository the offending material and restore the site to its original condition. Should any person fail to engage or complete the requirements of this Section, the Fire/EMS Chief and County Emergency Government Director may order the required actions to be taken by public or private resources, with all costs incurred by the Village to be reimbursed by the person violating this Section. 
(f)  Access. Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited discharge is indicated or suspected shall be provided to the Fire/EMS Chief and County Emergency Government Director for purposes of evaluating the threat to the public and monitor containment, cleanup and restoration. 
(g)  Public protection. Should any prohibited discharge occur that reasonably causes a threat to the life, safety or health of the public, the senior fire officer on the scene may order an evacuation of the area or take other appropriate protective steps for a period of time as deemed necessary for the safety of the public. 
(h)  Enforcement. The Fire/EMS Chief shall have authority to issue citations or complaints under this Section. 
(i)  Financial liability. Any person, firm or corporation in violation of this Section shall be liable to the Village for any expenses incurred by the Village or loss or damage sustained by the Village by reason of such violation and to any individual whose person or property was damaged by such violation. The party responsible for the release, escape or discharge of wastes shall be held financially liable for the cost of any cleanup or attempted cleanup deemed necessary or desirable and undertaken by the Village, or its designated agent, in any effort to minimize the pollutional effects of the discharged waste or hazardous material substance. 
(Code 1998, § 8-2-1; Ord. No. 2013-14, §§ 30—32, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 20-147. - Storage of polluting substances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store any potentially polluting substances unless such substances are stored in such manner as to securely prevent them from escaping onto the ground surface, air and/or into any street, sewer, ditch or drainageway, lake or stream within the jurisdiction of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 8-2-2)  
Chapter 23 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Village taxes, Wis. Stats. § 61.46; right-of-way improvement tax, Wis. Stats. § 61.47; audits, Wis. Stats. § 61.51; finance and revenues, Wis. Stats. § 66.0601 et seq.; property taxes, Wis. Stats. § 70.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 23-1—23-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL MATTERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Audits, Wis. Stats. § 61.51; borrowing money, Wis. Stats. § 61.61; finance and revenues, Wis. Stats. § 66.0601 et seq.; fiscal and administrative regulations, Wis. Stats. § 67.10. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 23-19. - Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.65(1), the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall annually prepare the tax roll. The contents of the tax roll shall be as specified in Wis. Stats. § 70.65(2). 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-1; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 30, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 122, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Tax rolls, Wis. Stats. §§ 70.65, 74.08.  
Secs. 23-20—23-41. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VILLAGE BUDGET[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal budgets, Wis. Stats. § 65.90. 
 
Sec. 23-42. - Departmental estimates. 
When required by the Village Administrator, each officer, department and committee shall annually file with the Village Administrator an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of such officer, department or committee during the preceding fiscal year, and a detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of such officer, department or committee during such year, and of the conditions and management of such fund; also detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such statements shall be presented in the form prescribed by the Village Administrator and shall be designated as "Departmental Estimates," and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main division of all departments. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-3(a); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 33, 1-27-2002)  
Sec. 23-43. - Consideration of estimates. 
The Village Administrator shall consider such departmental estimates in consultation with the department heads and recommend to the Village Board a budget amount for such department or activity. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-3(b))  
Sec. 23-44. - Form of proposed budget. 
(a)  The actual expenditures of each department and activity for the expired portion of the current year, and last preceding fiscal year, and the estimated expense of conducting each department and activity of the Village for the remainder of the current year and ensuing fiscal year, with reasons for any proposed increase or decrease as compared with actual and estimated expenditures for the current year. 
(b)  An itemization of all anticipated income of the Village from sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the Village from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
(c)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(d)  All existing indebtedness of the Village, including the amount of interest payable and principal to be redeemed on any outstanding general obligation bonds of the Village and any estimated deficiency in the sinking fund of any such bonds during the ensuing fiscal year. 
(e)  Such other information as may be required by the Village Board and by state law. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-3(c)) 
State Law reference— Contents of the budget, Wis. Stats. § 65.90(1)(2).  
Sec. 23-45. - Copies of budget. 
The Village Administrator shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget summary thus prepared for distribution to citizens. The entire fiscal budget shall be available for public inspection in the Administration Office during regular office hours. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-3(d); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 34, 1-27-2002) 
State Law reference— Summary of the budge available for public inspection, Wis. Stats. § 65.90(3)(a).  
Sec. 23-46. - Report and hearing. 
(a)  The Village Administrator shall make a report to the Village Board no later than the Village Board's first November meeting. The report shall include the estimated cost of improvements as well as the estimated cost of operating the various departments and all other costs, including interest charges, for which money will have to be raised by taxation during the following year. The Village Administrator shall submit to the Village Board at the time the annual budget is submitted the draft of an appropriation ordinance providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. Upon the submission of the proposed appropriation ordinance to the Village Board it shall be deemed to have been regularly introduced therein. 
(b)  A summary of such budget and notice of the time and place where such budget and detail is available for public inspection and notice of the time and place for holding the public hearing thereon, shall be published in the official Village newspaper as a class 1 notice. 
(c)  Not less than 15 days after the publication of the proposed budget and the notice of hearing thereon, the public hearing shall be held at the time and place stipulated, at which time any resident or taxpayer of the Village shall have an opportunity to be heard on the proposed budget. The budget hearing may be adjourned from time to time. Following the public hearing, the proposed appropriation ordinance may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the Village Board as other ordinances. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-3(e)) 
State Law reference— Budget notice, hearings and publication, Wis. Stats. § 65.90(3)—(5).  
Sec. 23-47. - Changes in budget. 
The amount of the tax to be levied or certified, the amounts of the various appropriations, and the purposes thereof shall not be changed after approval of the budget except upon a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the Village Board. Notice of such transfer shall be given by publication within ten days thereafter in the official Village newspaper. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-4)  
Sec. 23-48. - Village funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation. 
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Village, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuant of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized by Section 23-47. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the Village Board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works that will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-5) 
State Law reference— Appropriations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0601; withdrawal or disbursements from village treasury, Wis. Stats. § 66.0607.  
Secs. 23-49—23-69. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEPOSIT, PAYMENT AND INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Public deposits, Wis. Stats. § 34.01 et seq.; payment of claims, Wis. Stats. § 61.51; city depositories, Wis. Stats. § 62.12(7); investments, Wis. Stats. § 66.0603(1m). 
 
Sec. 23-70. - Public depositories. 
The Village Board shall designate the public depository within this state within which Village funds shall be deposited pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 34.06. When the money is deposited in such depository in the name of the Village, Village officials shall not be liable for such losses as are defined by state law. The interest arising therefrom shall be paid into the Village treasury. Pursuant to state law, designated public depositories shall be required to pledge U.S. Treasury notes or other forms of security satisfactory to the Village equal in amount to any uninsured balance of the Village's deposit. Deposits and investments shall be made pursuant to the Village Investment Policy adopted by the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-7) 
State Law reference— Designation of public depositories, Wis. Stats. § 34.05; eligible depositories, Wis. Stats. § 34.09; city depositories, Wis. Stats. § 62.12(7); public tax depositories, Wis. Stats. § 74.125.  
Sec. 23-71. - Payment of accounts and claims against Village. 
(a)  Accounts and claims to be certified. Prior to submission of any account or claim to the Village Board for approval of payment, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall certify, or cause to be endorsed thereon or on attached papers, that the following conditions have been complied with: 
(1)  That funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget. 
(2)  That the item or service was duly authorized by the proper official or agency. 
(3)  That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in conformity with the authorization in Subsection (a)(2) of this Section. 
(4)  That the claim is just and valid pursuant to law. 
(b)  Payment of accounts and claims. 
(1)  No account or claim against the Village, except as provided in Subsection (c) of this Section, shall be paid until it has been passed upon by the Village Board. 
(2)  If the Village Board approves payment of the account or claim it shall direct the Village Clerk-Treasurer to issue a Village order for the amount of the claim approved. All money paid out of the Village treasury shall be paid upon an order signed by the Village President and countersigned by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, except that payments of regular wages or salaries shall be as provided in Subsection (c) of this Section. The Minutes of the proceedings of the Village Board, or a statement attached thereto, shall show to whom, and for what purpose, every such account was allowed and the amount. Routine and time-dependent statements, such as utility bills, may be paid by the Village [Clerk]-Treasurer without utilizing the procedures of this Section. 
(c)  Payment of regular wages or salaries. Regular wages or salaries of Village officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, verified by the proper Village official or department head and filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer in time for payment on the regular pay day. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-8; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 35—38, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 123—125, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Payment of claims, Wis. Stats. § 61.51.  
Sec. 23-72. - Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed. 
The Village Clerk-Treasurer may invest any Village funds not immediately needed, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0603(lm) and Ch. 219, and Village Investment Policies adopted by resolution of the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-9; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 39, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 12, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 126, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Investments, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0603(1m), 219.001 et seq.  
Sec. 23-73. - Receiving money; receipt. 
(a)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer and deputies shall not receive money into the treasury from any source except on account of taxes levied and collected during the fiscal year for which they may then be serving, without giving a receipt therefor in the manner specified by the Village Board. 
(b)  Upon the payment of any money (except for taxes as herein provided), the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall make out a receipt in duplicate for the money so received. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall charge the amount thereof to the treasury and credit the proper account. The payment of the money to any receiving agent of the Village or to the Village or to the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be safeguarded in such manner as the Village Board shall direct. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-10; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 40, 41, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 13, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 127, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Receipt for fees, Wis. Stats. § 66.0515.  
Sec. 23-74. - Statement of real property status. 
The Village Clerk-Treasurer and designees are authorized to prepare a statement of real property status form to be used to provide information often requested for transfers of real property such as the amount of outstanding special assessments, deferred assessments, changes in assessments, amount of taxes, outstanding water and sewer bills, current water, sewer, and stormwater bills, contemplated improvements, outstanding citations on Building Code violations and similar information. Subject to any applicable legal restrictions prohibiting the release of any such information, the requested information shall be provided to the person requesting it on said form within five business days. The requesting party shall pay a fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and set forth in Appendix A to this Code. A request for expedited service shall be fulfilled by the end of the next business day following receipt of the request, and shall be subject to the expedited service fee provided in Appendix A. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-11; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 1, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 42, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 128, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2019-06 , § 1, 3-25-2019) 
State Law reference— Disclosure by owners of residential real estate, Wis. Stats. § 709.01 et seq.  
Secs. 23-75—23-91. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Bids on certain improvements, Wis. Stats. § 61.54; contract procedure, Wis. Stats. § 61.55; alternate procedure for contracts, Wis. Stats. § 61.56; bids for certain facilities, Wis. Stats. § 61.57; contracts for public works, Wis. Stats. § 62.15; bidding procedures, Wis. Stats. § 66.0901. 
 
Sec. 23-92. - Bidding procedures for certain public construction. 
(a)  Adoption of City bidding procedures. The Village does hereby provide that as a complete alternative to the requirements of Wis. Stats. §§ 61.54, and 66.0901 and in lieu thereof, that the public notice or public bidding provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.15, shall be applicable to all Village contracts for public construction over $25,000.00. The authority vested in the Board of Public Works by Wis. Stats. § 62.15 shall be exercised by the Village Board or by a committee designated by the Village Board. 
(b)  Construction by the Village. Any class of public construction may be done directly by the Village without submitting the project for bids, provided that the ordinance authorizing such exception was adopted by a vote of three-fourths of all members of the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-12; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 14, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 4-22-2013) 
State Law reference— Alternate procedure for contracts, Wis. Stats. § 61.56; bids for certain facilities, Wis. Stats. § 61.57; contracts for public works, Wis. Stats. § 62.15; bidding procedures, Wis. Stats. § 66.0901.  
Sec. 23-93. - Bid solicitation procedures generally. 
(a)  The Village Board has approved written purchasing policies and procedures to provide additional standards applicable to public purchasing policies. In the event of a conflict between Chapter 23, Division 4, of the Code and the purchasing policies and procedures, the Code shall control. 
(1)  Informal written quotation. An informal written quotation is a written request for quotation sent to vendors. The informal written quotation is used for the purchase of goods and services in an amount over $5,000.00 but less than $25,000.00. The Village shall give a class 1 legal public notice of the proposed construction before the contract for the construction may be executed. 
(2)  Formal bid. The formal bid procedure is used for purchasing goods and services in an amount of $25,000.00 and higher, and in some instances in amounts less than $25,000.00. The formal bid procedure requires a class 1 legal public notice and contains detailed, written specifications regarding the goods and services to be purchased and a summary of specific conditions associated with the purchase. 
(3)  Quotation form. The Village may solicit verbal or written quotations on items the Village purchases, which are less than $5,000.00. The results of verbal quotations are recorded on a "Memorandum of Quotation" form. 
(b)  Bid solicitation. 
(1)  Competitive bids or quotations shall be obtained before contracting to purchase articles, goods, wares, material services or merchandise, which amount in bulk to $25,000.00 or higher. Purchases up to $25,000.00 may be made by competitive quotation or by informal written quotation. Purchases of $25,000.00 and over, pursuant to Subsection (b)(2) of this Section, shall be made by formal bid unless exempted from it by action of the Village Board or by a committee designated by the Village Board. 
(2)  Verbal quotations for goods and services shall be secured from at least two qualified vendors and the results of the quotations shall be recorded on a "Memorandum of Quotation" form and signed by the person receiving the quotations. 
(3)  Informal requests for written quotations shall be solicited from at least three qualified bidders on the request for quotation form. All written requests for quotations shall be issued by the applicable department heads and returned to and analyzed by the applicable department heads. Informal requests for written quotations may also be solicited by telephone. Vendors shall be given a reasonable time to respond to the request for an informal, written quotation and shall be given clear, concise specifications and informal bidding instructions to facilitate competitive bidding. 
(4)  When a formal bid is required or deemed to be in the best interests of the Village, the bidding procedure shall follow the legal requirements associated with a class 1 notice under Wisconsin Statutes and the procedures normally associated with formal bid solicitations. 
(5)  Bidding procedures. When a formal bid is required or deemed to be in the best interests of the Village, the bidding procedure shall comply with formal bid solicitation standards identified in the Village's Purchasing Policies and Procedures and contain at least the following information: 
a.  A bid solicitation identifier. 
b.  A detailed description of the goods and services, including enough information about the items or services required so that, ordinarily, more than one vendor can meet the specifications. 
c.  The time, date and place the bids will be opened. 
d.  The address to which the bids shall be mailed or delivered. Instructions to bidders shall include such information as delivery dates, transportation charges, proposal prices, conditions for guaranteeing the proposal, payment terms, right of rejection of proposals, right to reject merchandise, insurance requirements, alternative proposal consideration, tax information, and other appropriate information regarding the awarding and execution of the contract and contract considerations. 
e.  The bid solicitation shall also include a section on special provisions including guarantees and service considerations, trade-in considerations, and other information relating to special conditions. 
(6)  Specifications for all items purchased shall be developed with the full involvement and participation of the using departments. However, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall ensure that the specifications are sufficiently broad enough that competition in the bidding process is preserved. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-13; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 43, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2013-04, §§ 2—9, 4-22-2013; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 129, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Advertisement, etc., for bid, Wis. Stats. § 62.15(3)—(8).  
Sec. 23-94. - Referendum requirement for large capital construction projects. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsection (b), prior to the start of any physical construction on any Village-financed project involving a net cost to the Village exceeding one percent of the Village's equalized value as most recently determined by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, the Village Board shall submit to the electorate a binding referendum for approval of the project. Failure of the binding referendum shall preclude the Village from proceeding with the project. The wording of any referendum shall provide the specific purpose, location, and cost of the project. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to preclude the Village from exercising its role in the planning or design of such publicly financed projects. As used in this section, the term "net cost" means the total amount paid or to be paid by the Village less any amounts received or to be received in connection with the project in the form of governmental grants, private donations, developer contributions or other third-party funding sources. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Public street projects; 
(2)  Public projects funded by a Village Utility (water, sewer and/or stormwater); 
(3)  Projects qualifying as project costs in an approved tax incremental district project plan; 
(4)  Projects required by any Federal, State or County statute, regulation, rule or ordinance, any court order or any previously approved agreement; 
(5)  Projects undertaken jointly with another unit of government; 
(6)  Public safety facilities, limited to fire, police, EMS and municipal court; 
(7)  Projects undertaken to address emergency conditions as determined by the Village Board. 
(c)  The following provisions shall apply to the determination of a single project for purposes of establishing the applicability of this section: 
(1)  Demolition of an existing structure to facilitate the construction of a designated new building or structure shall be considered part of the construction cost of the approved building. 
(2)  All public construction included in a single solicitation for bids or covered under the same general contract shall be deemed part of a single project. 
(3)  A contract for construction, remodeling, additions or alterations to a single building or structure awarded prior to, or within six months after, the substantial completion of any other such work on the same building or structure shall be deemed part of the initial project. 
(4)  Any number of contracts with individual trades for interrelated work on an integrated construction, remodeling or building addition project shall be deemed part of the same project. 
(5)  Construction of two or more buildings or structures on the same building lot shall be considered a single project if construction on the second building or structure is commenced prior to, or within six months of, substantial completion of the first building. 
(6)  Periodic repairs, replacement or resurfacing of parking lots, driveways, roofs, exterior lighting fixtures or similar improvements shall not be deemed part of the cost of construction activities within an existing building if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The repair, replacement or resurfacing is necessitated by damage or normal wear unrelated to the construction on the same site; 
b.  The improvement is not materially altered in any dimension or in location; 
c.  The repair, replacement or resurfacing neither necessitates, nor is necessitated by, the construction occurring on the site; 
d.  The repair, replacement or resurfacing is accomplished with substantially the same materials and quality as the existing improvement. 
(Code 1998, § 3-1-14; Ord. No. 2005-09, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. No. 2018-14 , § 1, 10-8-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-14 , § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 2018, changed the title of § 23-94 from "Direct legislation ordinance to require a binding referendum for projects requiring a Village expenditure of $1,250,000.00 or more" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Direct legislation, Wis. Stats. §§ 9.20, 61.342.  
Secs. 23-95—23-116. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - IMPACT FEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 3, adopted Feb. 24, 2020, amended Div. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 5, §§ 23-117—23-119, pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 98-02, § 2(3-2-2(a)—(g)), adopted Feb. 23, 1998; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2002; Ord. No. 2004-07, §§ 1—3, adopted April 26, 2004; Ord. No. 2006-10, §§ 1—3, adopted April 24, 2006; and Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 130, adopted June 26, 2017. 
State Law reference— Special charges for services, Wis. Stats. § 66.0627; special assessments, Wis. Stats. § 66.0701 et seq.; impact fees, Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. 
 
Sec. 23-117. - Intent and purpose. 
This Division is intended to allocate financial burdens of providing public facilities fairly between residents living in the Village at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this Division is derived and owners of existing development projects in the Village and developers of new land developments, as well as to comply with Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. The Village Board is adopting this Division to provide a means to recover the cost of development beyond that already existing to finance public facilities by other means authorized by law as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(2)(b), including, without limitation because of enumeration herein, Wis. Stats. §§ 236.45, and Wis. Stats. Ch. 56. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 3, 2-24-2020)  
Sec. 23-118. - Established fees. 
The following fees are impact fees established by the Village pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0617: 
(a)  Public water impact fees pursuant to Section 8-463. 
(b)  Park improvement impact fees pursuant to Section 8-464. 
(c)  Park-land impact fee pursuant to Section 8-464. 
(d)  Public library impact fees pursuant to Section 8-465. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 3, 2-24-2020) 
State Law reference— Impact fees, Wis. Stats. § 66.0617.  
Sec. 23-119. - Needs assessments; revenues; time periods; installment payments; appeals. 
(a)  The following Village documents contain the needs assessments for the impact fees identified under Section 23-118, and demonstrate Village compliance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(4): 
(1)  Public Facilities Needs Assessment for Public Water Impact Fees prepared by Town and Country Engineers dated December 9, 1997; 
(2)  Report on Impact Fees prepared by Virchow, Krause & Company dated December 9, 1997, as amended by Report dated February 21, 2002; 
(3)  Park Impact Fee, Fee in Lieu of Land Dedication and Public Facility Needs Assessment prepared by Baker Tilly Virchow Krause, LLP dated January 27, 2020; and 
(4)  Public Facilities Needs Assessment for Public Library Impact Fees prepared by Virchow Krause & Company, LLP dated March 7, 2006. 
(b)  Revenues collected by the Village as impact fees shall be placed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer in separate segregated interest-bearing accounts, and shall be accounted for separately from other funds of the Village. Impact fee revenues and interest earned on impact fee revenues may be expended by the Village only for the particular capital costs for which the impact fee was imposed, and shall be expended on a first-in first-out basis. Separate accounts shall be kept of fees collected from different impact fee zones, where the particular impact fee ordinance provides for differential fees according to zones, and revenues collected in particular zones shall be spent in those zones as appropriate. 
(c)  All fees collected under this Section shall be spent or refunded to the current property owner within the time set forth in the study prepared under Subsection (a) of this Section, but no later than the maximum time period permitted by law. 
Fees held by the Village and not used within the time period specified herein or pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(9) shall be refunded to the current owner of record of the property at the time of the refund with respect to which the impact fees were imposed along with any interest that has accumulated. 
(d)  The Village Board may authorize the payment of impact fees otherwise payable in full at the time of the issuance of a building permit in installment payments. If installment payments are authorized, interest shall be paid on the installment payments at the same rate charged by the Village on installments of special assessments. 
(e)  A "developer," as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(1)(b), may appeal to contest the amount, collection or use of the impact fee in the manner provided herein: 
(1)  It shall be a condition to the commencement of such an appeal that the impact fee from which the developer appeals shall be paid as and when the fee becomes due and payable, and upon default in making any such payment, such appeal may be dismissed. 
(2)  The only questions appealable under this Section are the following, as authorized by Wis. Stats. § 66.0617(10): 
a.  The amount of fee charged and paid by the developer; 
b.  The method of collection of the impact fee; 
c.  The use to which the particular fee paid by the developer is made by the Village. 
(3)  Appeals must be brought within 30 days of the date of payment of the impact fee. 
(4)  The appellant shall pay the filing fee stated in the fee schedule established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code at the time of filing of the appeal. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Village Administrator. 
(5)  Following the filing of the notice of appeal, the Village Administrator shall compile a record of the ordinance imposing the impact fee that is the subject of the appeal, a record of the management and expenditure of the proceeds of the impact fee, and shall transmit these documents to the Village Board. In consultation with the Village departments, the Village Administrator shall also compile a report on each appeal in which the appellant is seeking a reduction or total refund of the impact fee paid. This report shall specify the fiscal impact on the Village if the appeal overturns the impact fee. If the fiscal impact report indicates that the appeal, if successful, will cause a revenue shortfall that otherwise was not budgeted with respect to the public facility, and if this revenue shortfall cannot be reconciled by reduction in impacts caused by development on the appellant's property, the report shall estimate whether it will be necessary for the Village to adjust impact fees, or amend existing ordinances to recover the proposed revenue shortfall. 
(6)  The Village Board shall hold a public hearing on the appeal, preceded by a class 1 notice, providing fair opportunity for the appellant to be heard. The burden shall be on the appellant to establish illegality or impropriety of the fee from which the appeal has been taken. Following the close of the public hearing, the Village Board shall deliberate upon the matter, and shall conduct such studies and inquiries as it deems appropriate to decide the appeal. 
(7)  If the Village Board determines that the appeal has merit, it shall determine appropriate remedies. These may include reallocation of the proceeds of the challenged impact fee to accomplish the purposes for which the fee was collected, refunding the impact fee in full or in part, along with interest collected by the Village thereon, or granting the appellant the opportunity to make the impact fee payment installments, or such other remedies as it deems appropriate in a particular case. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 3, 2-24-2020) 
State Law reference— Impact fees, Wis. Stats. § 66.0617.  
Secs. 23-120—23-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ROOM TAX AND PERMIT 
 
Sec. 23-130. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts. The term "gross receipts" has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. § 77.51(4)(a), (b) and (c) insofar as applicable. 
Transient means any person residing for a continuous period of less than 29 days in a transient lodging establishment. 
Transient lodging facility means a building or group of buildings in which the public may obtain accommodations for consideration including, without limitation, such establishments as hotels inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist rooming houses or courts, bed and breakfast establishments, lodginghouses, roominghouses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other building or group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public, except accommodations, including mobile homes as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(1)(d), rented for a continuous period of 29 days or more and accommodations furnished by any hospitals, sanatorium, or nursing homes, or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-131. - Levy. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, a tax is hereby imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, except sales for resale, rooms or lodging to transients by hotel keepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing transient lodging facilities that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Beginning January 1, 2018, such tax shall be eight percent of gross receipts. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats. § 77.52(2)(a)1. and may not be imposed on sales to the federal government and persons listed under Wis. Stats. § 77.54(9a). 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-132. - Administration; payment; returns; extensions. 
(a)  This section shall be administered by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(b)  The tax imposed for each calendar quarter is due and payable on the last day of the month next succeeding the calendar quarter for which the tax is imposed. 
(c)  A return shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, by those furnishing at retail such rooms and lodging, on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the Village Clerk-Treasurer deems necessary. 
(d)  Every person required to file such quarterly return shall, with the first return, elect to file an annual calendar-year or fiscal-year return. Such annual return shall be filed within 90 days of the close of each such calendar or fiscal year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain certain such additional information as the Village Clerk-Treasurer requires. Such annual returns shall be made on forms as prescribed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. All such returns shall be signed by the person required to file a return or his/her duly authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath. 
(e)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer than one month from the filing date. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-133. - Disposition of proceeds and oversight by Village Board. 
(a)  The Village Board shall monitor, by reviewing quarterly reports from the Village Clerk-Treasurer, collection and allocation of room taxes from hotels and motels located within the Village. 
(b)  The Village Board shall establish a contract with a tourism entity, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1)(f), to assist with tourism promotion and tourism development. 
(c)  The Village Board shall provide the tourism entity contracted with pursuant to Subsection (b) of this Section with 70 percent of the room tax revenue on a quarterly basis within 45 days following collection of that quarter's room tax, to carry out the activities set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(d)  The tourism entity contracted with pursuant to Subsection (b) of this Section shall submit an annual report to the Village Board by March 1 each year detailing how their percentage of the hotel room tax revenue was spent on tourism promotion and tourism development in the preceding year. This report shall, at the minimum, include the information required to be filed with the Wisconsin Department of Revenue pursuant to Subsection (f) of this Section. 
(e)  The 30 percent of the hotel room tax retained by the Village and shall be disbursed or deposited as directed by the Village Board. 
(f)  Beginning May 1, 2018, on or before May 1 of each year, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall file an annual report with the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, using the form created and provided by the Department of Revenue. The report shall include all of the following: 
(1)  The amount of room tax collected and the room tax rate imposed in the previous year; and 
(2)  A detailed accounting of the amounts of revenue forwarded to the tourism entity pursuant to subsection (c) of this section and a detailed accounting of expenditures of $1,000.00 or more made by the tourism entity; and 
(3)  A list of each member of the governing body of the tourism entity and the name of the business entity each member owns, operates, or is employed by, if any. 
(g)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall submit an annual report to the Village Board by May 1 each year detailing and summarizing how the room tax revenue was spent on tourism promotion and tourism development. 
(h)  Neither the Village nor the tourism entity contracted with pursuant to Subsection (b) of this Section may use any of the room tax revenue it receives to construct or develop a transient lodging facility. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-134. - Sale of business. 
If any person liable for any amount of tax under this section sells the business or stock of goods or quits the business, the person's successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the Village Clerk-Treasurer that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the tax imposed by this section fails to withhold such amount of tax from the purchase price as required, that person shall become personally liable for payment of the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the purchase price valued in money. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-135. - Office audits. 
The Village Clerk-Treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the Village or the refund due to any person under this section. This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any other information within the Village Clerk-Treasurer's possession. One or more such office audit determinations may be made of the amount due for anyone or for more than one period. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-136. - Field audits. 
The Village Clerk-Treasurer or designee may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the Village or the refund due to any person under this Section. The determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or upon any other information within the Village Clerk-Treasurer's possession. Whenever the Village Clerk-Treasurer has probable cause to believe that the correct amount of room tax has not been assessed or that the tax return is not correct, the Village Clerk-Treasurer, including any designated agent, is authorized to examine and inspect the books, records, memoranda, and property of any person in order to verify the tax liability of that person or of another person. Nothing herein shall prevent the Village Clerk-Treasurer from making a determination of tax at any time. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-137. - Required recordkeeping. 
Every person liable for the tax imposed by this Section shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the Village Clerk-Treasurer requires. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-138. - Records confidential; exceptions. 
(a)  All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such returns on file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer are deemed to be confidential, except the Village Clerk-Treasurer may divulge the contents to the following, and no others: 
(1)  The person who filed the return. 
(2)  Officers, agents, or employees of the Federal Internal Revenue Service or the Wisconsin Department of Revenue. 
(3)  Officers, employees, or agents of the Village Administrator. 
(4)  Such other public officials of the Village, when deemed necessary. 
(5)  Pursuant to a valid subpoena or search warrant. 
(b)  Any person who violates or is in noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this Section or Section 23-139 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-139. - Disclosure prohibited. 
No person having an administrative duty under this Section shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is imposed by this Section, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided in Section 23-138. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-140. - Failure to file return; estimated tax. 
If any person fails to file a return as required by this Section, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts. Such estimate shall be made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's possession or may reasonably be obtained. On the basis of this estimate the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the Village. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-141. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay. 
A forfeiture of 25 percent of the room tax due for the previous year or $5,000.00, whichever is less, of the tax imposed, is hereby established and due and owing in the event that the room tax is not paid within 30 days after the due date of return. In addition to this forfeiture, all unpaid taxes under this section shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the due date of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. An extension of time within which to file a return shall not operate to extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest computation. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-142. - Penalties for refusal to permit inspection and audit. 
Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this section who fails to obtain a permit as required in Section 10-274, or who fails or refuses to permit the inspection of his/her records by the Village Clerk-Treasurer after such inspection has been duly required by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, or who fails to file a return as provided in this section, or who violates any other provisions of this Section, shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $250.00. Each day, or portion thereof, that such violation continues is hereby deemed to constitute a separate offense. The total forfeiture imposed shall not exceed five percent of the tax imposed by this Section. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 23-143. - Late filing fees. 
Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a late filing fee as set forth in the annual budget appendix fee schedule. The tax imposed by this Section shall become delinquent if not paid by the due date of the return. 
( Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Chapter 26 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire department, Wis. Stats. § 61.65(2); mutual assistance, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0314(1)(c), 66.03125; arson investigation, Wis. Stats. § 165.55; firefighting service, Wis. Stats. § 213.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-40. - Goals of the fire defense program. 
(a)  The primary objective of the fire defense program is to serve all citizens, without prejudice or favoritism, by safeguarding, collectively and individually, their lives against the effects of fires and explosions. 
(b)  The second objective of the fire defense program is to safeguard the general economy and welfare of the community by preventing major conflagrations and the destruction by fire of industries and businesses. 
(c)  The third objective of the fire defense program is to protect the property of all citizens against the effects of fire and explosions. All property deserves equal protection regardless of location or monetary value. 
(Code 1998, § 5-2-1(d); Ord. No. 2013-14, § 36, 11-11-2013) 
Editor's note— Section 36 of Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, renumbered former § 26-42 as § 26-40.  
Sec. 26-41. - Duty of bystanders to assist. 
Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the Fire Chief or officer in command and may be required to render assistance or in removing or guarding property. Such officer shall have the power to cause the arrest of any person refusing to obey said orders. 
(Code 1998, § 5-2-9; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 45, 11-11-2013) 
Editor's note— Section 45 of Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, renumbered former § 26-52 as § 26-41. 
State Law reference— Assistance at fires, Wis. Stats. § 213.095(2).  
Secs. 26-42—26-53. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-14, §§ 33—35, 37—44, 46, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, repealed former Div. 2, Fire Department, §§ 26-40, 26-41, 26-43—26-47, 26-49—26-51, 26-53, which pertained to Fire Department recognized, appropriations, compensation, organization and membership, powers and duties of the Fire Chief, department equipment, impeding fire equipment prohibited, fire inspection duties, damaging fire hose prohibited; parking by hydrants; blocking fire lanes, adjacent property, vehicles to yield right-of-way, and derived from the 1998 Code §§ 5-2-1(a)—(c), (e), 5-2-2—5-2-5, 5-2-6(b)—5-2-10.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 2013-20, § 2, adopted Dec. 9, 2013, repealed § 26-48, which pertained to police power of the Fire Chief, and derived from the 1998 Code, § 5-2-6(a). 
 
Secs. 26-54—26-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-80. - Open burning. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall build any outdoor fire within the corporate limits of the Village excepting as set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section. This prohibition on burning includes burning of construction waste and debris at construction sites. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Outdoor cooking over a fire contained in a device or structure designed for such use is permissible; 
(2)  Controlled burning of grass or similar vegetation for environmental management purposes, with the prior written approval of the Fire/EMS Chief, may be permitted; this exception is not to be used for the burning of grass, leaves or other lawn debris; 
(3)  Ceremonial campfire or bonfires, with prior written approval of the Fire/EMS Chief, may be permitted; 
(4)  Other occasions of desirable outdoor burning not specified by this Subsection, but not as an alternative to refuse removal or disposal of which other methods are available, may be granted single occasion approval as in Subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this Section; 
(5)  Any person desiring to burn wood, brush or other combustible material shall apply to the Fire/EMS Chief. Any person obtaining a permit to burn shall follow the instructions and directions prescribed by said Fire/EMS Chief and shall permit said Fire/EMS Chief or designee to come upon the property in order to exercise the supervisory function. Whenever approval and special permit are granted by the Fire/EMS Chief under this Section, the permit may specify and be conditioned on observance of safety restrictions and insurance requirements set forth therein; 
(6)  Campfires and fire pits burning untreated firewood only (not construction materials) that do not unreasonably disturb neighbors and are attended at all times by an adult at least 18 years old. Campfires and fire pits must be ten feet or more from any lot line, utility pole or overhead wire. Properties with commercial buildings and residential buildings containing three or more dwellings units are permitted only with a listed fire pit or fireplace with a spark arrestor. 
(c)  Chief may prohibit. The Fire/EMS Chief may prohibit any or all bonfires and outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
(d)  Burning on streets. No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk. 
(e)  Liability. Persons utilizing and maintaining outdoor fires shall be responsible for any liability resulting from damage caused by such person's fire. 
(Code 1998, § 5-2-11; Ord. No. 2013-14, §§ 47—49, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), 8-26-2019)  
Sec. 26-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 50 of Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, repealed § 26-81, which pertained to Fire Department highway response fees, and derived from Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1(5-2-12), adopted Feb. 27, 2006.  
Sec. 26-82. - Use and storage of grills and other outdoor cooking stoves. 
(a)  Location of use regulated. 
(1)  No person shall light or otherwise ignite any barbecue grill, hibachi or other stove designed for outdoor use, powered by charcoal, at any location less than 15 feet from any exterior wall of any structure containing three or more residential dwelling units. 
(2)  No person shall light or otherwise ignite any barbecue grill, hibachi or other stove designed for outdoor use, powered by liquid propane gas or natural gas, at any location less than 15 feet from any exterior wall of any structure containing three or more residential dwelling units unless the structure, including decks, patios and balconies, is protected by a fire sprinkler system. 
(b)  Storage of grills and other outdoor cooking stoves. The following regulations shall apply to the storage of grills and other outdoor cooking stoves within any structure containing three or more residential dwelling units or any accessory building thereto. No grill powered by liquid propane gas shall be placed inside a garage, basement or any other indoor location unless the liquid propane gas supply source is disconnected from the heat and/or flame producing portion of the grill. No person shall knowingly place a grill containing smoldering charcoal or hot ashes inside a garage, basement or other indoor location. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-16. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-5; Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), 8-26-2019)  
Sec. 26-83. - Adoption of fire prevention standards. 
(a)  The following Chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as set forth therein and as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length as part of the Fire Prevention Code of the Village: 
(1)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 303, Petition for Variance Procedures; 
(2)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 305, Licenses, Certifications and Regulations; 
(3)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 307, Explosive Materials; 
(4)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 308, Mines, Pits and Quarries; 
(5)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 310, Flammable and Combustible Liquids; 
(6)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 314, Fire Prevention; 
(7)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 316, Electrical; 
(8)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 318, Elevators, Escalators and life devices; 
(9)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 328, Smoke Detectors; 
(10)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 330, Fire Department Safety and Health; 
(11)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 334, Amusement Rides and Attractions; 
(12)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 335, Infectious Agents; 
(13)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 340, Gas Systems; 
(14)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 341, Boiler and Pressure Vessels; 
(15)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 343, Anhydrous Ammonia; 
(16)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 345, Mechanical Refrigeration; 
(17)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 361—366, Wisconsin Commercial Building Code; 
(18)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 375—379, Buildings Constructed Prior to 1914; 
(19)  Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 390, Public Swimming Pools. 
(b)  The International Fire Code®,® subject to modifications by the Wisconsin Administrative Codes and as specified in this Chapter. The edition of the International Fire Code® adopted herein shall be the edition adopted by Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 361. 
(c)  The International Fire Code®,® as referenced in this Chapter, is adopted as the Alternate Model Fire Code in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 314.001. 
(d)  Appendix D of the adopted edition of the International Fire Code for fire apparatus access roads. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-1; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 51, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), 8-26-2019)  
Sec. 26-84. - Applicability of fire prevention code. 
(a)  Applicability. The Fire Prevention Code of the Village shall be applicable in its scope and intent to the multifamily, commercial and industrial zones of the Village Zoning Code, as well as multifamily, commercial and industrial uses found in properties with other zoning classifications in the Village. 
(b)  Existing conditions. The Fire Prevention Code of the Village shall apply equally to new and existing conditions, except that existing conditions not in strict compliance with the terms of the Fire Prevention Code shall be permitted to continue where the existing conditions do not constitute an exceptional hazard to life or adjoining property, and as further set forth in specific provisions of the Fire Prevention Code. 
(c)  Fire sprinkler regulations. The automatic fire sprinkler regulations found in Division 2 of this Article shall be considered a part of the Fire Prevention Code of the Village. 
(d)  Additions to and remodeling of existing buildings. Where an existing building is remodeled or expanded, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  The entire building shall be made to conform with the requirements of Division 2 of this Article if more than 50 percent of the gross interior area of the building is remodeled or added to the building. In applying this percentage, successive additions, if made within a period of 20 years, shall be aggregated and treated as a single addition. 
(2)  Only the addition or remodeled area shall be made to conform with the requirements of Division 2 of this Article if 25 percent to 50 percent of the gross interior area of the building is remodeled or added to the building. In applying this percentage, successive additions, if made within a period of 20 years, shall be aggregated and treated as a single addition. 
(3)  The requirements of Division 2 of this Article need not be satisfied if less than 25 percent is remodeled or added to the gross interior area of the building, unless the addition involves additional dwelling units. 
(4)  These requirements shall not apply if the building being remodeled or expanded contains less than 7,000 square feet of gross interior area upon completion of the addition or remodeling project. 
(5)  Any party who feels that strict adherence to this Section would cause undue hardship or create conditions causing greater harmful effects than the conditions existing without compliance with this Section may request a variance from the requirements of this Section. Such requests shall be made to the Village Board. Other than the processing by the Village Board, the application, hearing and decision process for any variance requested shall be as set forth in Chapter 62, Article II, Division 5. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-7; Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), 8-26-2019)  
Secs. 26-85—26-111. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 26-112. - Scope. 
Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in operable condition in for all construction covered by this Chapter and as set forth in Section 26-84. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-21(a))  
Sec. 26-113. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted August 26, 2019, repealed § 26-113, which pertained to automatic fire sprinkler system installation and derived from Code 1998, § 15-1-21(b).  
Sec. 26-114. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted August 26, 2019, repealed § 26-114, which pertained to automatic fire sprinkler system monitoring requirements and derived from Code 1998, § 15-1-21(c).  
Sec. 26-115. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted August 26, 2019, repealed § 26-115, which pertained to automatic fire sprinkler system maintenance and annual inspection and derived from Code 1998, § 15-1-21(d).  
Sec. 26-116. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted August 26, 2019, repealed § 26-116, which pertained to where automatic fire sprinkler systems are required and derived from Code 1998, § 15-1-21(e); Ord. No. 2013-14, §§ 52—56, adopted November 11, 2013.  
Sec. 26-117. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted August 26, 2019, repealed § 26-117, which pertained to automatic fire sprinkler system exceptions and derived from Code 1998, § 15-1-21(f).  
Sec. 26-118. - Plan review; installation; inspection. 
(a)  Approval of plans required. No automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed or altered in any building until plans have been submitted to and reviewed by the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. Three copies of the plans and specifications shall be submitted for review. Conditionally approved plans shall be stamped with the date of review. One copy shall be returned to the owner; two retained by the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department for field use and property file reference. 
(b)  Plans. Plans for sprinkler systems (including drawings, diagrams as needed) shall be submitted to the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department for review and conditional approval. Plans shall be conditionally approved prior to any installation or construction. 
(c)  Calculations. Calculations shall be submitted with all plans. In the event a pipe schedule is used, a written report with verified pressure information shall be submitted. The engineer completing such calculations shall stamp and sign the report. 
(d)  Installation and inspection services required. 
(1)  The installation of underground piping shall be inspected by the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department prior to being covered. 
(2)  The installer shall provide advance notice to the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department for any required installation inspection. 
(e)  Acceptance test. The sprinkler system shall have a hydrostatic test performed by the installer in the presence of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department Inspector. The sprinkler system shall be tested by flows of the main drain and inspector's test. The installer shall notify the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department prior to any test being conducted. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-21(g); Ord. No. 2013-14, §§ 57—59, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), 8-26-2019)  
Sec. 26-119. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted August 26, 2019, repealed § 26-119, which pertained to automatic fire sprinkler system annual testing and derived from Code 1998, § 15-1-21(h).  
Sec. 26-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted August 26, 2019, repealed § 26-120, which pertained to automatic fire sprinkler system key box required and derived from Code 1998, § 15-1-21(i); Ord. No. 2013-14, § 60, adopted November 11, 2013.  
Sec. 26-121. - Reference standards. 
NFPA standards. All references to National Fire Protection Association Standards shall refer to the most current edition unless and until a different version is adopted by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce. 
(Code 1998, § 15-1-21(j); Ord. No. 2004-12, § 1, 5-24-2004; Ord. No. 2019-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), 8-26-2019)  
Secs. 26-122—26-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISCLOSURE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND INFECTIOUS AGENTS, REIMBURSEMENT FOR CLEANUP OF SPILLS 
 
Sec. 26-141. - Application. 
(a)  All persons, firms or organizations using, researching or producing hazardous materials and/or infectious agents shall notify the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department as prescribed by this Section. 
(b)  The provisions of this Section shall apply to all persons, firms or organizations using, researching, producing or storing hazardous materials and/or infectious agents on and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is derived. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-2(a); Ord. No. 2013-14, § 61, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 26-142. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Infectious agent. A bacterial, mycoplasmal, fungal, parasitic or viral agent known to cause illness in humans, which is used, researched, produced or stored within or on premises. 
(b)  Hazardous materials. Those materials that can cause death or disabling injury from brief exposure; those materials that could cause a lost-time injury from exposure; and those materials that could cause temporary disability or injury without permanent effects which are used, researched, produced or stored within or on premises except those household consumer products used at the point of consumption and not used for commercial or experimental purposes. This definition of hazardous materials shall include radioactive materials. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-2(b))  
Sec. 26-143. - Information required. 
(a)  Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing and/or storing any hazardous materials shall provide in writing to the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department the following information: 
(1)  The address, location of where hazardous materials are used, researched, stored or produced; 
(2)  The trade name of the hazardous material; 
(3)  The chemical name and any commonly used synonym for the hazardous material and the chemical name and any commonly used synonym for its major components; 
(4)  The exact locations on the premises where materials are used, researched, stored and/or produced; 
(5)  Amounts of hazardous materials on premises per exact location; 
(6)  The boiling point, vapor pressure, vapor density, solubility in water, specific gravity, percentage volatile by volume, evaporation rate for liquids and appearance and odor of the hazardous material; 
(7)  The flashpoint and flammable limits of the hazardous substance; 
(8)  Any permissible exposure level, threshold limit value or other established limit value for exposure to a hazardous material; 
(9)  The stability of the hazardous substance; 
(10)  Recommended fire extinguishing media, special firefighting procedures and fire and explosion hazard information for the hazardous material; 
(11)  Any effect of over-exposure to the hazardous material, emergency and first aid procedures and telephone numbers to call in an emergency; 
(12)  Any condition or material that is incompatible with the hazardous material and must be avoided; 
(13)  Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and special precautions to be taken when handling or coming into contact with the hazardous materials; 
(14)  Procedures for handling or coming into contact with the hazardous materials. 
(b)  Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing and/or storing infectious agent and/or carrier of an infectious agent shall provide in writing to the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department the following: 
(1)  The name and any commonly used synonym of the infectious agent; 
(2)  The address/location where infectious agents are used, researched, stored and/or produced; 
(3)  The exact locations where infectious agents are used, researched, stored and/or produced; 
(4)  Amount of infectious agent on premises per exact locations; 
(5)  Any methods of route of transmission of the infectious agents; 
(6)  Any symptoms of effect of infection, emergency and first aid procedure and a telephone number to be called in an emergency; 
(7)  Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and special precautions to be taken when handling or coming in contact with the infectious agent; 
(8)  Procedures for handling, clean-up and disposal of infectious agents leaked or spilled. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-2(c); Ord. No. 2013-14, § 62, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 26-144. - Reimbursement for cleanup of spills. 
Any person who possesses or controls a hazardous material or infectious agent that was discharged or caused the discharge of a hazardous material or infectious agent shall reimburse the Village for actual and necessary expenses incurred by the Village or its agent to contain, remove or dispose of the hazardous substance or infectious agent or take any other appropriate action that is deemed appropriate under the circumstance. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-2(d))  
Sec. 26-145. - Recovery of costs. 
(a)  Compliance with regulations. Every person, firm or corporation using, storing, handling or transporting flammable or combustible liquids, chemicals, gasses or other hazardous materials shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 8 as the same is now in force and may hereafter from time to time be amended. 
(b)  Clean-up costs. Every person, firm or corporation using, storing, handling or transporting (whether by rail or on the highways) flammable or combustible liquids, chemicals, gasses or other hazardous materials shall be liable to the Village for the actual cost of labor and materials associated with the use of any specialized extinguishing agent, chemical, neutralizer or similar material or equipment employed to extinguish, confine or clean up any such hazardous material that is involved in any accidental spill or in threat of any fire or accidental spill. 
(c)  Inspection of installations or modifications to tanks for flammable or combustible liquids. See Fee Schedule, Appendix A to this Code. 
(d)  Inspection of closures of tanks for flammable or combustible liquids. See Fee Schedule, Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-3; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 2-23-2006)  
Sec. 26-146. - Key boxes. 
(a)  Required. Newly constructed commercial buildings and residential buildings containing three or more dwelling units, or when access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes, the Fire/EMS Chief may require that a key box be installed in an accessible location. The key box shall be a type approved by the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department and shall contain those keys found to be necessary to provide emergency access. 
(b)  Property owner responsible. The property owner is responsible to ensure that keys maintained within a key box are those of the current type. When a change of locks within the building is necessary, the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department shall be notified with new keys placed in the key box. 
(c)  Removal of key prohibited. Removal of any key by other than Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department personnel shall subject the violator to a penalty as provided in Section 1-16. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-4; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 63, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2019-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 8-26-2019)  
Secs. 26-147—26-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FIRE HYDRANTS 
 
Sec. 26-176. - Installation required. 
Where the Village water system is available, and any portion of a commercial or industrial building containing 7,000 square feet or more of gross interior area, or a residential building containing more than two dwelling units and containing 7,000 square feet or more of gross interior area, is set back more than 300 feet from the centerline of the nearest abutting public right-of-way, the owner shall install approved fire hydrants at such owner's expense. The set back distances shall be determined by measuring the travel distance from a municipal hydrant along the centerline of a municipal street or private road suitable for travel by fire apparatus. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-6(a))  
Sec. 26-177. - Location. 
(a)  Hydrants determined to be necessary in accordance with Section 26-176 shall be freestanding and shall be installed not more than 75 feet nor less than 40 feet from the building. One hydrant shall be located at the main entryway to such building or complex. Additional hydrants shall be provided around the perimeter of the building or complex so that no hydrant is more than 400 feet from any other approved hydrant as described in Section 26-176. 
(b)  All water mains, hydrants and their location shall be approved by the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. The hydrants shall be installed in such a manner and locations so as to be accessible at all times to the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. 
(c)  Water lines serving hydrants and hydrants shall be located within lands in which the owner grants the Village an access easement for maintenance of the hydrant and water line. Following installation of all water lines and hydrants, the owner shall dedicate such facilities to the Village. Thereafter, the Village shall be responsible for maintenance of these facilities. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-6(b); Ord. No. 2013-14, § 64, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 26-178. - Installed prior to construction. 
For new construction, hydrants required by this Division shall be installed and made operable prior to permitting construction to progress beyond the footing and foundation stage. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-6(c))  
Sec. 26-179. - Specifications. 
All water lines between the municipal water main and approved fire hydrants shall be no less than eight inches inside diameter. All water mains and hydrants shall be installed in compliance with the standards of the Village Public Works Department. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-6(d))  
Sec. 26-180. - Blocking of fire hydrants prohibited. 
No person shall park any motor vehicle within ten feet of any fire hydrant or otherwise interfere with the accessibility of any fire hydrants by piling, dumping or placing any other obstructive material or object within ten feet of a fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture pursuant to Section 1-16. Every day during which such interference continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-6(e); Ord. No. 2013-14, § 65, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 26-181. - Marking of fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be marked with the curb painted yellow. The curb shall be painted to produce a 20-foot stripe extending ten feet to each side of the hydrant. Areas without curbs shall have a four inch wide yellow stripe placed on the pavement. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-6(f))  
Sec. 26-182. - Applicability. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, fire hydrants outside the public right-of-way need not be installed on private property to service buildings constructed prior to January 1, 1997, unless otherwise required by this Section. 
(b)  Where an existing building is expanded or remodeled, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  If more than 50 percent of the gross interior area of the existing building is added to the building, the owner shall provide fire hydrants in conformity with this Section. In applying this percentage, successive additions, if made within a period of 20 years, shall be aggregated and treated as a single addition. 
(2)  Regardless of the percentage set forth in Subsection (b)(1) of this Section, if the additional area is a high hazard occupancy as set forth in Section 26-116(h), or involves an addition to any building with three or more stories, area of public assembly or theater, or any hospital, nursing home or convalescence center, the property must meet the requirements of this Section. 
(3)  If more than 50 percent of the gross interior area of the building is remodeled into a high hazard occupancy as set forth in Section 26-116(h), or the building contains three or more stories, area of public assembly or theater, or any hospital, nursing home or convalescence center, the property must meet the requirements of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-6(g))  
Sec. 26-183. - Variance. 
Any party who feels that strict adherence to this Section would cause undue hardship or create conditions causing greater harmful effects than the conditions existing without compliance with this Section may request a variance from the requirements of this Section. Such requests shall be made to the Village Board. Other than the processing by the Village Board, the application, hearing and decision process for any variance requested shall be as set forth in Chapter 62, Article II, Division 5. 
(Code 1998, § 5-3-6(h))  
Chapter 29 - HOUSING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 29-1—29-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Antidiscrimination in housing, Wis. Stats. § 66.1022(2); housing for physically disabled persons, Wis. Stats. § 101.132; open housing, Wis. Stats. § 106.50. 
 
Sec. 29-19. - Statement on fair housing. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village to ensure equal opportunity to all persons to live in adequate housing facilities regardless of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, disability, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, lawful source of income, place of birth, or age, and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any persons. 
(Code 1998, § 15-7-1; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 44, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Declaration of policy, Wis. Stats. § 66.1011(1).  
Sec. 29-20. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this Section to render unlawful discrimination in housing. It is the declared policy of this Village that all persons shall have an equal opportunity for housing regardless of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, disability, religion, national origin, marital status, family status, lawful source of income, age or ancestry and it is the duty of the Village to assist in the orderly prevention or removal of all discrimination in housing through the powers granted under Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0125 and 66.1011. The state law governing equal housing opportunities has been extended to cover single-family residences that are owner-occupied. The sale and rental of single-family residences constitutes a significant portion of the housing business in this Village and should be regulated. This Section shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the Village for the protection of the welfare, health, peace, dignity and human rights of the people of this Village. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(1).  
Sec. 29-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Advertise. To publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement or sign in connection with the sale, financing or rental of housing. 
(b)  Age. In reference to a member of a protected class, means at least 18 years of age. 
(c)  Disability. A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record of having such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. The term does not include the current illegal use of a controlled substance, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(4), or a controlled substance analog, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(4m), unless the individual is participating in a supervised drug rehabilitation program. 
(d)  Discriminate. To segregate, separate, exclude or treat a person or class of persons unequally in a manner described in Sections 29-22, 29-23, or 29-24 because of sex, race, color, sexual orientation, disability, religion, national origin, marital status, family status, lawful source of income, age or ancestry. 
(e)  Discrimination/discriminatory housing practice. Any difference in treatment based upon race, color, religion, sex, sexual preference, ancestry, handicap, marital status, place of birth or national origin; or any act that is unlawful under this Article. 
(f)  Dwelling. Any building, structure, or portion thereof that is occupied as, or designed for occupancy as, a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons who are maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others and any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction thereof of any such buildings or structure. 
(g)  Family. One or more natural persons. 
(h)  Family status. Any of the following conditions that apply to a person seeking to rent or purchase housing or to a member or prospective member of the person's household regardless of the person's marital status: 
(1)  A person is pregnant. 
(2)  A person is in the process of securing sole or joint legal custody, periods of physical placement or visitation rights of a minor child. 
(3)  A person's household includes one or more minor or adult relatives. 
(4)  A person's household includes one or more adults or minor children in such person's legal custody or physical placement or with whom such person has visitation rights. 
(5)  A person's household includes one or more adults or minor children placed in such person's care under a court order, under a guardianship or with the written permission of a parent or other person having legal custody of the adult or minor child. 
(i)  Financial institution. Any person as defined in this Section, engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans. 
(j)  Hardship condition. A situation under which a tenant in housing for older persons has legal custody or physical placement of a minor child or a minor child is placed in the tenant's care under a court order, under a guardianship or with the written permission of a parent or other person having legal custody of the minor child. 
(k)  Housing. Any improved property, or any portion thereof, including a mobile home as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.91(10), manufactured home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.91(2), or condominium, that is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or residence. This includes any vacant land that is offered for sale or rent for the construction or location thereon of any building, structure or portion thereof that is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or residence. 
(l)  Housing accommodation/dwelling. Any building, mobile home or trailer, structure, or portion thereof that is occupied as, or designed, or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any real property, as defined herein, used or intended to be used for any of the purposes set forth in this Section. 
(m)  Housing for older persons. Any of the following: 
(1)  Housing provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of the Department of Workforce Development determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program. 
(2)  Housing solely intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older. 
(3)  Housing primarily intended and primarily operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per dwelling unit. 
(n)  Interested person. An adult relative or friend of a member of a protected class, or an official or representative of a private agency, corporation or association concerned with the welfare of a member of a protected class. 
(o)  Member of a protected class. A group of natural persons, or a natural person, who may be categorized based on one or more of the following characteristics: sex, race, color, disability, sexual orientation as defined in Wis. Stats. § 111.32(13m), religion, national origin, marital status, family status, lawful source of income, age or ancestry. 
(p)  Mortgage broker. An individual who is engaged in or who performs the business or services of a mortgage broker as defined by Wisconsin Statutes. 
(q)  Open market. The market that is informed of the availability for sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, whether informed through a real estate broker or by advertising by publication, signs or by any other advertising methods directed to the public or any portion thereof, indicating that the property is available for sale, purchase, rental or lease. 
(r)  Owner. Lessee, sublessee, co-tenant, assignee, managing agent or other person having the right of ownership or possession, or the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation. 
(s)  Person. Individuals, children, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations. 
(t)  Real estate broker/real estate salesman. Any individual qualified by law, who, for a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or collecting same, lists, sells, purchases, rents or leases any housing accommodations, including options thereupon, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing accommodation; or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby the individual undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose; or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
(u)  Real property. Buildings, structures, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives and condominiums. 
(v)  Relative. A parent, grandparent, great-grandparent, stepparent, step grandparent, brother, sister, child, stepchild, grandchild, step grandchild, great-grandchild, first cousin, second cousin, nephew, niece, uncle, aunt, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother or half sister or any other person related by blood, marriage or adoption. 
(w)  Rent. To lease, sublease, let or otherwise grant for a consideration the right of a tenant to occupy housing not owned by the tenant. 
(x)  Respondent. The person accused in a complaint or amended complaint of discrimination in housing and any other person identified in the course of an investigation as allegedly having discriminated in housing. 
(y)  Sexual orientation. Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 111.32(13m). 
(Code 1998, § 15-7-2) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(1m).  
Sec. 29-22. - Discrimination prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person: 
(a)  To discriminate by refusing to sell, rent, finance or contract to construct housing or by refusing to negotiate or discuss the terms thereof. 
(b)  To discriminate by refusing to permit inspection or exacting different or more stringent price, terms or conditions for the sale, lease, financing or rental of housing. 
(c)  To discriminate by refusing to finance or sell an unimproved residential lot or to construct a home or residence upon such lot. 
(d)  To discriminate by advertising in a manner that indicates discrimination by a preference or limitation. 
(e)  In the business of insuring against hazards, by refusing to enter into, or by exacting different terms, conditions or privileges with respect to, a contract of insurance against hazards to a dwelling. 
(f)  To discriminate by refusing to renew a lease, causing the eviction of a tenant from rental housing or engaging in the harassment of a tenant. 
(g)  To discriminate in providing the privileges, services or facilities that are available in connection with housing. 
(h)  To discriminate by falsely representing that housing is unavailable for inspection, rental or sale. 
(i)  To discriminate by denying access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple listing service or other real estate service. 
(j)  To discriminate by coercing, intimidating, threatening or interfering with a person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of such person having exercised or enjoyed, a right granted or protected under this Section, or with a person who has aided or encouraged another person in the exercise or enjoyment of a right granted or protected under this Section. 
(k)  To discriminate in making available any of the following transactions, or in the terms or conditions of such transactions for a person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining housing or the making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance secured by residential real estate. 
(2)  Selling, brokering or appraising residential real property. 
(l)  To discriminate by otherwise making unavailable or denying housing. 
(Code 1998, § 15-7-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(2).  
Sec. 29-23. - Representations designed to induce panic sales. 
No person may induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent housing by representations regarding the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular economic status or a member of a protected class, or by representations to the effect that such present or prospective entry will or may result in any of the following: 
(a)  The lowering of real estate values in the area concerned. 
(b)  A deterioration in the character of the area concerned. 
(c)  An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area concerned. 
(d)  A decline in the quality of the schools or other public facilities serving the area. 
(Code 1998, § 15-7-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(2m).  
Sec. 29-24. - Discrimination against persons with disabilities prohibited. 
(a)  Types of discrimination prohibited. In addition to discrimination prohibited under Sections 29-22 and 29-23, no person may do any of the following: 
(1)  Segregate, separate, exclude or treat unequally in the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, housing to a buyer or renter because of a disability of that buyer or renter, a disability of a person residing in or intending to reside in that housing after it is sold, rented or made available or a disability of a person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(2)  Segregate, separate, exclude or treat unequally a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of housing, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such housing, because of a disability of that person, a disability of a person residing in or intending to reside in that housing after it is sold, rented or made available or a disability of a person associated with that person. 
(3)  Refuse to permit, at the expense of a person with a disability, reasonable modifications of existing housing that is occupied, or is to be occupied, by such a person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the housing, except that in the case of rental housing the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the tenant's agreement to restore the interior of the housing to the condition that existed before the modification, other than reasonable wear and tear. The landlord may not increase any customarily required security deposit. Where it is necessary to ensure that funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of a restoration agreement a requirement that the tenant pay into an interest-bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in any such account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant. If escrowed funds are not used by the landlord for restorations, they shall be returned to the tenant. 
(4)  Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services that are associated with the housing, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing, unless the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the owner of the housing. 
(b)  Animals assisting persons with disabilities. 
(1)  If an individual's vision, hearing or mobility is impaired, it is discrimination for a person to refuse to rent or sell housing to the individual, cause the eviction of the individual from housing, require extra compensation from an individual as a condition of continued residence in housing or engage in the harassment of the individual because the individual keeps an animal that is specially trained to lead or assist the individual with impaired vision, hearing or mobility if all of the following apply: 
a.  Upon request, the individual shows to the lessor, seller or representative of the condominium association credentials issued by a school recognized by the department as accredited to train animals for individuals with impaired vision, hearing or mobility. 
b.  The individual accepts liability for sanitation with respect to, and damage to the premises caused by, the animal. 
(2)  Subsection (b)(1) of this Section does not apply in the case of the rental of owner-occupied housing if the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family occupying the housing possesses and, upon request, presents to the individual a certificate signed by a physician that states that the owner or family member is allergic to the type of animal the individual possesses. 
(c)  Design and construction of covered multifamily housing. In addition to discrimination prohibited under Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section and Sections 29-22 and 29-23, no person may design or construct covered multifamily housing, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.132(1)(d), unless it meets the standards specified in Wis. Stats. § 101.132(2)1. to 4. In addition, no person may remodel, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.132(1)(h), housing with three or more dwelling units unless the remodeled housing meets the standards specified in Wis. Stats. § 101.132(2)(a)1. to 4. as required under Wis. Stats. § 101.132(2)(b)1., 2. or 3., whichever is applicable. 
(Code 1998, § 15-7-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(2r).  
Sec. 29-25. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this Article prohibits discrimination based on age or family status with respect to housing for older persons. Under this Subsection, housing under Wis. Stats. § 105.50(1m)(m)3. may qualify as housing for older persons only if the owner of the housing maintains records containing written verification that all of the following factors apply to the housing: 
(1)  At least 80 percent of the dwelling units under Wis. Stats. § 105.50(1m)(m)3. are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older. 
(2)  Policies are published and procedures are adhered to that demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing under Wis. Stats. § 105.50(1m)(m)3. for persons 55 years of age or older. The owner or manager may document compliance with this Subsection by maintaining records containing written verification of the ages of the occupants of the housing. 
(b)  No person may discriminate by refusing to continue renting to a person living in housing for older persons under Wis. Stats. § 105.50(1m)(m)3. who is subject to a hardship condition. 
(c)  Under this Article, housing may qualify as housing for older persons with respect to persons first occupying the housing on or after September 1, 1992, regardless of whether a person who had not attained the age of 62 resided in the housing on that date or regardless of whether one or more dwelling units were unoccupied on that date, if the persons who first occupy the housing on or after that date have attained the age of 62. 
(d)  Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a person from exacting different or more stringent terms or conditions for financing housing based on the age of the individual applicant for financing if the terms or conditions are reasonably related to the individual applicant. 
(e)  Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the development of housing designed specifically for persons with disabilities and preference in favor of persons with disabilities in relation to such housing. 
(f)  Nothing in this Article requires that housing be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the safety of other tenants or persons employed on the property or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others, if the risk of direct threat or damage cannot be eliminated or sufficiently reduced through reasonable accommodations. A claim that an individual's tenancy poses a direct threat or a substantial risk of harm or damage must be evidenced by behavior by the individual that caused harm or damage, that directly threatened harm or damage, or that caused a reasonable fear of harm or damage to other tenants, persons employed on the property, or the property. No claim that an individual's tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the safety of other persons or would result in substantial damage to property may be based on the fact that a tenant has been or may be the victim of domestic abuse, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 813.12(1)(am). 
(g)  It is not discrimination based on family status to comply with any reasonable federal, state or local government restrictions relating to the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling unit. 
(h)  Sharing accommodations: 
(1)  Subject to Subsection (h)(2) of this Section, nothing in this Section applies to a decision by an individual as to the person with whom the individual will, or continues to, share a dwelling unit, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.71(2), except that dwelling unit does not include any residence occupied by more than five persons. 
(2)  Any advertisement or written notice published, posted or mailed in connection with the rental or lease of a dwelling unit under Subsection (h)(1) of this Section may not violate Wis. Stats. § 106.50(2)(d), 42 USC 3604(c), or any rules or regulations promulgated under this Section or 42 USC 3601 to 3619, except that such an advertisement or written notice may be for a person of the same sex as the individual who seeks a person to share the dwelling unit for which the advertisement or written notice is placed. 
(i)  Information: 
(1)  Nothing in this Article prohibits an owner or agent from requiring that a person who seeks to buy or rent housing supply information concerning family status and marital, financial and business status but not concerning race, color, physical condition, disability, sexual orientation, ancestry, national origin, religion, creed or, subject to Subsection (i)(2) of this Section. 
(2)  Notwithstanding Subsection (i)(1) of this Section an owner or agent may require that a person who seeks to buy or rent housing under Wis. Stats. § 106.50(1m)(m)3. supply information concerning the owner's age for the purpose of verifying compliance with Wis. Stats. § 106.50(a)1e. and b. 
(j)  A person may not be held personally liable for monetary damages for a violation of Wis. Stats. § 106.50(2), (2m) or (2r) if the person reasonably relied, in good faith, on the application of the exemption under this Subsection relating to housing for older persons. For purposes of this Subsection, a person may show reasonable reliance, in good faith, on the application of the exemption under this Subsection relating to housing for older persons only if the person shows all of the following: 
(1)  That the person has no actual knowledge that the housing is not or will not be eligible for the exemption. 
(2)  That the owner of the housing has stated formally, in writing, that the housing complies with the requirements for the exemption. 
(Code 1998, § 15-7-4) 
State Law reference— Exemptions and exclusions, Wis. Stats. § 106.50(5m).  
Chapter 32 - LAW ENFORCEMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Police, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.25(2), 62.09(1)(a)(4), (13), 62.50(6); police departments, Wis. Stats. § 66.0113; mutual aid, Wis. Stats. § 66.0313. 
 
Sec. 32-19. - Organization of Police Department. 
The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other officers, assistants and police officers as from time to time may be appointed by the Police and Fire Commission pursuant to the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1998, § 5-1-1) 
State Law reference— Police department, Wis. Stats. § 61.65(1).  
Sec. 32-20. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Monthly reports. The Chief of Police shall submit a monthly general report to the Village Board of all activities of the Police Department during the preceding month. 
(b)  Police records. There shall be kept by the Police Department a suitable record in which shall be entered the name of every person arrested in the Village, the name of the person making the arrest, the date and cause of the arrest, the court from which the warrant was issued, and the disposition made of the case. 
(Code 1998, § 5-1-2)  
Sec. 32-21. - General powers of police officers. 
Every police officer shall: 
(a)  Become familiar with the ordinances of the Village and the statutes and attend to the enforcement of such ordinances by all lawful means. 
(b)  Help prevent felonies, misdemeanors and violations of Village ordinances and protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the Village and its inhabitants. 
(c)  Report all street and sidewalk obstructions, unlighted street lamps, unlawful street signs or signals, and defective or dangerous streets and sidewalks to the appropriate person or organization responsible for their repair or service. 
(d)  Maintain order at the scene of a fire or any other fire response within the Village. 
(e)  See that the necessary permits and licenses issued by the state or Village are in the possession of or properly displayed by any person engaged in an activity or business within the Village for which such permit or license is required and that the terms of such permits or licenses are complied with. 
(f)  Perform such other lawful duties as ordered by the Chief of Police or authorized representative. 
(Code 1998, § 5-1-3)  
Sec. 32-22. - Rules and policies for the Police Department. 
The Chief of Police shall establish and promulgate rules of conduct, directives and policies and procedures and prescribe such duties for individual members as the Chief of Police may deem necessary for the effective and efficient command and operation of the Police Department; provided no such rules of conduct, directive or policy procedure duties or assignment shall be in conflict with the statutes, ordinances and approved Village personnel rules and regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 5-1-5)  
Sec. 32-23. - Maintenance of personnel records and performance evaluations. 
The Chief of Police shall cause to be maintained adequate personnel records of employment, assignment, promotions, attendance, performance and training for all police officers. The Chief of Police shall also comply with all provisions of the Law Enforcement Standards Board in regard to background investigations. The Chief of Police shall keep adequately informed of the activities of the Police Department and be assured that the duties of subordinates are properly discharged. The Chief of Police shall formulate procedures for recognizing outstanding performance by the Police Department members, for investigating complaints of misconduct by any police officer and for taking appropriate disciplinary action subject to the provisions of the applicable statutes, rules of the Police Department and the jurisdiction of the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 5-1-6)  
Sec. 32-24. - Chief of Police's responsibility for training. 
The Chief of Police is responsible for the training of all police officers and other Police Department personnel. The Chief of Police shall cause adequate and progressive programs of training to be organized and conducted to prepare Police Department members in the knowledge, procedures, and techniques of their duties and responsibilities. The Chief of Police will ensure that, within budgetary limitations, members of the Police Department attend training courses, seminars, and conferences necessary to maintain and improve their job skills and professional knowledge. The Chief of Police shall encourage Police Department members to further their education in law enforcement through study, special courses, college attendance, extension programs, and independent readings. 
(Code 1998, § 5-1-7) 
State Law reference— Law enforcement training, Wis. Stats. § 165.86; law enforcement schools and programs, Wis. Stats. § 165.85(5).  
Sec. 32-25. - Civilians to assist. 
All persons in the Village, when called upon by any police officer or peace officer, shall promptly aid and assist such police officer or peace officer in the execution of duties and whoever shall neglect or refuse to give such aid or assistance shall be subject to the general penalty as provided in Section 1-16. 
(Code 1998, § 5-1-8) 
State Law reference— Refusal to aid an officer, Wis. Stats. § 946.40.  
Chapter 35 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Wis. Stats. Chs. 340—351; rules of the road, Wis. Stats. § 346.01 et seq.; powers of local authorities, Wis. Stats. § 349.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35-1. - State traffic laws adopted. 
(a)  Statutes adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. Chs. 340 to 348, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment or exclusively state charges, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any regulation incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutory regulations in Wis. Stats. Chs. 340 to 348 incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this Chapter in order to secure to the extent legally practicable uniform statewide regulation of vehicle traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the state. Any person who shall, within the Village, violate any provisions of any statute incorporated herein by reference shall be deemed guilty of an offense under this Section. 
(b)  Other state laws adopted. There are also hereby adopted by reference the following Sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of such offenses under this Chapter shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. Chs. 340 to 348 and the penalty for violation thereof shall be limited to a forfeiture as hereinafter provided in this Chapter: 
Wis. Stats. § 941.01 	Negligent operation of vehicle off highway 
Wis. Stats. § 943.11 	Entry into locked vehicle 
Wis. Stats. § 943.23 	Operating motor vehicles without owner's consent 
 
(c)  Statutes specifically incorporated by reference. Whenever this Chapter incorporates by reference specific Sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, such references shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes of 2007—2008 as from time to time amended, repealed or modified by the Wisconsin Legislature, and shall include subsequent session laws. 
(d)  General references. General references in this Chapter to Wisconsin statutory Sections or Chapters describing or defining procedures or authority for enactment or enforcement of local traffic regulations shall be deemed to refer to the most recent enactments of the Wisconsin Legislature describing or defining such procedures or authorities. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt statutes by reference, Wis. Stats. § 349.06.  
Sec. 35-2. - Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions adopted. 
(a)  Administrative regulations adopted. The following administrative rules and regulations adopted by the Secretary of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and published in the Wisconsin Administrative Code, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein. 
(1) 	Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 146 	Vehicle registration and fuel trip permits (Penalties of Wis. Stats. §§ 341.04(3) and 341.45(b) apply) 
(2) 	Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 302 	Vehicle marking 
(3) 	Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 305 	Standards for vehicle equipment 
(4) 	Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 328 	Motor carrier safety requirements for intrastate transportation of hazardous materials 
(5) 	Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 300 	Transportation of school children 
(6) 	Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 304 	Slow moving vehicle emblem 
 
(b)  Noncompliance prohibited. No person shall operate or allow to be operated on any highway, street or alley within the Village a vehicle that is not in conformity with the requirements of Subsection (a) of this Section or the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 110.075 and Ch. 347, incorporated by reference in Section 35-1. 
(c)  Owner's liability. Any owner of a vehicle not equipped as required by this Section who knowingly causes or permits such vehicle to be operated on a highway in violation of this Section is guilty of the violation the same as the owner had operated the vehicle. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 347.04, relating to nonappliability of demerit points shall apply to owners convicted of a violation of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-2(a)—(c)) 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle inspection, Wis. Stats. § 110.075; equipment on vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 347.01 et seq.; owner responsible for vehicle equipment, Wis. Stats. § 347.04.  
Sec. 35-3. - Safety checks. 
(a)  Operators to submit to inspection. When directed to do so by any law enforcement officer, the operator of any motor vehicle shall stop and submit such vehicle to an inspection and such tests as are necessary to determine whether the vehicle meets the requirements of this Section or that the vehicle's equipment is in proper adjustment or repair. No person, when operating a motor vehicle, shall fail to stop and submit such vehicle to inspection when directed to do so by any law enforcement officer as herein provided. 
(b)  Authority of officer. Any law enforcement officer of the Village is hereby empowered whenever the law enforcement officer shall have reason to believe that any provision of this Section is being violated to order the operator of the vehicle to stop and to submit such vehicle to an inspection with respect to brakes, lights, turn signals, steering, horns and warning devices, glass, mirrors, exhaust systems, windshield wipers, tires and other items of equipment. 
(c)  Vehicle to be removed from highway. Whenever, after inspection as provided by this Section, a law enforcement officer determines that a vehicle is unsafe for operation, the law enforcement officer may order it removed from the highway and not operated, except for purposes of removal and repair until the vehicle has been repaired as directed in a repair order. Repair orders may be in the form prescribed by the Secretary of the Department of Transportation under Wis. Stats. § 110.075(5), and shall require the vehicle owner or operator to cause the repairs to be made and return evidence of compliance with the repair order to the department of the issuing officer within the time specified in the order. 
(d)  Penalty. Penalty for violation of any provision of this Section, including the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, incorporated herein by reference, shall be as provided in Section 35-2(c), together with the costs of prosecution and applicable penalty assessment. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-2(d)) 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle inspection, Wis. Stats. § 110.075.  
Sec. 35-4. - Official traffic signs and control devices; prohibited signs, signals and markers. 
(a)  Duty of Director of Public Works to erect and install uniform traffic control devices. Whenever traffic regulations created by this Chapter, including a state traffic regulation adopted by reference in Section 35-1, require the erection of traffic control devices for enforcement, the Director of Public Works, with the cooperation of the Police Department, shall procure, erect and maintain uniform traffic control devices conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual promulgated by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, giving notice of such traffic regulation to the users of the streets and highways on which such regulations apply. Whenever state law grants discretion to local authorities in erecting or placement of a uniform traffic control device, devices shall be erected in such locations and in such a manner as, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works or designee, will carry out the purposes of this Chapter and give adequate warning to users of the streets and highways of the Village. 
(b)  Code numbers to be affixed to official traffic control devices. The Director of Public Works or designee shall cause to be placed on each official traffic control sign a guide board, mile post, signal or marker erected under Subsection (a) of this Section, a code number assigned by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, and shall also place or direct the placing of code numbers on all existing official traffic control devices as required by the laws of the state. 
(c)  Prohibited signs and markers in highways. No person other than an officer authorized by this Chapter to erect and maintain official traffic control devices or designee shall place within the limits of any street or highway maintained by the Village any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument unless permission is first obtained from the Director of Public Works or, where applicable, the State Highway Commission. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument placed or maintained in violation of this Subsection shall be subject to removal as provided in Subsection (d) of this Section. 
(d)  Removal of unofficial signs, markers, signals and traffic control devices. The Director of Public Works or designee may remove any sign, signal, marking or other device which is placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this Chapter or state law. Any charge imposed against premises for removal of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal, marking or device shall be reported by the Director of Public Works or designee to the Village Board for review and certification at its next regular meeting following the imposition of the charge. Any charge not paid on or before the next succeeding November 15 shall be placed upon the tax roll for collection as other special municipal taxes. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-3) 
State Law reference— Unauthorized signs prohibited, Wis. Stats. §§ 346.41, 349.09.  
Sec. 35-5. - Registration record of vehicle as evidence. 
When any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this Chapter regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner, as shown by the ownership registration of the vehicle supplied by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, or a comparable authority of any other state, shall be deemed to have committed the violation for purposes of enforcement of this Chapter and specifically Section 35-1 and shall be subject to the applicable forfeiture penalty; provided the defenses defined and described in Wis. Stats. § 346.485(5)(b), shall be a defense for an owner charged with such violation. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-4) 
State Law reference— Owner's liability for vehicle illegally passing school bus, defenses, Wis. Stats. § 346.485(5)(b).  
Sec. 35-6. - School bus warning lights. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.48(2)(b)2 and 346.48(2)(bm) adopted by Section 35-1 to the contrary: 
(a)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.21(1), school bus operators shall use flashing red, and if so equipped, amber warning lights in residential and business districts when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at locations at which there are no traffic signals and such persons must cross the street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. 
(b)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.21(2), the use of flashing red, and if so equipped, amber warning lights by school bus operators is prohibited when pupils or other authorized passengers are loaded or unloaded directly from or onto the school grounds or that portion of the right-of-way between the roadway and the school grounds in a zone designated by school warning signs as provided in Wis. Stats. § 118.08(1), in which a street or highway borders the grounds of a school. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-5; Ord. No. 2011-12, §§ 1, 2, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1, 8-23-2016) 
State Law reference— School zone crossing, Wis. Stats. § 118.08.  
Sec. 35-7. - Blue warning lights on police vehicles. 
(a)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 346.03(3), 346.94(14), 346.95(3) and 347.25(1), (1m)(a) and (b) and (4), a marked police vehicle under Wis. Stats. § 340.01(3)(a), may be equipped with a blue light and a red light, which flashes, oscillates or rotates. 
(b)  If the vehicle is so equipped, the lights shall be illuminated when the operator of the police vehicle is exercising the privileges granted under Wis. Stats. § 346.03. The blue light shall be mounted on the passenger side of the vehicle and the red light shall be mounted on the driver side of the vehicle. The lights shall be designed and mounted so as to be plainly visible and understandable from a distance of 500 feet during normal sunlight and during hours of darkness. No operator of a police vehicle may use the warning lights except when responding to an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm or when necessarily parked on a highway in a position that is likely to be hazardous to traffic using the highway. 
(c)  The Village shall give notice of its intent to equip its police vehicles with flashing, oscillating or rotating blue lights as a class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. Ch. 985, at least 90 days before so equipping the first police vehicle. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-6) 
State Law reference— Emergency vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 346.03.  
Sec. 35-8. - Official Traffic Map. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established an Official Traffic Map for the Village upon which shall be indicated no parking areas, restricted parking areas, stop signs, arterial intersections, yield signs, special speed limits, one-way highways, school crossings and all other restrictions or limitations contained in this Chapter, as from time to time amended or modified by the Village Board when the laws of the state require the erection or use of official traffic control devices to enforce such restrictions of limitations. 
(b)  Violations prohibited. When official traffic control devices giving notice of the restrictions, prohibitions and limitations shown on the Official Traffic Map are erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Section a violation of the restriction, prohibition or limitation shown on the Official Traffic Map shall be a violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(c)  Map to be maintained. A copy of the Official Traffic Map shall be maintained and displayed in the office of the Police Department. 
(d)  Additions to map. The Village Board may from time to time make additions to or deletions from the Official Traffic Map and the Chief of Police shall keep such Official Traffic Map current. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-7)  
Sec. 35-9. - Accident reports. 
The operator of every vehicle involved in an accident shall, immediately after such accident, file with the Police Department a copy of the report required by Wis. Stats. § 346.70, if any. If the operator is unable to make such report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making such report shall have the duty to comply with this Section. Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73 specifically that accident reports filed with this Section shall be for the confidential use of the Police Department and shall not be open to public inspection except as permitted by Wis. Stats. § 346.73. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-8) 
State Law reference— Duty to report accident, Wis. Stats. § 346.70.  
Sec. 35-10. - Disturbance of the peace with a motor vehicle. 
No driver of any vehicle, including motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and bicycles, shall cause, by excessive and unnecessary acceleration, the tires of such vehicle or cycle to spin and emit loud noises or to unnecessarily throw stones or gravel; nor shall such driver cause to be made by excessive and unnecessary acceleration any loud noise as would disturb the public peace. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-40)  
Secs. 35-11—35-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC STREET TRAFFIC REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 35-39. - Operators to obey traffic control devices. 
Every operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection at which an official traffic control device is erected in accordance with this Chapter shall obey the direction of such official traffic control device as required by the Wisconsin Statutes incorporated by reference in Section 35-1. Operators of vehicles approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering a highway as required by Wis. Stats. § 346.46. Operators approaching intersections at which a yield sign has been installed shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles as required by Wis. Stats. § 346.18(6). 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-10) 
State Law reference— Rules of right-of-way, Wis. Stats. § 346.18.  
Secs. 35-40—35-66. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - THROUGH STREETS AND TRAFFIC ROUTES DESIGNATED 
 
Sec. 35-67. - Streets declared through highways and snow emergency routes. 
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.07, the following streets or portions thereof set forth in this Section are declared to be through highways and snow emergency routes, and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the Director of Public Works in accordance with Section 35-4: 
(a)  County Trunk MN from the east curbline of U.S. Highway 51 to the east limits of the Village. 
(b)  U.S. Highway 51 from the north limits of the Village to the south limits of the Village. 
(c)  The following streets shall also be through streets in the Village: 
Broadhead Street. 
Creamery Road. 
Elvehjem Road. 
Exchange Street. 
Holscher Road. 
Marsh Road. 
Siggelkow Road. 
Triangle Street. 
Valley Drive. 
Voges Road. 
Terminal Drive. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-11) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate through streets, Wis. Stats. § 349.07.  
Sec. 35-68. - Heavy traffic routes. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this Section, the term "heavy traffic" means: 
(1)  All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic tires; and 
(2)  All vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than motor buses, designed or used for transporting property of any nature and having a gross weight of more than 15,000 pounds. 
(b)  Prohibited routes. Heavy traffic is prohibited from using any Village street or highway not designated as a heavy traffic route. This Section shall not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using a Village street or highway for the purpose of obtaining orders for supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from any place of business or residence that has an entrance on such street or highway. Furthermore, this Section will not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using any Village streets over which are routed state trunk highways. When being driven to the site of any construction, repair or maintenance of electric, gas or water service, vehicles owned and operated by a public utility will be exempt from the provisions of this Section. 
(c)  Administration. The Director of Public Works in cooperation with the Police Department shall administer this Section. Administration shall include: 
(1)  Posting of signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted giving notice of this Section and of the heavy traffic routes established herein. Yellow sign posts may also be used to designate heavy traffic routes. 
(2)  Maps. Heavy traffic routes shall be shown on the Official Traffic Map. 
(3)  Construction equipment. 
a.  The Director of Public Works may grant temporary permits to allow heavy construction equipment to use Village streets or highways not designated as heavy traffic routes. These permits may be granted only when use of a nondesignated route is necessary for the equipment to reach a construction site. No permit may be issued unless the person or corporation owning the equipment agrees to reimburse and hold the Village harmless for any damage done to the Village street by the equipment and/or any personal injury or property damage caused in part or in whole by the street damage. 
b.  Village-owned or -operated equipment is specifically excluded from the provisions of this Section. 
(d)  Liability. Any operator, corporation, owner or agent whose heavy traffic vehicle damages any Village streets or highways in violating this Section shall be liable and required to pay the Village the cost of repair or replacement of the damaged street or highway. 
(e)  Special and seasonal weight limitations. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to impose special or seasonal weight limits on any highway, bridge or culvert maintained by the Village to prevent injury to the roadway or for the safety of the users of such bridge or culvert and shall be responsible for erecting uniform traffic control devices giving notice thereof in accordance with the proving of Section 35-4. 
(f)  Heavy traffic routes designated. All streets and alleys within the Village are designated class "B" highways subject to the weight limitations of Wis. Stats. § 346.16, except the following streets or parts thereof within the jurisdiction of the Village are hereby designated heavy traffic routes and are excepted from the class "B" weight limitations: 
County Trunk Highway MN. 
Siggelkow Road west of U.S. Highway 51. 
Terminal Drive from Ivywood Trail to north Village limits. 
Triangle Street. 
U.S. Highway 51. 
Voges Road from U.S. Highway 51 to east Village limits. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-12) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate heavy traffic, Wis. Stats. § 349.17.  
Secs. 35-69—35-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPEED LIMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Speed restrictions, Wis. Stats. § 346.57. 
 
Sec. 35-95. - Findings. 
The Village Board hereby determines that the statutory speed limits on certain streets or portions thereof are unreasonable, unsafe or imprudent and modifies such speed limits under authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 349.11, as provided in this Division. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-13)  
Sec. 35-96. - Speed limits increased. 
Speed limits established by Wis. Stats. § 346.57(4)(e), (f) and (g) are increased as hereinafter set forth upon the following streets or portions thereof: 
(a)  Thirty-five miles per hour. 
(1)  Siggelkow Road east of Triangle Street to the east Village limits. 
(2)  Terminal Drive from the north intersection of U.S. Highway 51 to a point 1,300 feet north of Siggelkow Road. 
(b)  Forty miles per hour. U.S. Highway 51 from 510 feet north of Larson Beach Road to the south Village limits. 
(c)  Thirty miles per hour. 
(1)  Triangle Street. 
(2)  Voges Road. 
(3)  Marsh Road from Siggelkow Road north to Village limits. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-13(a))  
Sec. 35-97. - Speed limits modified. 
With the approval of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, the speed limits set forth in Wis. Stats. § 346.57(4)(e), (f) and (g), are decreased as hereinafter set forth upon the following streets or portions thereof: 
(a)  Fifteen miles per hour on the one way alley known as Card Avenue. 
(b)  Fifteen miles per hour on Lake Edge Road from South Court northeasterly to Severson Street and 15 miles per hour on the remainder of the street up to Larson Beach Road. 
(c)  Fifteen miles per hour on Beckler Street. 
(d)  Fifteen miles per hour on Field Avenue. 
(e)  Fifteen miles per hour on Larson Street. 
(f)  Fifteen miles per hour on Glen Road. 
(g)  Fifteen miles per hour on Lakeview Street. 
(h)  Fifteen miles per hour on Wisconsin Avenue. 
(i)  Fifteen miles per hour on Bellevue Court. 
(j)  Fifteen miles per hour on Ivywood Trail. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-13(b))  
Sec. 35-98. - Speed limits decreased. 
The speed limit set forth in Wis. Stats. § 346.57(4)(f), is hereby decreased from 35 miles per hour to 25 miles per hour upon the following streets: 
(a)  Taylor Road. 
(b)  Creamery Road. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-13(c))  
Secs. 35-99—35-124. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ONE-WAY STREETS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, Wis. Stats. § 349.10. 
 
Sec. 35-125. - Declared one-way streets. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.10, the following streets and parts thereof are declared to be one way streets, and no person shall operate any vehicle thereon except in the indicated direction: 
(a)  Card Avenue. 
(b)  Sure Avenue. 
(c)  Johnson Street from the Bashford Street intersection to Sure Street. 
(d)  Overlook Drive. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-14)  
Secs. 35-126—35-148. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, Wis. Stats. § 349.13. 
 
Sec. 35-149. - Restrictions on parking on public streets; posted limitations. 
(a)  General parking restrictions. No person, firm or corporation shall park any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, semitrailer or mobile home on any Village street or Village parking lot for 24 or more consecutive hours, or for 72 or more consecutive hours in front of the owner's residence or with permission from the residence's owner, except that where more restrictive parking limits have been established the more restrictive limits shall apply. 
(b)  Parking of large vehicles restricted. 
(1)  Definition. For purposes of this Section, the term "large vehicle" means: Any automobile, truck, trailer, truck power unit, bus, boat, recreational vehicle and/or combinations of vehicles weighing in excess of 12,000 pounds or over 21 feet in length (including accessories, racks or other physical extensions) or having a height of more than eight feet from the roadway. 
(2)  Restrictions on parking large vehicles. 
a.  Nighttime restrictions. No person, firm or corporation shall park or leave standing any large vehicle upon any Village street between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless otherwise lawfully parked and engaged in the continuous loading or unloading of goods, wares or merchandise. 
b.  Daytime restrictions. No person, firm or corporation shall park or leave standing any large vehicle upon any Village street between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for more than two hours, unless otherwise lawfully parked and engaged in continuous loading or unloading of goods, wares or merchandise. The Village Board may designate specific truck parking zones. 
(3)  Temporary parking. Notwithstanding the restrictions set forth in Subsection (b)(2) of this Section, the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, may authorize the temporary parking of a large vehicle upon a public street after considering the following factors: 
a.  Whether such permission has been given before for the same vehicle, and the frequency of such requests. 
b.  The proposed duration of parking. 
c.  The nature and size of the large vehicle. 
d.  The proposed parking location, including the layout and width of the street, traffic volume, and impact on accessibility. 
e.  The impact the proposed parking will have on the neighborhood with respect to safety and aesthetics. 
f.  Any other relevant safety concerns identified by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee. 
Temporary parking will only be authorized upon advanced notice and approval, and only for the duration of time so authorized and in compliance with any conditions imposed by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee. 
(c)  Removal. Any vehicle or other item unlawfully parked under this Section may be removed from the street by order of a law enforcement officer, pursuant to Section 35-163, and the expense of so moving and storing such vehicle or other item shall be paid by the operator or owner of said vehicle or other item as a forfeiture in addition to the penalties prescribed. 
(d)  Posted limitations. 
(1)  The Village Board may designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones or as zones for parking by physically handicapped persons and may limit the hours in which the restrictions apply. The Village shall mark, by appropriate signs, each zone so designated in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 349.13. 
(2)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in a no parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited except physicians on emergency calls or as permitted by state law or elsewhere by this Code. 
(3)  The Chief of Police is hereby granted the authority, within the reasonable exercise of police power to prohibit, limit the time or otherwise restrict the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles beyond the provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 346. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to restrict the turning or movement of heavy traffic and to impose special weight limitations on any highway or portions thereof which, because of the weakness of the roadbed due to deterioration or climatic conditions or other special or temporary conditions, would likely be seriously damaged or destroyed in the absence of any restrictions on heavy traffic movement or special weight limitations. 
(4)  No prohibition, restriction or limitation on parking or restriction on movement or turning of heavy traffic and imposition of special weight limits is effective unless official traffic control devices have been placed or erected indicating the particular prohibition, restriction or limitation. 
(5)  After the parking limitations on any given street have expired, any change of location of not more than one stall following expiration of the parking period allowed shall be and constitute a violation of this Chapter. 
(e)  Unregistered motor vehicles. Pursuant to the authority granted under Wis. Stats. § 341.65(2)(a), no person, firm or corporation shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle on any public highway that is not displaying valid registration plates, a temporary operation plate or other evidence of valid registration as provided under Wis. Stats. § 341.18(1) for the vehicle's current registration period or for a registration period for the vehicle that expired within the immediately preceding 31 days. 
(f)  Government and emergency vehicles exempted. The parking restrictions set forth in this Section do not apply to any vehicles owned by any governmental entity, utility service or emergency service while the vehicles are actively being used in conjunction with related services or official governmental business. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-20; Ord. No. 2014-19, § 1, 12-8-2014; Ord. No. 2019-04 , § 1, 3-25-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-04 , § 1, adopted March 25, 2019, changed the title of § 35-149 from "Restrictions on parking; posted limitations" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 35-150. - Parking restrictions during temporary snow removal or street maintenance. 
(a)  Street maintenance. Whenever it is necessary to clear or repair a Village roadway or any part thereof, the Director of Public Works and/or Police Department shall post such highways or parts thereof with signs bearing the words "No Parking—By Order of the Police Department." Such signs shall be erected at least two hours prior to the time that street maintenance work is to be commenced. No person shall park a motor vehicle in violation of such signs. 
(b)  Temporary parking restrictions for special events. Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 349.13, the Chief of Police is authorized to direct that temporary "No Parking" signs be erected by the Director of Public Works during parades, festivals and other authorized events that require the regulating of vehicle stopping, standing or parking on Village roadways. The temporary regulation shall be limited to the time the event exists or is likely to exist. 
(c)  Parking during snow removal. No person shall park, place or leave standing any automobile, truck or other vehicle on any street or public way after one hour from the time such area has been designated and marked with signs or barriers by the Police Department and/or the Director of Public Works of the Village indicating no parking due to snow removal. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-21)  
Sec. 35-151. - Stopping or parking prohibited in certain specified places. 
Except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers or property and while the vehicle is attended by a licensed operator so that it may be moved promptly in case of an emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic, no person shall at any time park or leave standing any vehicle: 
(a)  Within an intersection. 
(b)  On a crosswalk. 
(c)  On a sidewalk or terrace area, except when parking in such place is clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers or parking meters. The term "terrace or sidewalk area" means that area between the sidewalk and the nearest curbline running parallel or generally parallel thereto or in the absence of a sidewalk ten feet beyond the curbline. 
(d)  Alongside or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction when such stopping or standing would obstruct traffic or when pedestrian traffic would be required to travel in the roadway. 
(e)  On the roadway side of any parked vehicle unless double parking is clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers. 
(f)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station. 
(g)  Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when stopping or standing is prohibited by official traffic signs indicating the prohibition of any stopping or standing. 
(h)  In any place or manner so as to obstruct, block or impede traffic. 
(i)  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant, unless a greater distance is indicated by an official traffic sign. 
(j)  Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when parking is prohibited, limited or restricted by official traffic signs. 
(k)  Upon any bridge. 
(l)  Upon any street or highway within the Village limits any vehicle that faces a direction different from the direction of normal traffic flow for the lane of traffic in which said vehicle is stopped or standing. 
(m)  Upon any terrace or sidewalk in the Village at any time. 
(n)  In a loading zone. 
(o)  Within four feet of the entrance to an alley, private road or driveway. 
(p)  In any municipal park when said park is closed to the public. 
(q)  When signs or parking meters are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the period thereon specified. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-22(a)) 
State Law reference— Parking prohibited in certain specified places, Wis. Stats. § 346.53.  
Sec. 35-152. - Parking in driveways; vehicles not to block private drive, alley or fire lane. 
(a)  No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle in any private driveway without the permission of the owner or lessee of the property where such driveway is located, whether or not such driveway is posted to limit or restrict parking. 
(b)  No vehicle shall, at any time, be parked so as to unreasonably restrict the normal access to any private drive, alley or fire lane. Said access shall be deemed to be unreasonably restricted if any vehicle is parked within four feet of either side of said access. Upon discovery by a police officer or upon complaint by the owner of any such blocked drive, alley or fire lane, the Chief of Police may order said vehicle towed from such position at the risk and expense of the owner of said vehicle. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-22(b), (c)) 
State Law reference— Parking within four feet of driveway, etc., Wis. Stats. § 346.53(4).  
Sec. 35-153. - Parking vehicle for repair or display for sale prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street, alley, public right-of-way or municipal parking lot in the Village to display such vehicle for sale. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically set forth below, no person shall perform or attempt to perform any motor vehicle repair service while such motor vehicle is located, completely or partially, upon the roadway of any public street or highway. 
(c)  Subsection (b) of this Section shall not apply to any emergency road service performed by an established towing company, nor to changing tires and wheels, nor to temporary emergency motor vehicle repair service, which is necessary prior to removal of a disabled motor vehicle from the roadway. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-23)  
Sec. 35-154. - Parking reserved for vehicles of disabled. 
When official traffic signs indicating such restriction have been erected in accordance with Section 35-4, no person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle upon any portion of a street, highway or public or private parking facility reserved for vehicles displaying special registration plates or identification cards or emblems issued by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation or, for vehicles registered in another jurisdiction, by such other jurisdiction designating the vehicle as one used by a physically disabled person. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-24) 
State Law reference— Parking, etc., in spaces reserved for disabled persons, Wis. Stats. §§ 346.503, 346.505.  
Sec. 35-155. - Leaving keys in vehicle prohibited; parking vehicles with motor running. 
(a)  Leaving keys in vehicle. No person shall permit any motor vehicle to stand or remain unattended on any street, alley or other public area, except an attended parking area, unless either the starting lever, throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift or ignition of the vehicle is locked and the key for such lock is removed from the vehicle. Whenever any police officer shall find any vehicle standing with the key in the ignition in violation of this Section, such officer is authorized to remove such key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the Police Department for safe custody. 
(b)  Parking vehicles with motor running. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle with the motor or refrigerator unit running for more than 30 minutes within 300 feet of any residence within the Village between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-25)  
Sec. 35-156. - Unattended motorized machinery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit any construction, compaction, earth-grading or farm machinery that is self-propelled and moves upon the surface of the earth and which is owned or controlled by such person to stand for any period of time unattended without locking the ignition system or otherwise rendering said machinery inoperable so as to prevent any person unauthorized by the owner or individual in control thereof from starting said machinery. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-26)  
Sec. 35-157. - Angle parking. 
(a)  Angle parking or parking diagonally is prohibited on all the streets, alleys and highways of the Village except where vehicle parking markers indicate that angle parking is permissible. All vehicles shall park parallel to, and within one foot of the curb except where streets and parking lots are so marked for angle parking. 
(b)  No person shall at any time park any vehicle: 
(1)  In any direction other than the designated parking angle, where angle parking spaces are so designated and provided by appropriate markings. 
(2)  Backwards into angle parking spaces so designated and provided by appropriate markings. 
(3)  With a trailer attached or any vehicle longer than 20 feet on any street where angle parking is so provided and allowed. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-27) 
State Law reference— Angle parking, Wis. Stats. §§ 346.54, 349.13(2)(e).  
Sec. 35-158. - Winter parking regulations. 
(a)  Alternate side parking. Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., all vehicles must park on the even numbered side of the street on even-numbered calendar days and on the odd-numbered side of the street on odd-numbered days from December 1 to March 31 of each year. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any cul-de-sac bulb street in the Village from December 1 to March 31 each year during the hours between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Any vehicle or object parked in violation hereof may be removed from said street by the Village police at the cost of the owner thereof and, in addition thereto, shall be liable for and subject to the penalties provided below. This Subsection shall not apply to streets where parking is limited to one side of the street. 
(b)  Snow emergency parking by regulations. Upon the declaration of a snow or snow removal emergency by the Chief of Police and/or the Village Board and in conjunction with the Director of Public Works, regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this Subsection shall be made. 
(1)  When it becomes necessary to effectuate the effective movement of vehicles and to plow snow or ice from streets which, because of the accumulation of snow or ice thereon, causes such a hindrance to traffic as constitutes an emergency unless the snow or ice is promptly removed, the Chief of Police or a designated subordinate, after consultation with the Director of Public Works shall, by appropriate public media, declare the beginning of an emergency and the application of emergency snow parking regulations, which regulations shall remain in force and effect until lifted by the Chief of Police or a designated subordinate. For the purpose of this Subsection, the accumulation of snow or ice on any streets or area sufficient for the application of emergency regulations herein shall be such accumulation of snow and ice that hinders the safe movement of traffic hereon or that impedes the ability of emergency vehicles and public transportation vehicles to travel safely and expeditiously over such streets or areas. 
(2)  When necessary for the clearing, repairing, removal and plowing of snow or ice from any street or for other emergency or special conditions as declared, the Chief of Police or designated subordinates are hereby authorized to make and carry out regulations and procedures sufficient to effectively cope with such emergency or special conditions to include: 
a.  Making temporary regulations directing traffic and regulating parking; 
b.  Restrictions prohibiting parking on any street during the hours from 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.; and/or 
c.  Such other and further regulations and restrictions as to traffic and parking as may be designated as necessary. 
(3)  Whenever a snow emergency exists as declared herein and any motor vehicle or object shall remain on the street or public parking lot in violation of this Subsection, it may be removed by or under the direction of the Police or Public Works Department after one of such departments has attempted to notify the owner to remove such vehicle and it has not been removed. 
(4)  This Subsection shall supersede all other parking regulations in force or posted on any street. Enforcement of this Subsection shall not require posting on affected streets but posting shall be placed or erected at or reasonably near the corporate limits on all state and county trunk highways and connecting streets informing motorists that snow emergency regulations are in effect. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-28; Ord. No. 2004-22, § 1, 10-11-2004; Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 1, 1-23-2017) 
State Law reference— Parking during snow emergencies, Wis. Stats. §§ 347.23(4), 349.13(1e)(c)2.  
Sec. 35-159. - Restrictions on storage of heavy vehicles on private property. 
No person, firm or corporation shall park, keep or maintain on property in an urban residential district for residential use the following types of vehicles: trucks, truck tractors, tractor-trailers, semi-tractors, dump trucks, auto wreckers and road machinery in excess of 12,000 pounds gross weight, or over 18 feet in length, or having an enclosed area of a height of more than eight feet. Said vehicles may not be kept or parked on said premises whether or not they are in enclosed buildings, except temporarily for the purposes of unloading or servicing the premises. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-29; Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 15, 3-26-2018; Ord. No. 2019-04 , § 2, 3-25-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-04 , § 2, adopted March 25, 2019, changed the title of § 35-159 from "Parking of vehicles over 12,000 pounds or 18 feet restricted; storage of heavy vehicles on private property" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 35-160. - Traffic and parking regulations on school district grounds. 
The Village Board may contract with the School Board to provide reimbursement for the cost of enforcing any ordinance regulating the operation and parking of motor vehicles on off-highway public school premises, school drives or parking lots or pedestrian traffic on any such drives or parking lots. Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 118.105, the following regulations shall apply to the grounds of the McFarland School District located within the Village: 
(a)  Parking. All parking on any grounds of the McFarland School District from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. shall be restricted to areas designated for parking by the School Board. When signs are erected by the School Board giving notice of such restrictions, all persons shall park only in areas designated and signed for visitor parking. All parking on grounds of the McFarland School District from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. shall be by permit only and shall be restricted to areas designated for parking by the District Board. When signs are erected by the School Board giving notice of such restrictions, no person shall park a motor vehicle in an area other than one for which such person shall have been issued a permit nor without displaying a valid permit. There shall be no parking on said grounds between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except when school functions extend past 11:00 p.m.; on such nights there shall be no parking one hour after the function has concluded. 
(b)  Speed limits. No person shall at any time operate a motor vehicle upon any McFarland School District grounds at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(c)  Vehicles prohibited at specified times. No person shall at any time operate a motor vehicle, other than a school bus or emergency vehicle, in or upon any drive designed for buses only by sign during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and during the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on any weekday during the months school is in session. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-30)  
Sec. 35-161. - Unlawful removal of parking citations. 
No person other than the owner or operator thereof shall remove a Village parking ticket from a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-31)  
Sec. 35-162. - Operation of motor vehicles in public parking lots and ramps. 
(a)  Unlicensed operators prohibited. No person who does not hold a valid operator's license shall operate a vehicle in any public parking lot or ramp or in any private parking lot or ramp held out for the use of parking for the general public. 
(b)  Traffic regulations applicable. All provisions of Section 35-1 and of the Wisconsin Statutes and laws incorporated herein by reference shall be applicable on any public parking lot or ramp and on any private parking lot, road or ramp held out for use for the general public for parking or vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-32)  
Sec. 35-163. - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  Hazard to public safety. Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon a highway or public parking lot or ramp in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public safety. 
(b)  Removal by operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator in charge, upon request of any police officer, to a position where parking is permitted or to a private or public parking or storage premises. 
(c)  Removal by police officer. Any police officer after issuing a citation for illegal parking, stopping or standing of an unattended vehicle in violation of this Chapter, is authorized to remove such vehicle to a position where parking is permitted. 
(d)  Removal by private service. Any police officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to perform vehicle towing services, a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer or a licensed motor vehicle dealer who performs vehicle towing services to remove and store such vehicle in any public storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of the person providing the towing services. 
(e)  Towing and storage charges. In addition to other penalties provided in this Chapter, the owner or operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay the actual cost of moving, towing and storage. If the vehicle is towed or stored by a private motor carrier, motor vehicle salvage dealer or licensed motor vehicle dealer, actual charges regularly paid for such services shall be paid. If the vehicle is stored in a public storage garage or rental facility, customary charges for such storage shall be paid. Upon payment, a receipt shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle for the towing or storage charge. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-33)  
Secs. 35-164—35-194. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RAILROAD REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Railroads, Wis. Stats. § 192.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 35-195. - Obstruction of railroad crossings. 
No person shall leave standing or stop or permit or allow to stand or stop any railroad train, engine or car upon any street, alley or highway crossing within the Village so as to obstruct public travel for a greater period of time than five minutes without opening said street, alley or crossing for at least ten minutes. Any railroad employee on any train or locomotive so obstructing any street, alley or railroad crossing or any railroad employee who shall allow and be responsible for such obstruction shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 35-247. The corporation running or operating such train, engine or cars so obstructing any street or railroad crossing shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-41(a)) 
State Law reference— Trains obstructing highway, Wis. Stats. § 192.292.  
Sec. 35-196. - Crossing warning by trains. 
No person shall operate or permit to be operated a locomotive, railway train, engine or railway car over any graded street or highway crossing within the limits of the Village unless a whistle or horn shall be blown 80 rods (1,320 feet) from said crossing and a crossing bell run continuously until the crossing shall be reached. The blowing of a whistle or horn and the ringing of a bell shall not be necessary where gates are operated automatically or a railroad employee is stationed at such traveled grade crossing. Any person violating this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Section 35-247. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-41(b)) 
State Law reference— Railroad warning bells and signs, Wis. Stats. § 192.29.  
Secs. 35-197—35-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Pedestrians, Wis. Stats. §§ 346.37, 346.38. 
 
Sec. 35-216. - Pedestrian obedience to traffic control devices and regulations. 
(a)  Obedience to traffic control devices. No person shall fail to obey the instructions of any uniform traffic control device when traveling as a pedestrian on any highway within the Village unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  Crossing at crosswalks. No pedestrian shall cross at a crosswalk except on the right half thereof whenever practicable. Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway except when the sidewalk is visibly unsafe, obstructed or closed to public travel. 
(c)  Prohibited pedestrian crossings. No pedestrian shall cross between adjacent intersections, unless such crossing is permitted by official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-42) 
State Law reference— Pedestrian control signals, Wis. Stats. § 346.38.  
Sec. 35-217. - Motor vehicles on pedestrian ways and overpasses. 
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle on any pedestrian way or pedestrian overpass within the Village except municipal or county maintenance vehicles. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-43) 
State Law reference— Parking on crosswalk prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 346.52(1)(b).  
Sec. 35-218. - School crossing guards. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.215, those adult persons hired by the Police Department to act as "school crossing guards" shall have the authority to stop vehicular traffic and to keep it stopped as long as necessary at their respective school crossings for the purpose of permitting school children to cross the street. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-44) 
State Law reference— Authority to appoint school crossing guards, Wis. Stats. § 349.215.  
Sec. 35-219. - Driving over curbing or safety islands prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be driven or backed over any curbing in the Village. 
(b)  Whenever safety zones or safety islands are marked in accordance with the Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual, no operator of a vehicle shall at any time drive through or over a safety zone or safety island. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-45) 
State Law reference— Crossing at crosswalk, Wis. Stats. §§ 346.23, 346.24.  
Secs. 35-220—35-246. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 35-247. - Penalties. 
(a)  Forfeiture penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a forfeiture as hereafter provided, together with court costs and fees, as well as any applicable surcharges. Payment of the judgment and applicable court costs, fees, assessments and surcharges may be suspended by the sentencing court for not more than 60 days. Any person 18 years of age or older who shall fail to pay the amount of the forfeiture, court costs, any penalty assessment or driver surcharge or other penalty imposed for violation of any provision of this Chapter may, upon order of the court entering judgment therefor and having jurisdiction of the case, be imprisoned until such forfeiture, costs and assessment are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(b)  Other sanctions. 
(1)  By court. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin Statutes to suspend or revoke the operating privileges of the defendant, order the defendant to submit to assessment and rehabilitation programs or to attend traffic safety school in addition to payment of a monetary penalty or in lieu or imprisonment. 
(2)  By municipality. Pursuant to Section 11-1, no person who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be issued a license or permit by the Village, until the forfeiture imposed for such violation and any penalty assessment, court costs and fees or surcharge is paid. 
(c)  Forfeitures for violation of uniform moving traffic regulations. Forfeitures for violations of any moving traffic regulation set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in Section 35-1 shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the comparable Wisconsin Statutes, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses; provided, however, that this Subsection shall not be construed to permit prosecution under this Chapter for any offense described in Wis. Stats. Chs. 341 to 348, for which an imprisonment penalty or fine may be imposed upon the defendant. 
(d)  Forfeitures for parking violations. 
(1)  Forfeitures for uniform statewide parking, stopping and standing offenses. Minimum and maximum forfeiture for violation of nonmoving traffic violations adopted by reference in Section 35-1 as described in Wis. Stats. Chs. 341 to 348, shall be as found in the current edition of the Revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule. 
(2)  Penalty for other parking violations. The penalty for all other parking violations not included under Subsection (d)(1) of this Section, subject to the exceptions listed below, shall be not less than $15.00 nor more than $50.00. 
(e)  Other violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise established by this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $15.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-50)  
Sec. 35-248. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement procedures. 
(1)  How enforced. This Chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0111, 66.0113, 345.20 to 345.53, and 800.01 et seq. 
(2)  Applicable court procedures. Except where otherwise specifically provided by the laws of the state or this Code, the traffic regulations in this Code shall be enforced in Circuit Court or the municipal court. 
(b)  Citations. 
(1)  Uniform citation and complaint. The Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation and Complaint described and defined in the Wisconsin Statutes shall be used for enforcement of all provisions of this Chapter except those provisions which describe or define nonmoving traffic violations. 
(2)  Parking citations. The Chief of Police shall recommend a citation for use in enforcing the nonmoving traffic offenses in this Chapter. Such citation shall be used for enforcement of nonmoving traffic regulations created or adopted by this Chapter, including violations of nonmoving traffic regulations defined and described in the Wisconsin Statutes, adopted by reference in Section 35-1, and all provisions regarding nonmoving traffic violations in this Chapter. The citation for nonmoving traffic violations shall contain a notice that the person cited may discharge the forfeiture for violation of a nonmoving traffic regulation and penalty thereof by complying with Subsection (c)(2) of this Section. Nonmoving traffic citations may be issued by law enforcement officers or by civilian employees of the Police Department. 
(c)  Deposits and stipulations. 
(1)  Uniform traffic offenses. 
a.  Who may make. Persons arrested or cited for violation of moving traffic offenses created by this Chapter shall be permitted to make deposits and stipulations of no contest or released by the arresting officer in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made by persons arrested for violations of this Chapter in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0114(1)(b) whenever the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 345.27 are inapplicable to such violations. Stipulations shall conform to the form contained in the uniform traffic citation and complaint under Wis. Stats. § 345.11 and may be accepted within ten days of the date of the alleged violation. Stipulations may be accepted by the Police Department. 
b.  Delivery or mailing of deposit and stipulation. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under the preceding Subsection must make the deposit required under Wis. Stats. § 345.26 or, if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule established by the Chief of Police and approved by the Village Board. Deposits may be brought or mailed to the Police Department within ten days of the issuance of the citation in lieu of court appearance. 
c.  Receipt required. Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this Chapter shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 343.27, 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2) and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11. The official or person receiving the deposit shall furnish and deliver or mail an original receipt for such deposit to the alleged violator and shall deliver the deposit and stipulation, and a copy of the receipt within seven days to the Municipal Court Clerk. 
(2)  Nonmoving traffic offenses. 
a.  Direct payment of penalty permitted. Persons cited (summons not issued) for violation of nonmoving traffic offenses described and defined in this Chapter may discharge the penalty thereof and avoid court prosecution by mailing or forwarding within five days of the issuance of the citation to the Police Department the minimum forfeiture specified for the violation. If not forwarded, the penalty may be discharged by forwarding within 60 days of the date of citation. When payment is made as provided in this Subsection (c)(2), no court costs shall be charged. 
b.  Registration suspension. If the alleged violator does not pay the forfeiture or appear in court in response to the citation for a nonmoving traffic violation on the date specified in the citation of, if no date is specified on the citation, within 28 days after the citation is issued, the Village may ask the Wisconsin Department of Transportation to suspend the registration of the vehicle involved or refuse registration of any vehicle owned by the person pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 345.28(4), and Subsection (c)(3) of this Section. 
c.  Deposits returned to Municipal Court Clerk. Officers receiving deposits for nonmoving traffic violations under this Subsection shall pay over such deposits to the Municipal Court Clerk within seven days of receipt. Such payment shall be accompanied by an itemized statement for each deposit of the offense charged and the name of the depositor. 
d.  Bond. Any officer authorized to accept deposits under Wis. Stats. § 345.26 or this Section, shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 19.01. 
(3)  Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited penalty or money deposit under this Section shall receipt therefor in triplicate as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this Section shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 343.27, 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2), and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11. 
(4)  Registration suspension program. 
a.  The Village shall participate in the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 345.28 and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 128 and all amendments or changes thereto. 
b.  The Police Department is hereby designated as a delegated authority for purposes of Wis. Stats. §§ 85.13 and 345.28 and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 128. The Police Department is authorized to perform, on behalf of the Village, all functions required of a local authority under said statutes and Code including, but not limited to: 
1.  Preparing and completing all forms and notices, notifying the Wisconsin Department of Transportation of unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations; 
2.  Specifying whether the registration of vehicles involved in unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations should be suspended and/or whether registration should be refused for any vehicle owned by persons with unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations; 
3.  Determining the method by which the Village will pay the Wisconsin Department of Transportation for administration of the program; establishing the effective date for participation; 
4.  And taking such other action as is necessary to institute and continue participation in the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program. 
c.  The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to assign a member of the Police Department to perform such acts as are necessary to effectuate this Subsection. 
d.  In addition to all applicable fines and court costs, the cost of using the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program shall be assessed as permitted by Wis. Stats. § 345.28(4)(d). Such costs include the prepayment required by the Department of Transportation under Wis. Stats. § 85.13, as well as the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for the Village's administrative costs in preparing the notices required by Wis. Stats. § 345.28(3). The Police Department may refuse to notify the Wisconsin Department of Transportation of payment on a citation until all applicable fines and costs, including costs assessed under the preceding sentence, are paid. 
e.  This Subsection shall not be interpreted as requiring that all unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations be processed through the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program. The Village's participation in such program shall be in addition to any and all other means legally available to enforce such citations. 
(Code 1998, § 10-1-51; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 33, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Deposits, Wis. Stats. § 345.26; nonmoving violations, Wis. Stats. § 345.28; traffic violation and registration program, Wis. Stats. § 345.285.  
Secs. 35-249—35-274. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Bicycles, Wis. Stats. §§ 346.02(4), 346.075; bicycles, electric personal mobility devices and play vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 346.77 et seq. 
 
Sec. 35-275. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Bicycle. Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and having wheels, any two of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter. 
(b)  Bicycle way. Any path or sidewalk, or portion thereof, designated for the use of bicycles and electric personal assistive mobility devices by the responsible governing body. 
(c)  Bicycle lane. That portion of a roadway set aside for exclusive use of bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, or other modes of travel where permitted under Wis. Stats. § 349.23(2)(a), and so designated by appropriate signs and markings by the responsible governing body. 
(d)  Bike route. Any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway that has been duly designated by the responsible governing body and identified by appropriate signs and markings. 
(e)  Carrier. Any device attached to a bicycle designed for carrying articles. 
(f)  Identification tag. A metal plate or sticker indicating that a bicycle is registered. 
(g)  Right-of-way. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-1) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 340.01.  
Sec. 35-276. - Manner of operation restricted. 
No bicycle shall be allowed to proceed in any street in the Village by inertia or momentum with the feet of the rider removed from the bicycle pedals. No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or practice any trick or fancy riding in any street in the Village nor shall any bicycle rider carry or ride any other person so that two persons are on the bicycle at one time, unless a seat is provided for a second person. 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-2) 
State Law reference— Rules for riding bicycles, Wis. Stats. §§ 346.79, 346.80.  
Sec. 35-277. - Lighting and other equipment. 
(a)  Lighting equipment. No person shall operate a bicycle upon a highway unless equipped as required in Wis. Stats. § 347.489. 
(b)  Braking equipment. No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway unless it is equipped with a brake in good condition adequate to control the movement of and to stop the bicycle whenever necessary and with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, but a bicycle may not be equipped with nor may a person use upon a bicycle any siren or compression whistle. 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-3) 
State Law reference— Equipment on bicycles, Wis. Stats. § 347.489.  
Sec. 35-278. - Parking a bicycle. 
No person shall leave a bicycle at such a place or in such a way as to create a hazard to pedestrians, automobile operators or to anyone else. Bicycles shall be parked either upon the roadway against the curb, in bicycle racks or, if on the sidewalk, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic, and not in such a manner as to obstruct the ingress and egress to buildings used by the public. If there is no bicycle rack or other facility intended to be used for the parking of bicycles in the vicinity, the operator may park a bicycle on the sidewalk in an upright position parallel to and within 24 inches of the curb. 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-4)  
Sec. 35-279. - Rules of the road. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. Chs. 346 and 347, and applicable Village ordinances shall govern the operation of bicycles where appropriate. 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-5)  
Sec. 35-280. - Bicycle regulations. 
(a)  Area of operation. Unless preparing to make a left turn, every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway carrying two way traffic shall ride as near as practicable to the right edge of the unobstructed traveled roadway, including operators who are riding two abreast where permitted under Subsection (b) of this Section. On one way roadways, the operator of the bicycle shall ride as near as practicable to the right edge or left edge of the unobstructed traveled roadway, including operators who are riding two abreast where permitted under Subsection (b) of this Section. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction, allowing a minimum of three feet between the bicycle and the vehicle. 
(b)  Single-file operation. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall ride single file on all roadways which have centerlines or lane lines indicated by painting or other markings. On roadways not divided by painted or other marked centerlines or lane lines, bicycle operators may ride two abreast. 
(c)  Rules for turning. 
(1)  The operator of a bicycle intending to turn to the right at an intersection shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the right-hand edge or curb of the street and, in turning, shall keep as closely as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb of the highway. 
(2)  The operator of a bicycle intending to turn to the left of an intersection or into a private driveway shall make such turn from the traffic lane immediately to the right or next to the center of the street and pass immediately to the left of the center of the intersection, passing as closely as practicable to the left of the center of the intersection immediately to the right of the center of the intersection of the street. 
(3)  At any intersection where traffic is controlled by a traffic control signal or by a traffic officer, it shall be unlawful for any such operator of such bicycle upon any street to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or signal placed in accordance with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the Village. 
(4)  Crosswalks shall be used when walking a bicycle through an intersection. 
(d)  Trick riding. No person shall operate a bicycle upon the streets of the Village without having manual control of the handlebars or operate a bicycle in any other manner which necessitates the element of unusual extraordinary skill and involves unnecessary risk. 
(e)  Tandem riding. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street, sidewalk or other public way in said Village with another person upon said bicycle unless such bicycle is so constructed as to be a tandem bicycle. 
(f)  Emerging from alley or driveway. The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
(g)  Bicycles not to be pulled by moving vehicles. No person riding upon a bicycle shall cling or attach themselves or their bicycle to any other moving vehicle upon a street or highway, nor shall be operator of any such bicycle tow or draw any coaster wagon, sled, person on roller skates, toy vehicles or any other similar vehicle on such highway. 
(h)  Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under existing conditions or in excess of any posted speed limit. 
(i)  Operation on sidewalks. No person shall ride any bicycle upon any sidewalk area, except at a permanently or temporarily established driveway, or upon any footbridge, unless such bicycle has wheels sized 20 inches or under. This exception shall not apply to 20 inch or under bicycles designed or modified to BMX specifications. 
(j)  Bicycle paths. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-6) 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, Wis. Stats. § 346.01 et seq.  
Sec. 35-281. - Bicycle operation while hearing obstructed. 
No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway while such operator is using any audio device attached directly to the ears of such operator that materially impairs the ability of such operator to hear traffic signals or warnings. 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-7)  
Sec. 35-282. - Skateboards and play vehicles. 
(a)  Play vehicles not to be used on highways. No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, roller blades, roller skis, sled, toboggan, skateboard or toy vehicle shall attach the same or themselves to any vehicle upon a roadway or go upon a roadway except while crossing a roadway at a crosswalk. 
(b)  Skateboard and roller skates prohibited. No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, or roller skis in any of the following places: 
(1)  On any sidewalk or street in any business district. The business district for the purposes of this Section is defined as any area containing primarily commercially zoned uses, which generate heavy pedestrian traffic during the business hours. 
(2)  On any public school grounds, unless within a time and/or area specifically designated for such use. 
(3)  In any public park unless within an area specifically designated for such use. 
(4)  On any public or private property where a sign indicates such operation is prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-8; Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 11-12-2001) 
State Law reference— Play vehicles not to be on roadway, Wis. Stats. § 346.78.  
Sec. 35-283. - Registration of bicycles. 
(a)  Required. No Village resident shall operate a bicycle upon any street within the Village unless such bicycle shall have been properly registered as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Registration forms. Every Village resident owning or operating any bicycle within the Village shall, within ten days of the acquisition of such bicycle, file with the Village Police Department, or the agent designated by the Village Board, a complete description of such bicycle upon a form to be provided for this purpose. Such filing shall constitute a registration of such bicycle for the purposes of this Chapter. Such registration shall be serially numbered and be kept on file by the Village Police Department in its office as a public record. 
(c)  Identification tag. Immediately upon registration of a bicycle by the Police Department, the Police Department shall issue to the owner of such bicycle an identification tag serially numbered to correspond with the registration of such bicycle. Such tag shall be affixed to the side of such bicycle's downpost so that it is visible from the side and shall be kept reasonably clean at all times. It shall thereafter remain affixed to such bicycle unless the owner transfers such bicycle to another person. The fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for the registration of a bicycle shall be charged. No person shall willfully remove, deface or destroy any such identification tag. 
(d)  Term of registration. The registration of a bicycle shall continue for an indefinite term unless the owner of the bicycle transfers the bicycle's ownership to another person. Upon transfer, the provisions of Subsection (b) of this Section shall apply to the transferee. 
(e)  Bicycles to be in safe mechanical condition. The owner of each registered bicycle shall maintain such bicycle in a reasonably safe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-9; Ord. No. 99-02, § 9, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 4, 2-23-2006)  
Sec. 35-284. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person 16 years of age or older who shall violate any provision of this Chapter may be issued a uniform municipal ordinance citation and be subject to the penalties provided by the uniform state traffic deposit schedule. 
(b)  Any person 12 years of age through 15 years of age who shall violate any provisions of this Chapter may be issued a citation and may be required to forfeit not more than $25.00, together with costs, penalties, fees and assessments as authorized by law. 
(c)  Any parent or guardian of any child who authorizes or knowingly permits such child to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter may be subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.77 and 346.82(1). 
(Code 1998, § 10-2-10; Ord. No. 2004-21, §§ 1, 2, 10-11-2004)  
Secs. 35-285—35-301. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SNOWMOBILES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Snowmobiles, Wis. Stats. § 350.01 et seq.; rules of the road, Wis. Stats. § 346.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 35-302. - State snowmobile laws adopted. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, the statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein. Acts required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this Chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to be made part of this Code. 
Wis. Stats. § 350.01 	Definitions 
Wis. Stats. § 350.02 	Operation of snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of highways 
Wis. Stats. § 350.03 	Right-of-way 
Wis. Stats. § 350.035 	Meeting of snowmobiles 
Wis. Stats. § 350.04 	Snowmobile races, derbies and routes 
Wis. Stats. § 350.045 	Public utility exemption 
Wis. Stats. § 350.05 	Operation by youthful operators restricted 
Wis. Stats. § 350.055 	Safety certification program established 
Wis. Stats. § 350.07 	Driving animals 
Wis. Stats. § 350.08 	Owner permitting operation 
Wis. Stats. § 350.09 	Head lamps, tail lamps and brakes, etc. 
Wis. Stats. § 350.095 	Noise level requirements. 
Wis. Stats. § 350.10 	Miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile operation 
Wis. Stats. § 350.101 	Intoxicated snowmobiling 
Wis. Stats. § 350.102 	Preliminary breath screening test 
Wis. Stats. § 350.1025 	Application of intoxicated snowmobiling law 
Wis. Stats. § 350.103 	Implied consent 
Wis. Stats. § 350.104 	Chemical tests 
Wis. Stats. § 350.106 	Report arrest to department 
Wis. Stats. § 350.11 	Penalties 
Wis. Stats. § 350.115 	Snowmobile registration restitution surcharge 
Wis. Stats. § 350.12 	Registration of snowmobiles, trail use stickers 
Wis. Stats. § 350.125 	Completion of application for registration by snowmobile dealers 
Wis. Stats. § 350.13 	Uniform trail signs and standards 
Wis. Stats. § 350.135 	Interference with Uniform trail signs and standards prohibited 
Wis. Stats. § 350.137 	Uniform snowmobile rail crossing standards 
Wis. Stats. § 350.138 	Snowmobile rail crossings requiring permits 
Wis. Stats. § 350.139 	Established snowmobile rail crossing 
Wis. Stats. § 350.15 	Accidents and accident reports 
Wis. Stats. § 350.17 	Enforcement 
Wis. Stats. § 350.18 	Local ordinances 
Wis. Stats. § 350.99 	Parties to a violation 
 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-1) 
State Law reference— Snowmobiles, Wis. Stats. § 350.01 et seq.  
Sec. 35-303. - Applicability of traffic regulations to snowmobiles. 
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any street, highway or alley within the Village in violation of the traffic regulation provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and 346.94(1), (6), (6m) and (9). 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Wis. Stats. § 346.02(10).  
Sec. 35-304. - Speed; hours of operation; equipment. 
(a)  Speed. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the Village or on any trail designated in Section 35-307 at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour. 
(b)  Hours of operation restricted. Except on a designated trail, no person shall operate a snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle anywhere within the Village between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except for returning home via the most direct route. 
(c)  Restriction on equipment. No snowmobile or other vehicle operating on the snowmobile route shall be allowed if it has an expansion chamber or any muffler other than the type and size provided by the manufacturer. Each snowmobile must display a lighted headlight and taillight at all times and said lights must conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 350.09. 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-3)  
Sec. 35-305. - Unattended vehicles. 
No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile owned or operated by such person to remain unattended on any public highway or public property while the motor is running or with the starting key left in the ignition. 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-4)  
Sec. 35-306. - Operation on sidewalks prohibited. 
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any sidewalk, pedestrian way or upon the area between the sidewalk and the curbline of any street in the Village, except as specifically authorized by Section 35-307 or for the purpose of crossing to obtain immediate access to an authorized area of operation. 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-5)  
Sec. 35-307. - Snowmobile and other off-highway vehicle operation restricted. 
(a)  Operation on private property. Except as permitted by this Code, it shall be unlawful to operate any snowmobile or any other motor-driven craft or vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use on the Village streets, alleys, parks, parking lots or on any public lands or private lands or parking lots held open to the public. The operator shall at all times have the express consent of the owner before operation of such craft or vehicle on private property not owned or controlled by the operator. 
(b)  Permitting operation by improper persons prohibited. No owner or person having charge or control of a snowmobile shall authorize or permit any person to operate such snowmobile who is not permitted under state law to operate such snowmobile or who is under the influence of an intoxicant or a dangerous narcotic drug. 
(c)  Operation in parks. No person shall drive a snowmobile in any park within the Village except upon designated snowmobile trails as shall be designated by the Village Board. 
(d)  Written consent of owner required. The consent required in Subsection (a) of this Section shall be written consent dated and limited to the year in which the consent is given. If the property is owned or leased by more than one person, the consent of each must be obtained. 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-6)  
Sec. 35-308. - Restrictions on operators. 
(a)  No person under the age of 12 years may operate a snowmobile. No person over the age of 12 years but under the age of 16 years may operate a snowmobile unless such person holds a valid snowmobile safety certificate or is accompanied by a person over 18 years of age or by a person over 14 years of age having a snowmobile safety certificate issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)  No person shall operate any snowmobile upon any street, alley or other public right-of-way in the Village unless such person shall have a valid motor vehicle operator's license or unless such operator is accompanied by a person who has a valid motor vehicle operator's license and who is occupying a seat on the vehicle. 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-7)  
Sec. 35-309. - Snowmobile routes and trails designated. 
(a)  Routes generally designated. Except as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 350.02 and 350.045, or for snowmobile events authorized in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 350.04, no person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public right-of-way, in any public park or on any other public or private property in the Village except upon snowmobile routes and trails designated by the Village Board. The designated routes to be used within the Village limits shall be adopted by resolution by the Village Board, a copy of which shall be on file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(b)  Trail markers. The Director of Public Works and Chief of Police shall approve the placement of appropriate snowmobile route, trail and limit signs and markers as approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Stats. § 350.13. The Chief of Police shall have the power to declare the stated snowmobile routes and trails either open or closed. 
(c)  Markers to be obeyed. No person shall fail to obey any route or trail sign, marker or limit erected in accordance with this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-9; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 131, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 35-310. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, may be imprisoned in the county jail for not exceeding ten days, provided no person shall forfeit an amount in excess of the maximum fine or forfeiture allowed in the Wisconsin Statutes for the same offense and further provided that the penalty and forfeiture for parking violations on highways shall be the amount applicable to such violations by owners or operators of motor vehicles under this Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-10)  
Sec. 35-311. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Uniform citation for highway violations. The uniform traffic citation promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11, shall be used for violations of this Chapter relating to highway use except as herein provided. 
(b)  Parking violations. The special traffic citation described and defined in this Chapter shall be used for enforcement of violations of rules of the road relating to parking of vehicles adopted by reference in Section 35-302. 
(c)  Other violations. All violations of this Chapter not described in Subsections (a) or (b) of this Section shall be enforced in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0114 and 66.0111. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0114(1)(b), in substantially the form provided in the uniform traffic citation within five days of the date of the citation for such violation. Bail deposits may also be made under Wis. Stats. § 66.0114. 
(d)  Police Department to receive stipulations and penalties. Stipulations, forfeited penalties and deposits for obtaining release from arrest authorized under this Chapter may be accepted at the Police Department offices by the Chief of Police or officer designated by the Chief of Police. The officer authorized to accept penalties and deposits shall be bonded and such bond shall be filed with the Municipal Court Clerk. 
(e)  Forfeited penalties and deposits. Except as otherwise provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.26, and the deposit schedule adopted by the State Judicial Conference thereunder, required penalties and deposits or bail not including costs or fees for violation of this Chapter shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 10-3-11; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 34, 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 35-312—35-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND OFF-ROAD MOTOR VEHICLES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— All terrain vehicles, Wis. Stats. § 23.33. 
 
Sec. 35-341. - State all-terrain vehicle laws adopted. 
The provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to all-terrain vehicles in the following-enumerated Subsections of Wis. Stats. § 23.33, and any future amendments or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Section as if fully set forth herein. Any acts required to be performed by the following statutory Subsections or which are prohibited by such statutory Subsections are required to be performed by this Section or are prohibited by this Section: 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33(2) 	Registration 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33(3) 	Rules of operation, including Subsections (a) through (i) 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33(4) 	Operation on or near highway, including Subsections (a) through (e) 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33(4c) 	Exceptions 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33(4x) 	Officer's action after arrest for operating all-terrain vehicle under influence of intoxicant 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33(5)(a)(c) 	Age restrictions 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33(6) 	Equipment requirements, including Subsections (a) through (e) 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33(7) 	Accidents, including Subsections (a) and (b) 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33(1) 	Definitions, including Subsections (a) through (n) 
 
(Code 1998, § 10-4-1)  
Sec. 35-342. - Speed limits. 
No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within the Village, except on an all-terrain vehicle route established by resolution of the Village Board. No person shall operate any all-terrain vehicle within the Village at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. No person may operate an all-terrain vehicle on the designated access route within the Village at a speed in excess of five miles per hour. 
(Code 1998, § 10-4-2)  
Sec. 35-343. - Penalties. 
Violation of this Chapter shall be punishable by a forfeiture and enforced pursuant to Sections 35-310 and 35-311. 
(Code 1998, § 10-4-3)  
Sec. 35-344. - Unauthorized operation of motor vehicles on public or private property. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Motor vehicle. Any vehicle that is self-propelled and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, jeeps, vans, motorcycles, motorbikes, go-carts, motorized three-wheeled vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, mopeds, snowmobiles, dune buggies and tractors. The term shall not mean any airplane, railroad train, boat, wheelchair or bicycle. A vehicle that would otherwise be defined as a motor vehicle under this Section shall not be so defined while: 
a.  It is being operated solely for the purpose of construction or maintenance of an improvement to land or solely for access to construction or maintenance sites, provided such operation is by persons having legitimate business on such lands or sites; 
b.  It is being operated by or at the direction of public employees or utility company employees as part of their employment duties; 
c.  It is being operated by the holder of an easement or right of access on or over the land on which operation is occurring or the holder's employees or agents. 
(2)  Off-road. Any location that: 
a.  Is not a paved or maintained public street or alley; 
b.  Is not used or maintained by the owner or lessee of land as a driveway, parking lot or other way for motor vehicles; or 
c.  Is a private trail for use only by the owner or the owner's permittees for recreational or other vehicular use. The term shall not include any creekbed, riverbed or lake provided, however, that this Subsection shall not apply to snowmobiles or other vehicles being operated on the ice covering such creekbed, riverbed or lake. 
(3)  Operation. The physical manipulation or activation of any of the controls of a motor vehicle necessary to put it in motion. 
(4)  Unauthorized. Without the express prior consent of the owner, lessee, manager or other person authorized to give consent by the owner or lessee of land. Authorization shall not be implied from a failure to post private or public land. 
(b)  Findings. The findings of the Village Board are as follows: 
(1)  The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in serious damage to public and private lands including damage or destruction of vegetation, animal life and improvement to the lands; 
(2)  The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in the permanent scarring of land and an increase in both erosion and air pollution; 
(3)  The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in collisions and near collisions threatening the life and safety of the operators of such vehicles as well as of other persons; and 
(4)  The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in a loss of the privacy, quietude and serenity to which the owners and users of land are rightfully entitled. 
(c)  Unauthorized off-road operation prohibited. 
(1)  The unauthorized off-road operation of a motor vehicle is prohibited. 
(2)  Except for authorized maintenance vehicles and snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles operating in authorized areas pursuant to Sections 35-309 and 35-342, it shall be unlawful to operate any minibike, go-cart, all-terrain vehicle or any other motor-driven craft or vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use on the Village streets, alleys, parks, sidewalks, bikeways, parking lots or on any public lands or private lands or parking lots held open to the public. The operator shall at all times have the consent of the owner in writing before operation of such licensed or unlicensed craft or vehicle on private lands. 
(d)  Prohibited use of snowmobile trails. Except as provided in Subsection (b)(4) of this Section, no person shall operate any motor vehicle other than a snowmobile on a snowmobile trail. 
(Code 1998, § 10-4-4)  
Secs. 35-345—35-361. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 35-362. - Abandoned vehicles; procedures. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Street. Any public highway or alley and the entire width between the boundary lines of any public way where any part thereof is open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Unattended. Unmoved from its location with no obvious sign of continuous human use. 
(3)  Vehicle. A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home, whether or not such vehicle is registered under Wisconsin law. 
(b)  Abandonment of vehicles prohibited. No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public street or highway or private or public property in the Village for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. Whenever any such vehicle has been left unattended on any street or highway in the Village or upon private or public property without the permission of the property owner or other person charged with the lawful jurisdiction thereof for more than 72 hours, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance. A motor vehicle shall not be considered an abandoned motor vehicle when it is out of ordinary public view or when designated as not abandoned by the Chief of Police or the Building Inspector or their designees. 
(c)  Presumptions. For purposes of this Section, the following irrebuttable presumptions shall apply: Any vehicle left unattended for more than 72 hours on any public street or public ground or left unattended for more than 72 hours on private property without the consent of the property owner is deemed abandoned and constitutes a nuisance; provided, that the vehicle shall not be deemed abandoned under this Subsection if left unattended on private property and is enclosed within a building, or if designated as not abandoned by the Chief of Police. 
(d)  Enforcement procedures. Any vehicle that qualifies as abandoned under Subsection (b) of this Section shall first be placarded with a notice indicating the abandonment of the vehicle. Thereafter, the Chief of Police or designee shall send a notice of abandonment by mail to the owner and lienholders of record as reflected by the registration records of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. If the vehicle remains in approximately the same location for at least 72 hours after placarding and 48 hours after the mailing of notice of abandonment, the Police Department may issue a vehicle abandonment citation and tow the vehicle. 
(e)  Exception for emergencies. The procedure in Subsection (d) of this Section shall not apply if the vehicle in question is blocking a driveway, in a posted tow away zone, blocking traffic or is impeding snow plowing operations during a snow emergency. In such situations, the vehicle may be issued a citation and towed immediately, and the vehicle shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's application without being cited under this Section. 
(f)  Exception for deserted vehicles. The procedure in Subsection (d) of this Section shall not apply if the vehicle in question both: 
(1)  Is in disrepair (including, but not limited to, incapable of present locomotion, lack of engine, on blocks, without tires); and 
(2)  Lacks valid registration plates. 
Then the vehicle may be issued a citation and towed without the pre-seizure notice required in Subsection (d) of this Section, and the post-seizure procedures set forth in this Section shall apply. 
(g)  Deposit; release of vehicle. All vehicle abandonment citations shall be retained by the Police Department for personal service on the owner or lienholder of record when such person appears at the Police Department. At the time of personal service, the individual requests a court date, the individual shall deposit such individual's valid Wisconsin operator's license or money in the citation amount with the Police Department, and the procedures in Wis. Stats. §§ 345.34 to 345.47 shall apply. In either case, the vehicle shall be released to the individual. 
(h)  Disposal of abandoned vehicle. 
(1)  If no one appears to reclaim the towed vehicle within ten days after the vehicle is towed, the vehicle shall be appraised. If the vehicle's value is appraised at or at less than $100.00 or if the vehicle is in excess of 19 model years of age, or it is deemed by the Police Department that the cost of towing and storage charges would exceed the value of the vehicle, the Police Department shall send a registered mail notice to the owner and lienholder informing them that if the vehicle is not reclaimed within ten days of the date of receipt of the notice, the vehicle will be junked or sold. If the vehicle's value is appraised at more than $100.00, the Police Department shall send registered mail notice to the owner and lienholder, informing them that, upon their failure to reclaim the vehicle within ten days, such failure is construed as a waiver of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle. Such sale shall be by sealed bid and shall conform substantially to the procedure set forth in Wis. Stats. § 342.40(3)(c). In either case, if an individual does appear to reclaim the vehicle, the deposit and release procedure set forth in Subsection (g) of this Section shall apply. 
(2)  The notice sent under Subsection (h)(1) of this Section shall notify the owner of record of the right to reclaim personal property contained in the towed vehicle without payment of any kind upon proof of identification and ownership. 
(3)  If a person reclaiming the vehicle does not pay the forfeiture at that time and fails to appear in court at the time specified in the citation, the procedure set forth in Wis. Stats. § 345.28(4), and Section 35-248 shall apply. 
(i)  Violations. Any person violating this Section shall forfeit not less than $20.00 nor more than $100.00 for each violation. The forfeiture for violation of this Section shall be in addition to any other nonmoving traffic violations assessed to the vehicle. The Village shall not separately charge the owner for any costs attributable to towing or storing the vehicle. 
(j)  Collector vehicle exception. The procedure in Subsection (d) of this Section shall not apply to vehicles owned by individuals holding licenses from the Wisconsin Department of Transportation as a collector pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 341.266, or as a hobbyist pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 341.268, provided the licensed collector or hobbyist stores the vehicle on such licensed collector or hobbyist's property and the vehicle and outdoor storage area are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
(Code 1998, § 10-5-1) 
State Law reference— Abandoning vehicles prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 342.40.  
Sec. 35-363. - Junked vehicles and appliances on private property. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Disassembled, inoperable, junked or wrecked motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, trailers. Motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, farm machinery or trailers in such state of physical or mechanical ruin as to be incapable of propulsion, being operated upon the public streets or highways or which is otherwise not in safe or legal condition for operation on public streets or highways due to missing or inoperative parts, flat or removed tires, expired or missing license plates or other defects. 
(2)  Inoperable appliance. Any stove, washer, refrigerator or other appliance that is no longer operable in the sense for which it was manufactured. 
(3)  Motor vehicle. As defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(35). 
(4)  Unlicensed motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers. Motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, recreational vehicles or trailers which do not bear lawful current license plates. 
(b)  Storage restricted. No disassembled, inoperable, unlicensed, junked or wrecked motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, trailers, farm machinery or appliances shall be stored upon private residential property or unenclosed within a building upon nonresidential property within the Village for a period exceeding ten days unless it is in connection with an authorized business enterprise located in a properly zoned area maintained in such a manner as to not constitute a public nuisance. 
(c)  Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored within an enclosed building or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner in a properly zoned area when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, in a storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner, or seasonal use vehicles such as snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters and nonmotorized campers, provided such vehicles are stored in compliance with the ordinances of the Village. Also excepted are motor vehicles registered pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 341.265 and 341.266. In other situations the Village Board may issue temporary permits permitting an extension of not to exceed an additional 30 days' time to comply with this Section where exceptional facts and circumstances warrant such extension. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Whenever the Police Department shall find any vehicles or appliances, as described herein, placed or stored in the open upon private property within the Village, they shall notify the owner of said property on which said vehicle or appliance is stored of the violation of this Section. If said vehicles or appliance is not removed within five days, the Police Department shall cause to be issued a citation to the property owner or tenant of the property upon which said vehicle or appliance is stored. The property owner shall be informed, if possible, on the legal procedures applicable under Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(2)  If such vehicle or appliance is not removed within 20 days after issuance of a citation, the Chief of Police shall cause the vehicle or appliance to be removed and impounded, and it shall thereafter be disposed of as prescribed in Section 35-362 by the Chief of Police or duly authorized representative. Any cost incurred in the removal and sale of said vehicle or appliance shall be recovered from the owner. However, if the owner of the vehicle or appliance cannot readily be found, the cost of such removal shall be charged to the property from which it is removed, which charges shall be entered as a special charge on the tax roll. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who shall interfere with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Section and shall be found guilty thereof shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-16. Each motor vehicle or appliance involved shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 10-5-2; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 35, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Regulation of junkyards, Wis. Stats. § 84.31; storage of junked automobiles, Wis. Stats. § 175.25; abandoning vehicles prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 342.40.  
Secs. 35-364—35-384. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ELECTRIC VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 35-385. - Neighborhood electric vehicles permitted. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.26, the Village Board hereby authorizes the operation of neighborhood electric vehicles meeting the requirements of Section 35-363 on any highway in the Village having a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less. Headlamps must be on at all times during operation on Village streets. This Section is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Wis. Stats. § 349.26 and adopted for the protection of the public health, benefit and welfare of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 2(10-6-1), 4-14-2008)  
Sec. 35-386. - Equipment and specifications. 
(a)  The term "neighborhood electric vehicle" means a self-propelled motor vehicle that has successfully completed Neighborhood Electric Vehicle America test program conducted by the Federal Department of Energy and that conforms to the definition and requirements for low speed vehicles as adopted in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for low-speed vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3 and 571.500. Neighborhood electric vehicle does not include an electric golf cart. 
(b)  Neighborhood electric vehicles shall have four-wheels and have a speed range of at least 20 miles per hour and not more than 35 miles per hour on a paved surface and have a gross vehicle weight at rest of less than 2,500 pounds. 
(c)  Neighborhood electric vehicle shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  Headlamps. 
(2)  Front and rear turn signals. 
(3)  Stop lamps. 
(4)  Three reflex reflectors consisting of one red reflector on each side as far to the rear as practicable and one red reflector on the rear. 
(5)  An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side and either an exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rearview mirror. 
(6)  Parking brakes. 
(7)  A windshield that conforms to the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard on glazing materials under 49 CFR 571.205. 
(8)  A vehicle identification number (VIN) that complies with 49 CFR 565. 
(9)  A type 1 or type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming to 49 CFR 571.209 and Federal Motor Safety Standard No. 209, for each designated seating position. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 2(10-6-2), 4-14-2008)  
Sec. 35-387. - Registration. 
Neighborhood electric vehicles shall be registered and display such registration in conformity with Wis. Stats. Ch. 341. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 2(10-6-3), 4-14-2008)  
Sec. 35-388. - Enforcement. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall be subject to forfeiture as provided in Section 35-247. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 2(10-6-4), 4-14-2008)  
Secs. 35-389—35-419. - Reserved.  
Chapter 36 - EVENTS REQUIRING PERMIT 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Purpose. 
This Chapter is enacted to regulate and control the use of streets and public property to ensure that the health, safety and general welfare of the public and the good order of the Village is protected and maintained. The Village's authority to regulate streets and public property is contained in the Wisconsin Statutes, including, but not limited to, Wis. Stats. § 349.185. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter: 
(a)  Processions, runs, walks, marathons, bicycle races, block parties, and similar activities have their usual and customary usage. 
(b)  "Community organization" means an active group or organization that regularly meets within the Village of McFarland, that is tax exempt pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that provides charitable services, sponsorships or donations within the Village of McFarland community. 
(c)  "Event" means a street use event, neighborhood event, parade or special event occurring on or in any portion of a Village-owned street, roadway or cul-de-sac, or off-street property owned by the Village of McFarland. 
(d)  "Event permit" means a permit granted by the Village of McFarland authorizing an event. 
(e)  "School District" means the School District of McFarland and/or that of the McFarland Recreation, Activities, and Play ("MRAP"). 
(f)  "Street use event" means a planned event or situation in which any portion of a Village-owned street, roadway or cul-de-sac will be utilized, for events including, but not limited to: estate sales or auctions, run/walk events, car shows, community event, or public demonstration. 
(g)  "Neighborhood event" means a planned gathering in which any portion of a Village-owned street, roadway or cul-de-sac will be utilized. Examples: a neighborhood block party, graduation party, family reunions, and farmers market. 
(h)  "Parade" means any parade or procession taking place in which any portion of a Village-owned street, roadway or cul-de-sac will be utilized, but not including any funeral procession. Authorities and organizers of funeral processions are requested to coordinate preparations with the Chief of Police or his/her designee. 
(i)  "Special event" means any other planned event on off-street property owned by the Village of McFarland in which 200 or more attendees are anticipated at one time, or that is likely to have significant impact on neighborhood parking or the free-flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, including, but not limited to: 
• Festivals or celebrations; 
• Estate sales, auctions or other sales activities; 
• Political gatherings or events; 
• Events involving the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; 
• Concerts; 
• Events involving the use of amplified music, sound or public address; 
• Events in which tents or other temporary structures will be erected and require stakes to be driven into the ground; 
• Runs, walks, marathons not on roadways. 
(j)  "Highways" and "streets" have the meanings set forth in Wis. Stats. § 340.01, and also include alleys (as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01) and areas owned by the Village of McFarland which are used primarily for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(k)  "Person" means any natural individual, group, entity, organization, partnership, association, corporation, or limited liability company. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-3. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person may hold an event on any part of a highway, roadway, street or cul-de-sac in the Village of McFarland, or on any property owned by the Village of McFarland without first obtaining an event permit from the Village. No person may hold or conduct an event in violation of any requirements or restrictions set forth in an applicable event permit. 
(b)  Property and events exempt from permit requirement. Notwithstanding subsection (a), the following events do not require a permit under this section: 
(1)  The event is to take place on property which is under the control or jurisdiction of the federal government, the State of Wisconsin, Dane County, or the School District. 
(2)  The event is a sporting event that is to take place on property equipped with facilities designed for the purpose of accommodating such events, including baseball diamonds, soccer fields, and football fields, whether or not bleachers or other seating is provided. 
(3)  Funeral processions. 
(4)  Events both not open to the public and not utilizing any public street, roadway or cul-de-sac. 
(5)  Events sponsored by the Village of McFarland subject to approval by the Village Board as may be appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-4. - Application. 
A person seeking to hold an event shall file an application with the Village Clerk on the form provided by the Village Clerk. The completed application shall be filed at least 45 days before the proposed event, along with the application fee. The application shall contain, but is not limited to, the following information: 
(a)  The name, address, email address and telephone number of the applicant or applicants. 
(b)  If the event is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization or company, the name, address, email address and telephone number of the organization's or company's headquarters and of individual(s) authorized to act on behalf of the organization or company. 
(c)  The name, address, email address and telephone number of the person or persons who will be responsible for operating the event. 
(d)  The proposed use, described in detail, for which the event permit is requested. Applicants shall select all event types that are applicable to their event. 
(e)  The date(s) and duration of time during which the event is to occur, including a detailed schedule of events. 
(f)  A detailed security plan, including how many individuals will be designated to this function, how they will be identified, and how they will communicate with one another. 
(g)  The applicant shall indicate if the event requires complete, partial, or no closure of any streets. 
(h)  A map of the event, including any street(s)/property to be used, the placement of any tents, facilities, equipment, fencing, alcohol sale and carding areas (if applicable). The Public Works Director shall have final decision on placement of tents or any place the applicant wishes to break ground. 
(i)  The approximate number of persons who will attend the event. 
(j)  A detailed plan for mitigating severe weather (if applicable). 
(k)  A detailed fire evacuation plan (if applicable). 
(l)  If the event involves the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, a detailed plan for identifying and refusing service to those under the legal drinking age shall be included. NOTE: Requires the application for and issuance of a temporary Class "B" alcohol license, in addition to the event permit. 
(m)  A detailed plan describing what cleanup activities will take place at the conclusion of the event. 
(n)  Events that are anticipated to allow for the presence of minors where alcohol is served requires Village Board approval. It shall be the event organizer's responsibility to request this approval on the application form. 
(o)  Events that anticipate the use of amplified sound, or to in some manner generate excessive noise, beyond 10:00 p.m. requires Village Board approval. It shall be the event organizer's responsibility to request this approval on the application form. 
(p)  Any other information that the Village deems necessary or appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-5. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Parade restrictions. 
(1)  Drivers to stay near right-hand edge of roadway. Each driver in any procession, shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical, except upon one-way streets or when otherwise directed or approved by a police officer, and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(2)  No person who leads or participates in a parade shall disobey, or encourage others to disobey, the direction of any police officer, the terms of this Chapter, or the terms of the applicable event permit. 
(3)  Sponsors or organizers shall obtain any county or state permits that may be required for use of any roadway under the jurisdiction of the county or state. 
(4)  Only Community Organizations may be issued an event permit for a parade, and no event permit shall be issued for a parade that is primarily for private economic or commercial purposes. 
(b)  Petition required for street use events. An application for an event permit for a street use event shall be accompanied by a petition designating the proposed area of the street to be used and time for said proposed use, said petition to be signed by not less than 75 percent of the residents over 18 years of age residing along that portion of the street designated for the proposed use. Said petition shall be in a form provided in the application packet. Events involving a marathon, bicycle race, run/walk race, triathlon, or other athletic event do not require a petition. 
(c)  Petition required for neighborhood events. Applicants shall apply for a neighborhood event on a form provided by the Village Clerk/Treasurer, no less than two weeks prior to the event. The application shall be accompanied by a petition designating the proposed area of the street to be used and time for said proposed use, said petition shall be signed by not less than 75 percent of the residents over 18 years of age residing along that portion of the street designated for the proposed use. 
The Director of Public Works or designee is given authorization to approve or deny street use permits for block parties in coordination with recommendations from the Police Department and Fire/EMS Department. If approved, the Clerk/Treasurer shall issue a permit. If denied, the applicant may appeal to the Village Board by filing a notice of appeal with the Village Clerk/Treasurer within ten days of notification of denial. The applicant must state the basis of appeal. The Village Board may be majority vote to reverse or modify the decision. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-6. - Events occurring in public parks. 
(a)  Events occurring in public parks are subject to all regulations and requirements as set forth in Chapter 44 (Parks and Recreation) of Village Ordinance. 
(b)  Events occurring in public parks which qualify under this Chapter that include the operation or use of any amplifying system, public address systems or equipment shall generally be approved or denied by the Public Safety Committee, pursuant to Section 44-20(b) of Village Ordinance. The Public Safety Committee reserves the right to require the approval of the Parks and Recreation Committee. 
(c)  Events occurring in public parks which qualify under this Chapter that include the disturbance of soil by utilization of tent poles, tent stakes or any other activity likely to penetrate the grass and or soil bed shall require Village approval. It is the sole responsibility of the organizer to contact digger's hotline and schedule a site inspection to occur no less than five business days prior to the date any such disturbance is to occur, and to provide the Director of Public Works with a written report of the assessment no less than two business days prior to the date any such disturbance is to occur. Should such report indicate the presence of any obstructions or other hazards, any prior approval specific to soil disturbance is revoked and is no longer permitted. If time permits, the organizer may, at the discretion and with the assistance of the Public Works Director, attempt to identify an alternate placement on the event site. In such circumstances, the organizer may conduct all other approved activities not related to soil disturbance. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-7. - Application review. 
If the Village Clerk-Treasurer determines that the event permit application is timely and complete, including payment of the application fee, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately forward copies of the same to the Director of Public Works, the Chief of Police, and the Fire/EMS Chief who shall consider the same and make recommendation thereon. Village staff may require the applicant to provide additional information in support of the application if deemed necessary for review purposes. Incomplete or untimely applications will not be forwarded for review or approval. 
The Director of Public Works or designee is given authorization to approve or deny permits for block parties in coordination with recommendations from the Police Department and Fire/EMS Department. If approved, the Clerk/Treasurer shall issue a permit. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-8. - Review by the Public Safety Committee. 
(a)  Complete event permit applications shall be forwarded with staff recommendations to the Public Safety Committee for review and recommendation to the Village Board, except that annual recurring events that propose no substantial changes from the previous year(s) shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police, who may make a recommendation of approval or denial directly to the Village Board. The Village Board will ultimately approve or deny all applications for event permits, and the Village Board may impose any conditions or restrictions it deems appropriate as part of any event permit. The Village Board may waive the requirement for an event permit within its sole discretion. 
(b)  The Village reserves the authority, under its sole discretion, to refer any event permit application to any pertinent committee for review. 
(c)  If the Public Safety Committee recommends denial of an event permit application, the application will not be forwarded to the Village Board for review unless the applicant submits a written request to the Village Clerk-Treasurer within ten days of the Public Safety Committee's decision, and the applicant's failure to make this request will result in the application being denied. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-9. - Issuance of permit. 
If the Village Board approves the issuance of the event permit, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the event permit, subject to any restrictions and conditions imposed by the Village Board. Prior to issuance of the event permit, the applicant shall provide adequate proof of insurance to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall deposit of any funds required by the Village Board as a condition of approval. Upon issuance of the event permit, the applicant shall comply with all requirements and conditions as set forth in the event permit, along with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, and Village ordinances. The applicant shall also meet the requirements of Section 11-1. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-10. - Denial of an event permit. 
(a)  The Public Safety Committee may recommend denying the issuance of an event permit, or the Village Board may deny the issuance of an event permit if, in their discretion, it is determined that one or more of the factors identified below warrant denial of the application. Further, the Public Safety Committee may recommend, and the Village Board may impose, conditions on the approval of an event permit application. 
(b)  Reasons for denial of an event permit. An application for an event permit may be denied for any of the following reasons. This list is demonstrative only, and the Village Board may deny the issuance of an event permit for any reason related to public safety, health, and welfare, ordinance, the prevention of any nuisance or other hazard, and the preservation of Village property, services and resources. 
(1)  The proposed use would violate any federal or state law or regulation, or any Village ordinance. 
(2)  The proposed use will substantially hinder the movement of police, fire or emergency vehicles, constituting a risk to persons or property. 
(3)  The application does not contain information requested or required by Village staff, the Public Safety Committee, or the Village Board. 
(4)  The application requests a period for the use of the street for an excessive amount of time. 
(5)  The proposed use on a street could equally be held in a public park or other location. 
(6)  The granting of the event permit would conflict with another event permit already granted or for which application is already pending. 
(7)  If reasonably anticipated utilization of public services, including police and fire protection, by the proposed street use will require so large a number of persons and vehicles, including ambulances, as to prevent adequate service of the needs of the rest of the Village. 
(8)  It appears that the proposed event is so poorly organized that participants therein are likely to engage in aggressive, destructive, or otherwise unlawful activity. 
(9)  If any part of the area described in the said event permit application includes a through intersection such that the highways cross each other. 
(10)  If the event is to be held between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or, in the case of a parade, sufficient parade marshals are not provided as to reasonably assure the orderly conduct of the parade. 
(11)  The event organizer(s) refuses to cooperate with, meet with or communicate with Village Officials regarding event planning and related requirements, and/or fails to or has demonstrated a past history of failing to comply with conditions set forth for this or past event permits. 
(12)  Requiring the pre-payment of any amounts to cover increased costs to the Village for services anticipated for the Event. 
(13)  How vehicular traffic and parking availability may be affected by the event, including the effect, if any, of construction projects or other scheduled events in and around the Village. 
(14)  Whether the event will negatively affect the health, safety or general welfare of the public, including, but not limited to, the movement of police, fire, or emergency vehicles within the Village, the overall impact to the neighborhood, including noise levels, and the effectiveness of hazard mitigation plans as submitted by the organizer(s). 
(15)  Whether sufficient supervision and event security will be provided to reasonably assure orderly conduct by the attendee. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-11. - Termination of event permit and event. 
An event may be immediately terminated, and the event permit revoked, while the event is in progress, if the Chief of Police, Fire/EMS Chief, or Public Works Director or his or her designee determine that the health, safety or general welfare of the public, including participants at the event, is endangered by activities generated as a result of the event, or if the event has violated any conditions placed on the event in the permit, or if the event has violated any Village ordinances, applicable laws or other regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-12. - Emergency revocation. 
The Chief of Police, Fire/EMS Chief, or Public Works Director or his or her designee may revoke an event permit that has already been issued if they determine that revocation is justified by an actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot, other catastrophe or likelihood of a breach of the peace, or by a major change in the conditions forming the basis for the issuance of the event permit. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-13. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-16 of this Code. Additionally, failure to comply with any provisions of this Chapter may result in the withholding of approval on any subsequent permit applications for this or other permits required by the Village. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-14. - Security/Village staffing requirements. 
If the Chief of Police, Fire Chief or Public Works Director determines that members of the Police Department, other Law Enforcement, private Security Officers, Fire Department, Emergency Medical Services or Public Works personnel must be available to staff the event, the applicant shall pay all associated costs incurred by the Village or other provider to staff the event. When utilizing Village of McFarland Employees, the event organizer shall reimburse the Village at each employee's full overtime rate, and the Village shall subsequently reimburse each employee through standard payroll practices. The Village Board may require the applicant to make a deposit to the Village in an amount necessary to cover the cost of Village services and staff for an event. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-15. - Representative at meeting. 
It is recommended the event organizer(s) making application for an event be present when the Public Safety Committee and Village Board considers the application in order for the applicant to provide any additional information that is reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether the event permit should be issued. Failure by the applicant to be present could result in denial of the application in the event additional information or input from the organizer(s) is needed, but is not available due to lack of attendance of the meeting. It is the event organizer's responsibility to make themselves aware of when the Public Safety Committee and Village Board will consider the application. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-16. - Fee. 
The permit fee shall be as established by the Village Board. The Village Board may waive the fee for Community Organizations. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-17. - Insurance. 
(a)  The applicant shall furnish a certificate with the Village demonstrating that applicant has in force and will maintain during the time the event permit is in effect public liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00 per one person, $2,000,000.00 per occurrence for personal injury and $1,000,000.00 for property damage naming the Village as an additional insured. If the certificate references any policy language, endorsement or other requirement as being necessary for the additional insured coverage to take effect, the applicant shall provide all such required documentation. The required coverage for the Village shall be written on a primary, non-contributory basis, and include a waiver of subrogation rights. 
(b)  Additional insurance requirements may apply in the reasonable discretion of the Village. The Village may waive or modify these insurance requirements for purely private events if it determines that the requirements would impose an undue hardship and that the public interest is otherwise adequately protected. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-18. - Indemnification. 
The applicant shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Village of McFarland and its officers, officials, agents, and employees against all loss or expense (including liability costs and reasonable attorney's fees) by reason of any claim or suit, or of liability imposed by law upon the Village or its officers, officials, agents or employees, for damages because of injury, including death at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or persons, or on account of damages to property, including loss of use thereof, arising from, in connection with, caused by or resulting from the event. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 36-19. - Cleanup requirements. 
The applicant shall return the site to the condition that existed before the event occurred within 24 hours of the completion of the event. The Village may require the applicant to provide a deposit in an amount to be determined by the Village to ensure that the site is adequately restored. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1, 3-11-2019)  
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal code, Wis. Stats. § 939.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture. 
The following Wisconsin Statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order of the state are adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace and good order of the Village provided the penalty for commission of such offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under the general penalty provisions of this Code. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to be made part of this Code. 
Wis. Stats. § 167.10 	Fireworks regulated 
Wis. Stats. § 175.25 	Illegal storage of junked vehicles 
Wis. Stats. § 254.76 	Causing fires by tobacco smoking 
Wis. Stats. § 939.05 	Aiding and abetting 
Wis. Stats. § 939.22 	Words and phrases defined 
Wis. Stats. § 940.19(1) 	Battery 
Wis. Stats. § 940.291 	Failure of a police officer to render aid 
Wis. Stats. § 941.01 	Negligent operation of a vehicle off highway 
Wis. Stats. § 941.10 	Negligent handling of burning materials 
Wis. Stats. § 941.12(2), (3) 	Interfering with firefighting 
Wis. Stats. § 941.13 	False alarms 
Wis. Stats. § 941.20(1) 	Endangering safety by use of dangerous weapon 
Wis. Stats. § 941.23 	Carrying concealed weapon 
Wis. Stats. § 941.235 	Carrying a firearm in a public building 
Wis. Stats. § 941.237 	Carrying a handgun where alcohol beverages may be sold and consumed 
Wis. Stats. § 941.24 	Possession of switchblade knife 
Wis. Stats. § 941.35 	Emergency telephone calls 
Wis. Stats. § 941.36 	Fraudulent tapping of electric wires or gas or water meters or pipes 
Wis. Stats. § 941.37(1), (2) 	Obstructing emergency or rescue personnel 
Wis. Stats. § 942.05 	Opening letters 
Wis. Stats. § 943.01(1) 	Damage to property 
Wis. Stats. § 943.014 	Demolition of historic building without authorization 
Wis. Stats. § 943.017 	Graffiti 
Wis. Stats. § 943.11 	Entry into locked vehicle 
Wis. Stats. § 943.125 	Entry into locked coin box 
Wis. Stats. § 943.13 	Trespass to land 
Wis. Stats. § 943.14 	Criminal trespass to dwellings 
Wis. Stats. § 943.145 	Criminal trespass to a medical facility 
Wis. Stats. § 943.15 	Entry into locked construction site or into a locked building, dwelling or room 
Wis. Stats. § 943.20 	Theft 
Wis. Stats. § 943.21 	Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper, recreational attraction, taxicab operator or gas station 
Wis. Stats. § 943.215 	Absconding without paying rent 
Wis. Stats. § 943.22 	Use of cheating tokens 
Wis. Stats. § 943.23 (3m), (4m) 	Operating vehicle without owner's consent 
Wis. Stats. § 943.24(1) 	Issue of worthless checks 
Wis. Stats. § 943.34(1)(a) 	Receiving stolen property 
Wis. Stats. § 943.37 	Alteration of property identification marks 
Wis. Stats. § 943.38(3) 	Forgery 
Wis. Stats. § 943.41 	Financial transaction card crimes 
Wis. Stats. § 943.45 	Theft of telecommunications service 
Wis. Stats. § 943.455 	Theft of commercial mobile service 
Wis. Stats. § 943.46 	Theft of video service 
Wis. Stats. § 943.47 	Theft of satellite cable programming 
Wis. Stats. § 943.50 	Retail theft 
Wis. Stats. § 943.55 	Removal of a shopping cart 
Wis. Stats. § 943.61 	Theft of library material 
Wis. Stats. § 944.17 	Sexual gratification 
Wis. Stats. § 944.20 	Lewd and lascivious behavior 
Wis. Stats. § 944.23 	Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings 
Wis. Stats. § 944.30 	Prostitution 
Wis. Stats. § 944.31 	Patronizing prostitutes 
Wis. Stats. § 944.33 	Pandering 
Wis. Stats. § 944.36 	Solicitation of drinks prohibited 
Wis. Stats. § 945.01 	Definitions relating to gambling 
Wis. Stats. § 945.02 	Gambling 
Wis. Stats. § 945.04 	Permitting premises to be used for commercial gambling 
Wis. Stats. § 946.40 	Refusing to aid officer 
Wis. Stats. § 946.41 	Resisting or obstructing officer 
Wis. Stats. § 946.42(2) 	Escape 
Wis. Stats. § 946.66 	False complaints of police misconduct 
Wis. Stats. § 946.69 	Falsely assuming to act as public officer or employee or a utility employee 
Wis. Stats. § 946.70 	Impersonating peace officer 
Wis. Stats. § 946.72(2) 	Tampering with public records and notices 
Wis. Stats. § 947.01 	Disorderly conduct 
Wis. Stats. § 947.011 	Disrupting a funeral or memorial service 
Wis. Stats. § 947.012 	Unlawful use of telephone 
Wis. Stats. § 947.0125 	Unlawful use of computerized communication systems 
Wis. Stats. § 947.013 	Harassment 
Wis. Stats. § 947.02 	Vagrancy 
Wis. Stats. § 947.06 	Unlawful assemblies and their suppression 
Wis. Stats. § 948.40 	Contributing to the delinquency of a child 
Wis. Stats. § 948.45 	Contributing to truancy 
Wis. Stats. § 948.50 	Strip search by school employee 
Wis. Stats. § 948.51 	Hazing 
Wis. Stats. § 948.60 	Possession of a dangerous weapon by a person under 18 
Wis. Stats. § 948.61 	Dangerous weapons other than firearms on school premises 
Wis. Stats. § 948.62(1)(a) 	Receiving stolen property from a child 
Wis. Stats. § 948.63 	Receiving property from a child 
Wis. Stats. § 951.01 	Definitions 
Wis. Stats. § 951.015 	Construction and application 
Wis. Stats. § 951.02 	Mistreating animals 
Wis. Stats. § 951.03 	Dognapping and catnapping 
Wis. Stats. § 951.04 	Leading animal from motor vehicle 
Wis. Stats. § 951.05 	Transportation of animals 
Wis. Stats. § 951.06 	Use of poisonous and controlled substances 
Wis. Stats. § 951.07 	Use of certain devices prohibited 
Wis. Stats. § 951.08 	Instigating fights between animals 
Wis. Stats. § 951.09 	Shooting at caged or staked animals 
Wis. Stats. § 951.095 	Harassment of police and fire animals 
Wis. Stats. § 951.097 	Harassment of service dogs 
Wis. Stats. § 951.10 	Sale of baby rabbits, chicks and other fowl 
Wis. Stats. § 951.11 	Artificially colored animals; sale 
Wis. Stats. § 951.13 	Providing proper food and drink to confined animals 
Wis. Stats. § 951.14 	Providing proper shelter 
Wis. Stats. § 951.15 	Abandoning animals 
 
Code 1998, § 11-1-1; Ord. No. 99-13, § 1, 10-25-1999; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY AND PEACE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes against public health and safety, Wis. Stats. § 941.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-21. - Regulation of firearms and explosives. 
(a)  Definition. For the purposes of this Section, the term "firearm" means any instrumentality from or with which a shot, bullet or pellet may be discharged or expelled, regardless of whether the propelling force is provided by air, spring or other similar mechanical device, or gunpowder. 
(b)  Discharge and possession of firearms and other weapons regulated. 
(1)  No person, except a police officer or other law enforcement officer in the performance of an official duty, shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun of any description within the Village. 
(2)  No person shall have any air gun, spring gun or pneumatic pellet gun in their possession or under their control unless it is unloaded and enclosed or encased within a carrying case or other suitable container pursuant to state law. 
(3)  No person shall possess any firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun or other weapon contrary to Wis. Stats. §§ 948.55, 948.60, 948.605 or 948.61. 
(c)  Shooting into Village limits. No person shall in the territory adjacent to the Village discharge any firearm in such manner that the discharge shall enter or fall within the Village. 
(d)  Shooting ranges. Any sport shooting range that exists on June 18, 1998, may continue to operate as a sport shooting range at that location notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 66.0409(3)(b). This Section shall not prevent the maintenance and use of duly supervised rifle or pistol ranges or shooting galleries approved by the Village Board, after an advisory recommendation from the Chief of Police, where proper safety precautions are taken. 
(e)  Explosive devices. No person shall discharge or detonate any dynamite, nitroglycerin or other explosive within the Village without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Village Board. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  This section shall not apply to the discharge of a firearm if the actor's conduct is justified or, had it been subject to criminal penalty, would have been subject to a defense described in Wis. Stats. § 939.45. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-1; Ord. No. 2011-17, § 1, 9-26-2011; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 5-27-2014; Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1, 3-12-2018) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate discharge of firearms, Wis. Stats. § 60.22(3); limitation on the regulation of firearms, Wis. Stats. § 66.0409; restrictions on operating sport shooting range activities, Wis. Stats. § 895.527; weapons, Wis. Stats. § 941.10 et seq.  
Sec. 38-22. - Firearms in public buildings. 
(a)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 943.13(1m)(c)4, no person shall enter or remain in any part of a building owned, occupied or controlled by the State or local governmental unit if the State or local governmental unit has notified the person not to enter or remain in the building while carrying a firearm or a specific type of firearm. 
(b)  The Village Administrator shall cause signs to be erected at all entrances to designated buildings owned, occupied or under the control of the Village of McFarland providing notice that no person is to enter or remain in any such building while carrying a firearm. Such signs shall be five inches by seven inches or larger. 
(c)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to apply to prohibit a peace officer or armed forces or military personnel armed in the line of duty or any person duly authorized by the Chief of Police to possess a firearm in any public building. Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 939.22(22), for purposes of this paragraph, peace officer does not include a commission warden who is not a State certified commission warden. 
(d)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the carrying of any firearm or dangerous weapon contrary to Wis. Stats. §§ 941.23 or 941.235. 
(Ord. No. 2011-17, § 2, 9-26-2011) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 201-17, adopted Sept. 26, 2011, repealed the former § 38-22, and enacted a new § 38-22 as set out herein. The former § 38-22 pertained to certain weapons prohibited, and derived from the Code of 1998, § 11-2-2(a), (b). 
State Law reference— Weapons, Wis. Stats. § 941.20 et seq.; carrying concealed weapons, Wis. Stats. § 941.23.  
Sec. 38-23. - Possession, sale and manufacture of certain weapons prohibited. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Churkin. A round throwing knife consisting of several sharp points protruding from a rounded disc. 
(2)  "Numchuk or nunchaku. An instrument consisting of two or more sticks, clubs or rods connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain. 
(3)  "Sucbai. A short length of wood or metal or similar material which, when gripped in the hand, protrudes on either side of the fist. Such prohibited instrument may or may not have spikes or short pointed protrusions from either end. 
(b)  No person shall sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry a "Numchuk" (also called a "Nunchaku") or a "Churkin" or a "Sucbai" or similar weapon within the Village. 
(c)  Any such device shall be seized by a law enforcement officer and destroyed or turned over to the State of Wisconsin Crime Laboratory for destruction. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-2(c)) 
State Law reference— Weapons, Wis. Stats. § 941.20 et seq.; carrying concealed weapons, Wis. Stats. § 941.23; possession of dangerous weapon by person under 18, Wis. Stats. § 948.60.  
Sec. 38-24. - Safe use and transportation of firearms and bows. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 167.31 are hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-3; Ord. No. 2011-17, § 3, 9-26-2011; Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 2, 3-12-2018)  
Sec. 38-25. - Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones and other missiles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or throw by any means any dangerous missile, object, arrow, stone or other missile within the Village. The following actions are exempt from this section: 
(a)  The discharge of an arrow or bolt at a supervised archery range approved by the Village Board upon consideration of the recommendation of the Chief of Police. Such approval may be obtained by filing a written application with the Chief of Police containing such information required by the Chief to determine that the construction, maintenance and use of such range will not endanger the public health and safety. 
(b)  The discharge of an arrow or bolt from a bow or crossbow while hunting. This exemption shall not be effective unless the person and the flight of the arrow or bolt are at all times during the discharge at least 100 yards from a building located on another person's land unless that land owner has given the person permits the hunter to hunt within 100 yards of the building. This exemption shall further not apply unless the arrow or bolt are discharged in a downward direction from a tree stand, hill or other raised position such that any arrow or bolt discharged will travel in a direct line into the ground if it misses the intended target. All terms in this paragraph shall have the meaning as used Wis. Stats. § 29.038(3)(b). 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-4; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 2, 5-27-2014) 
State Law reference— Dangerous weapons defined, Wis. Stats. § 939.22(10).  
Sec. 38-26. - Harassing or obscene telephone calls. 
(a)  Whoever commits any of the following acts shall be subject to the general penalty as provided in this Code: 
(1)  Makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal that is obscene, lewd, lascivious or indecent; 
(2)  Makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with the intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number; 
(3)  Makes or causes the telephone of another repeatedly or continuously to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number; 
(4)  Makes repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, solely to harass any person at the called number; 
(5)  Knowingly permits any telephone under such person's control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this Section; 
(6)  In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes repeated calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called number. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, the point of receipt shall be deemed the place where the harassment occurred. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-5) 
State Law reference— Unlawful use of telephone, Wis. Stats. § 947.012.  
Sec. 38-27. - Sale and discharge of fireworks restricted. 
No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep, discharge or explode any fireworks except toy pistol paper caps, sparklers and toy snakes within the limits of the Village unless such person shall be authorized by a fireworks permit as provided in Chapter 11, Article VII. The term "fireworks" as used in this Section shall be defined as provided in Wis. Stats. § 167.10(1), and shall be deemed to include all rockets or similar missiles containing explosive fuel. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-6) 
State Law reference— Fireworks regulations, Wis. Stats. § 167.10.  
Sec. 38-28. - Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Block. To interfere with unobstructed travel by any means, including, but not limited to, standing on the part of the walk that is fit for travel, or placing any object or vehicle whatsoever on such walk. 
(2)  Sidewalk. Any sidewalk owned or maintained by the Village. The term shall not include sidewalks or walkways on private property in shopping centers, apartment complexes, office building sites or any other private property. 
(b)  Obstructing streets. No person shall stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, bridge or public ground within the Village in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of business or amusement, house of worship, public hall or meeting place. 
(c)  Blocking sidewalk prohibited. No person shall block any sidewalk by obstructing the same so that it is impossible for a pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street. 
(d)  Free speech. This Section shall not be interpreted as prohibiting any person from stopping on any sidewalk to talk or to make a speech, provided that such person shall not stand in such a location that it is impossible for any pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street. If two or more persons are engaged in talking while stopped on a sidewalk, they shall not stand in such locations as to completely prevent any pedestrian from passing them on the sidewalk. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-7) 
State Law reference— Trains obstructing streets, Wis. Stats. § 192.22; unlawful assemblies, Wis. Stats. § 947.06.  
Sec. 38-29. - Loitering prohibited. 
No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify themselves or manifestly endeavors to conceal themselves or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm that would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify themselves and explain their presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Subsection if the police or peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the police or peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-8) 
State Law reference— Loitering on roadway prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 346.29.  
Sec. 38-30. - Disorderly conduct; indecent exposure. 
(a)  Disorderly conduct prohibited. No person within the Village shall: 
(1)  In any public or private place engage in violent, noisy, riotous, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct, which tends to cause or provoke an immediate disturbance of public order or tends to annoy or disturb any other person. 
(2)  Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy altercation other than a bona fide athletic contest. 
(b)  Disorderly conduct with motor vehicle. No person shall make unnecessary and annoying noises with a motor vehicle, including motorcycles and all-terrain vehicles, by squealing tires, excessive acceleration of the engine or by emitting unnecessary and loud muffler noise. 
(c)  Defecating or urinating in public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate outside of designed sanitary facilities, upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground, cemetery or other public area within the Village, or upon any private property in open view of the public, or in the halls, stairways or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or to indecently expose themselves. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-10)  
Sec. 38-31. - Possession of controlled substances. 
(a)  Controlled substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a controlled substance contrary to the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Wis. Stats. Ch. 961. 
(b)  Possession of marijuana, etc. No person shall possess tetra-hydrocannabinois or any derivative thereof, unless the substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order of, a licensed physician or pharmacist for a valid medical purpose. Any person possessing 25 grams or less of marijuana, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(14), subject to the exceptions in Wis. Stats. § 961.41(3g), shall be in violation of this Subsection and will be subject to the forfeiture in Section 1-16; except that any person who is charged with possession of more than 25 grams of marijuana, or who is charged with possession of any amount of marijuana following a conviction for possession of marijuana, in this state shall not be prosecuted under this Subsection. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-11) 
State Law reference— Authority to enact ordinance prohibiting possession of 25 grams or less of marijuana, Wis. Stats. § 66.0107(1)(bm); uniform controlled substances act, Wis. Stats. § 961.001 et seq.  
Sec. 38-32. - Unauthorized presence on school property prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided in Subsection (b) of this Section, to be present in, loiter or enter into any public school building, school parking lot or on any public school grounds without the permission of the school principal, custodian or other person in charge thereof between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on official school days. 
(b)  This Section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Students regularly enrolled in public schools who have not been properly ordered by the school principal, custodian or other person in charge thereof to leave the school building or school grounds; 
(2)  Persons coming into the school building or school grounds for the purpose of attending scheduled school or civic functions, or making use of the recreational facilities located upon or within school premises, but as to such attendance or use, this exception shall apply only to the portion of the premises on which facilities are located and during the hours such facilities are specifically open to the general public or an invited portion thereof; 
(3)  Parents or legal guardians of a regularly enrolled student. However, such parent or legal guardian may be required to register at the school office. 
(c)  The exceptions set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section shall not apply to any person who, while in school buildings or on school grounds, commits or attempts to commit any act prohibited by statute or ordinance. 
(d)  All entrances to the school buildings shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry Into School Building by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited." All school grounds shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry Upon School Grounds by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited." 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-12)  
Sec. 38-33. - Public nudity prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Business establishment. Any land or building in and upon which alcohol beverages are sold or given away pursuant to an alcohol beverage license issued by the Village pursuant to any part of Wis. Stats. Ch. 125, or the alcohol beverage ordinances of the Village. 
(2)  Nudity. The showing or exposing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola or nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, or any simulation of any of the above. 
(3)  Public. Any place of accommodation or amusement, which shall be interpreted to include, but not be limited to, places of business or recreation, hotels, motels, resorts, campgrounds, mobile home parks, restaurants, taverns, and any place where accommodations, amusements, goods or services are available either free or for a consideration. 
(b)  Preamble; legislative intent. The Village Board hereby determines that nudity in public places and among strangers, particularly in establishments providing adult entertainment for its patrons such as nude or nearly nude dancing, is injurious to the citizens of the Village and to the public interest. Accordingly, this Section is necessary: 
(1)  To protect property values; 
(2)  To prevent blight and the deterioration of Village neighborhoods; 
(3)  To promote a healthy climate conducive to the residential and business areas of the Village; 
(4)  To enhance the quality of life within the Village; 
(5)  To preserve and stabilize the Village's neighborhoods; 
(6)  To reduce the likely incidence of crime, disorderly conduct and juvenile delinquency in the Village. 
(c)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a public place or in a business establishment in a state of nudity. 
(d)  Exception. This Section shall not be interpreted to restrict a person's proper use of an enclosed bathroom area, nor to prohibit activities in rooms privately rented in a hotel, motel, resort or camper if the person involved rented such private facility or owns it and has not invited or allowed members of the public who are not immediate family members to be in such private facility. 
(e)  Contact. There shall be no contact between a patron, owner, employee, customer or bystander with a professional or amateur dancer during a dance or other performance where clothing is or has recently been removed, either by direct, physical contact or the placing of money or other things of value in the remaining clothing or in a body part of said dancer or performer. 
(f)  Violations in business establishment; penalty. The licensee of any business establishment in or on which the licensee knows or reasonably should know that one or more persons are appearing or have appeared in a state of nudity contrary to Subsection (c) of this Section or in violation of Subsection (e) of this Section shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation of any and all alcohol beverage licenses for such establishment in addition to other penalties under this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-13)  
Sec. 38-34. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Possession of drug paraphernalia. No person may use, or possess with the primary intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Wis. Stats. Ch. 961. Any person who violates this Section may be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00, plus all applicable court costs and assessments. 
(b)  Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. No person may deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be primarily used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Wis. Stats. Ch. 961. Any person who violates this Section may be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00, plus all applicable court costs and assessments. 
(c)  Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates Section 38-34 by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three years younger than the violator may be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 nor more than $10,000.00, plus all applicable court costs and assessments. 
(d)  Definitions and determinations. Wis. Stats. §§ 961.571 and 961.572 are hereby adopted by reference for purposes of analyzing circumstances arising under this Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-14) 
State Law reference— Drug paraphernalia, Wis. Stats. § 961.571 et seq.; drug paraphernalia violation by juveniles, Wis. Stats. § 938.344(2e).  
Sec. 38-35. - Unlawful sheltering of minors. 
No person, organization, agency, corporation or other entity shall, unless duly licensed under the Wisconsin Statutes or without having first obtained the permission of the parents or legal guardian of any minor or without first notifying the Village Police Department of the presence of a minor described in Subsection (a) of this Section on premises owned or operated by or under the control of such person, organization, agency, corporation or other entity: 
(a)  By any means conceal or shelter, or assist in the concealing or sheltering of any minor under the age of 18 years while the minor is under the legal custody of the parents or legal guardian and while the minor is on report with any law enforcement agency as a "missing person" or "runaway" or a "wanted person"; or 
(b)  Supply false information to or obstruct any police officer in the performance of duties to locate or take into custody any minor described in this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-15; Ord. No. 99-13, § 2, 10-25-1999)  
Sec. 38-36. - Sale of mercury thermometers prohibited. 
(a)  The sale or distribution of mercury fever or basal thermometers is prohibited. No person shall sell at retail or offer for sale at retail within the Village any fever thermometer or basal thermometer containing mercury. 
(b)  Any person violating this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $20.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Code 1998, § 11-2-16; Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 12-13-2000)  
Sec. 38-37. - Impeding fire and emergency medical services. 
(a)  Driving over fire hose. No person shall willfully injure in any manner any hose, hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, and no vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department when laid down on any street, private driveway or other place, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department official in command. 
(b)  Parking vehicles near hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or leave any object within ten feet of any fire hydrant at any time. 
(c)  No parking near fire. It shall be unlawful for any person, in case of fire, to drive or park any vehicle within one block from the place of fire without the consent and authority of the Fire/EMS Chief or designee, or of any police officer. 
(d)  No person shall impede the progress of a fire truck, ambulance or other fire apparatus of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department along the streets or alleys of such Village at the time of a fire or when the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department is using such streets or alleys in response to a fire alarm or for practice. 
(e)  Vehicles to yield right-of-way. Whenever Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department vehicles are operating in an emergency with lights flashing and/or sirens operating, every person driving or riding in a motorized or other vehicle shall move and remain to the side of the street until the fire engine and fire truck and other fire apparatus shall have passed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 67, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 38-38. - Unlicensed massage therapy prohibited. 
(a)  No person may provide massage therapy or bodywork therapy, or otherwise violate the prohibitions provided under Wis. Stats. § 460.02, unless the individual is licensed pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 460. 
(b)  No person may employ or contract for the services of an individual to provide massage therapy or bodywork therapy unless the individual is licensed pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 460. 
(c)  No person may employ or contract for the services of an individual to provide massage therapy or bodywork therapy to third parties unless the individual is licensed pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 460. 
(d)  Any person who violates Subsection (a) or (b) of this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture of $500.00 for first offense, and $1,000.00 for second or greater offenses. Each day of continued violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)  Any person who violates Subsection (c) of this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture of $1,000.00. Each day of continued violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2020-05 , § 1, 2-24-2020)  
Secs. 38-39—38-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Littering prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the Village, or any private person, or upon the surface of any body of water within the Village. 
(b)  Litter from conduct of commercial enterprise. 
(1)  Scope. The provisions of this Subsection shall apply to all sales, promotions and other commercial ventures that result in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way. 
(2)  Litter to be cleaned up. Any person, firm, corporation or association carrying on an enterprise that results in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way shall clean up the same within 12 hours of the time the same is deposited. If any such litter is subject to being blown about or presents a hazard to vehicles or the public, it shall be picked up immediately. If any such litter is likely to attract animals or vermin, such litter shall be picked up immediately. 
(3)  Litter picked up at litterer's expense. If any person, firm, corporation or association fails to pick up any litter as required by Subsection (b)(1) of this Section within the time specified, the Village shall arrange to have the same picked up by Village crews or by private enterprise. Applicable bidding procedures shall be used for any arrangement for the use of private enterprise to pick up such litter. The entire expense of picking up such litter, together with an additional charge of 20 percent for administrative expenses, shall be charged to the person, firm, corporation or association that did the littering. If such sum is not promptly paid, steps shall be taken, with the advice of the Village Attorney's office, to collect the same. This charge shall be in addition to any forfeiture or other penalty for violation of this Section, except such signs as are authorized under any other Village ordinance. 
(c)  Handbills. 
(1)  Scattering prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deliver any handbills or advertising material to any premises in the Village except by being handed to the recipient, placed on the porch, stoop or entrance way of the building or firmly affixed to a building so as to prevent any such articles from being blown about, becoming scattered or in any way causing litter. 
(2)  Papers in public places prohibited. It shall be unlawful to leave any handbills, advertising material or newspapers unattended in any street, alley, public building or other public place, provided that this shall not prohibit the sale of newspapers in vending machines. 
(3)  Advertisements upon public or private property. No person shall place any advertisement upon any public property or any street, alley or public ground or upon any private property situated and fixed in any street, alley or public ground or upon any other private property, except by the permission of the owner thereof, but this Section shall not apply to the posting of notices required by law. 
(Code 1998, § 11-3-1)  
Sec. 38-62. - Abandoned refrigerators prohibited. 
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under such person's control in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container, which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside without first removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from said icebox, refrigerator or container, unless such container is displayed for sale on the premises of the owner or the owner's agent and is securely locked or fastened. 
(Code 1998, § 11-3-2)  
Sec. 38-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 3, adopted June 12, 2017, repealed former § 38-63 which pertained to storage of junk, etc., regulated, and derived from the 1998 Code, § 11-3-4.  
Sec. 38-64. - Damage to public property. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall climb any tree or pluck any flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon, remove, or in any manner injure or deface, write upon, defile or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, fountain, ornament, statue, building, fence, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign, bridge, structure or other property within any park or parkway, or in any way injure, damage or deface any public building, sidewalk or other public property in the Village. 
(b)  Breaking of street lamps or windows. No person shall break glass in any street lamps or windows of any building owned or occupied by the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 11-3-7)  
Sec. 38-65. - Disturbing cemetery property. 
No person except the owner of the cemetery lot or a cemetery employee shall cut, remove, injury or carry away flowers, trees, plants or vines from any cemetery lot or property; nor shall any person deface, injury or mark upon any cemetery markers, headstones, monuments, fences or structures; nor shall any person other than the owner injure, carry away or destroy any vases, flower pots, urns or other objects which have been placed on any cemetery lot. 
(Code 1998, § 11-3-8)  
Sec. 38-66. - Graffiti. 
Graffiti shall be removed by the property owner or by the Village at the property owner's expense. The Director of Public Works may order graffiti removed within a time certain as specified in the order, which shall advise the property owner that if the graffiti is not removed within the specified time period, it will be removed at the property owner's expense. If a property owner fails to remove graffiti within the time specified in the order, the Director of Public Works may cause the graffiti to be removed. The Director of Public Works shall keep an accurate account of the expenses thereof and report the expenses to the property owner and to the Village Clerk-Treasurer who shall annually prepare a statement of the expenses so incurred on each lot or parcel of land and report the expenses to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and the amount therein charged to each lot or parcel of land shall be entered by the Village Clerk-Treasurer in the tax roll as a special charge against said lot or parcel of land. Such expenses shall be collected in all respects like other special charges upon real estate under Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. Prosecution for failure to remove graffiti under this Section shall not bar the Village from charging property owners for graffiti removal, nor shall charging the property owners for graffiti removal bar prosecution for graffiti violation. 
( Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 132, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Graffiti, Wis. Stats. § 943.017.  
Sec. 38-67. - Trespass to vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(a)  Enter into or upon any motor vehicle or watercraft without the consent of the owner thereof or the person having the right to the possession or control of such motor vehicle or watercraft. 
(b)  Fail or refuse to leave any motor vehicle or watercraft after being requested to leave by the owner thereof or the person having the right to the possession or control of such motor vehicle or watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 5-14-2012)  
Secs. 38-68—38-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOL BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 38-91. - Outside consumption. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Alcohol beverage. All ardent, spirituous, distilled or vinous liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented, or not, and by whatever name called, as well as all liquors and liquids made by the alcohol fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley malt and hops, with or without unmalted grains or decorticated or degerminated grains or sugar, which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which are fit for use for beverage purposes. 
(2)  Public area. Any location within the Village that is open to access to persons not requiring specific permission of the owner to be at such location including all parking lots serving commercial establishments. 
(3)  Underage person. Any person under the legal drinking age as defined by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(b)  Alcohol beverages in public areas. 
(1)  Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or give away, or offer to sell, serve or give away, any alcohol beverage upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, public parking lot, highway, cemetery or drives or other public area within the Village or on private property without the owner's consent, except at licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have possession of any open container containing alcohol beverage upon any public street, public sidewalk, public way, public alley or public parking lot within the Village except as licensed premises. 
(2)  Parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in their possession any alcohol beverage in any Village park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except at licensed premises or at a special event licensed by the Village pursuant to Section 11-66(a) or except within a building leased to a nonprofit club or organization for a term of more than one year, provided, however, that the consumption or possession of alcohol beverages shall not be permitted within such buildings during the closing hours in effect in the Village established under Section 11-65(a) for class "B" and "class B" licenses. 
(3)  Private property held out for public use. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcohol beverages upon any private property held open for public use within the Village unless the property is specifically named as being part of a licensed premises. For purposes of this Section, a public place shall be construed to mean any location within the Village which, at the time the person is apprehended, is open to access to persons not requiring specific permission of the owner to be at such location, including, without exclusion by reason of this enumeration, all such premises and places that are held open for public use, whether publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use thereof. In no event shall a private yard, with the owner's consent, in a residentially zoned district, be construed to be a public place nor shall this Section apply to public parks unless specifically restricted by the Village Board by ordinance or resolution and properly posted to reflect such restriction of use. 
(4)  Leaving licensed premises with open container. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, permittee or operator to permit any patron to leave the licensed premises with an open container containing any alcohol beverage. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any patron to leave a licensed premises with an open container containing any alcohol beverage. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any patron to remove an original unopened package, container or bottle containing any alcohol beverage from the licensed premises between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(5)  Exceptions. 
a.  The provisions of this Section may be waived by the Village Board for duly authorized events. 
b.  Any organization that has been issued a special class "B" fermented malt beverage picnic license for a designated area pursuant to this Code, provided that the provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 11, Article II, are fully complied with. 
(Code 1998, § 11-4-1)  
Sec. 38-92. - Sale to underage or intoxicated persons restricted. 
(a)  Sales of alcohol beverages to underage persons. 
(1)  No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away any fermented malt beverages to any underage person not accompanied by the underage person's parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, or procure for, sell, dispense or give away any intoxicating liquor to any underage person. 
(2)  No license or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in fermented malt beverages to or with any underage person not accompanied by the underage person's parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age or sell, vend, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor to or with any underage person. 
(b)  Penalties. A person who commits a violation of Subsection (a) of this Section is subject to a forfeiture of: 
(1)  Not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a previous violation within 30 months of the violation. 
(2)  Not more than $500.00 if the person has committed a previous violation within 30 months of the violation. 
(3)  Not more than $1,000.00 if the person has committed two previous violations within 30 months of the violation. 
(4)  The 30-month period shall be measured from the dates of violations that resulted in an imposition of a forfeiture or a conviction. For the purpose of determining whether or not a previous violation has occurred, if more than one violation occurs at the same time all of those violations shall be counted as one violation. 
(5)  In addition to the forfeitures provided in Subsections (b)(1), (2) and (3) of this Section, a court shall suspend any license issued under Chapter 11 to a person violating this Section pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.07(1)(b)3. 
(c)  Sale of alcohol beverages to intoxicated persons. 
(1)  No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away alcohol beverages to a person who is intoxicated. 
(2)  No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages to or with a person who is intoxicated. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who violates Subsection (c) of this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Code 1998, § 11-4-2) 
State Law reference— Underage or intoxicated persons, Wis. Stats. § 125.07.  
Sec. 38-93. - Underage persons' presence in places of sale; penalty. 
(a)  Restrictions. An underage person not accompanied by the underage person's parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age may not enter or be on any premises for which a license or permit for the retail sale of alcohol beverages has been issued for any purpose except the transaction of business pertaining to the licensed premises with or for the licensee or the licensee's employee. The business may not be amusement or the purchase, receiving or consumption of edibles or beverages or similar activities, which normally constitute activities of a customer of the premises. This Subsection does not apply to: 
(1)  An underage person who is a resident, employee, lodger or boarder on the premises controlled by the proprietor, licensee or permittee of which the licensed premises consists or is a part. 
(2)  An underage person who enters or is on a "Class A" retail intoxicating liquor premises for the purpose of purchasing edibles or beverages other than alcohol beverages. An underage person so entering the premises may not remain on the premises after the purchase. 
(3)  Hotels, drug stores, grocery stores, bowling alleys, cars operated by any railroad, regularly established athletic fields, stadiums or public facilities as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(5)(b)1.d, which are owned by a county or municipality. 
(4)  Premises operated under both a Class "B" or "Class B" license or permit and a restaurant permit where the principal business conducted is that of a restaurant. If the premises are operated under both a Class "B" or "Class B" license or permit and a restaurant permit, the principal business conducted is presumed to be the sale of alcohol beverages, but the presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence. 
(5)  An underage person who enters or remains on a Class "B" or "Class B" premises for the purpose of transacting business at an auction or market as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.32(4)(b)1, if the person does not enter or remain in a room where alcohol beverages are sold or furnished. 
(b)  Penalties. A licensee or permittee who directly or indirectly permits an underage person to enter or be on a licensed premises in violation of Subsection (a) of this Section is subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00. 
(Code 1998, § 11-4-3)  
Sec. 38-94. - Underage persons; prohibitions; penalties. 
(a)  Any underage person who does any of the following is guilty of a violation: 
(1)  Procures or attempts to procure alcohol beverages from a licensee or permittee. 
(2)  Unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, possesses or consumes alcohol beverages on licensed premises. 
(3)  Enters, knowingly attempts to enter or is on licensed premises in violation of Wis. Stats. § 125.07(3)(a). 
(4)  Falsely represents their age for the purpose of receiving alcohol beverages from a licensee or permittee. 
(b)  Except as provided in Subsection (g) of this Section, any underage person not accompanied by their parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age who knowingly possesses or consumes alcohol beverages is guilty of a violation. 
(c)  Any person violating Subsection (a) of this Section is subject to the penalties set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.07(4)(bs), as amended from time to time. Any person violating Subsection (b) of this Section is subject to the penalties set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.07(4)(c), as amended from time to time. 
(d)  If the court orders a person to participate in a supervised work program as a penalty under Subsection (c) of this Section, the court shall set standards for the program within the budgetary limits established by the Village Board. The program may provide the person with reasonable compensation reflecting the market value of the work performed, or it may consist of uncompensated community service work and shall be administered by the County Department of Public Welfare or a community agency approved by the court. The supervised work program shall be of a constructive nature designed to promote the person's rehabilitation, shall be appropriate to the person's age level and physical ability and shall be combined with counseling from an agency staff member or other qualified person. The program may not conflict with the person's regular attendance at school. The amount of work required shall be reasonably related to the seriousness of the person's offense. 
(e)  When a court revokes or suspends a person's operating privilege under Subsection (c) of this Section, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation may not disclose information concerning or relating to the revocation or suspension to any person other than a court, district attorney, county corporation counsel, city, village or town attorney, law enforcement agency or the person whose operating privilege is revoked or suspended. A person entitled to receive information under this Subsection may not disclose the information to any other person or agency. 
(f)  A person who is under 18 years of age on the date of disposition is subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.344, and Section 38-134(c), unless proceedings have been instituted against the person in a court of civil or criminal jurisdiction after dismissal of the citation under Wis. Stats. § 938.344(3). 
(g)  An underage person may possess alcohol beverages in the course of employment during working hours if employed by any of the following: 
(1)  A brewer. 
(2)  A fermented malt beverages wholesaler. 
(3)  A permittee other than a class "B" or "class B" permittee. 
(4)  A facility for the production of alcohol fuel. 
(5)  A retail licensee or permittee under the conditions specified in Wis. Stats. §§ 125.32(20) or 125.68(2), or for delivery of unopened containers to the home or vehicle of a customer. 
(6)  A campus, if the underage person is at least 18 years of age and is under the immediate supervision of a person who has attained the legal drinking age. 
(Code 1998, § 11-4-4) 
State Law reference— Underage persons on licensed premises, Wis. Stats. § 125.07; underage possession, etc., of alcohol beverages, Wis. Stats. § 938.344.  
Sec. 38-95. - Defense of sellers. 
(a)  Defenses. Proof of the following facts by a seller of alcohol beverages to an underage person is a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this Section: 
(1)  That the purchaser falsely represented in writing and supported with other documentary proof that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age. 
(2)  That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent person would believe that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age. 
(3)  That the sale was made in good faith and in reliance on the written representation and appearance of the purchaser in the belief that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age. 
(b)  Book kept by licensees and permittees. Every retail alcohol beverage licensee or permittee shall cause a book to be kept for the purpose of this Subsection. The licensee or permittee or employee shall require any person who has shown documentary proof that such person has attained the legal drinking age to sign the book: 
(1)  If the person's age is in question. 
(2)  A person who alleges that such person is the underage person's parent, guardian or spouse and that such person has attained the legal drinking age, if the licensee or permittee or employee suspects that the person is not the underage person's parent, guardian or spouse or that the person has not attained the legal drinking age. 
The book shall show the date of the purchase of the alcohol beverages, the identification used in making the purchase or the identification used to establish that a person is an underage person's parent, guardian or spouse and has attained the legal drinking age, the address of the purchaser and the purchaser's signature. 
(Code 1998, § 11-4-5) 
State Law reference— Defenses, Wis. Stats. § 125.07(6); book kept by licensees, etc., Wis. Stats. § 125.07(7).  
Sec. 38-96. - Persons who have attained the legal drinking age; false or altered identification cards. 
(a)  Any person who has attained the legal drinking age, other than one authorized by Wis. Stats. § 125.08, who makes, alters or duplicates an official identification card shall forfeit not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(b)  Any person who has attained the legal drinking age who, in applying for an identification card, presents false information to the issuing officer shall forfeit not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(c)  Any underage person who does any of the following is guilty of a violation: 
(1)  Intentionally carries an official identification card not legally issued to such underage person, an official identification card obtained under false pretenses or an official identification card, which has been altered or duplicated to convey false information. 
(2)  Makes, alters or duplicates an official identification card purporting to show that such underage person has attained the legal drinking age. 
(3)  Presents false information to an issuing officer in applying for an official identification card. 
(4)  Intentionally carries an official identification card or other documentation showing that the person has attained the legal drinking age, with knowledge that the official identification card or documentation is false. 
(d)  Any underage person who violates Subsection (c) of this Section is subject to the penalties set forth in Wis. Stats. § 125.085(3)(bd), as amended from time to time. The court's order that the person participate in a supervised work program shall be subject to the provisions of Section 38-94(d). Any suspension of the person's operating privileges ordered by the court shall be subject to the provisions of Section 38-94(c). 
(e)  A person who violates Subsection (c) of this Section and is under 18 years of age on the date of disposition is subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.344, and Section 38-134(c), unless proceedings have been instituted against the person in a court of civil or criminal jurisdiction after dismissal of the citation under Wis. Stats. § 938.344(3). 
(f)  A law enforcement officer investigating an alleged violation of Subsection (c) of this Section shall confiscate any official identification card or other documentation that constitutes evidence of the violation. 
(g)  Any underage person who provides to another underage person an official identification card or other documentation showing that the person has attained the legal drinking age, with knowledge that the documentation is false, shall be guilty of a violation of this Section and subject to the penalties set forth in Section 38-134(b). 
(Code 1998, § 11-4-6) 
State Law reference— Proof of age, Wis. Stats. § 125.085.  
Sec. 38-97. - Possession of alcohol beverages on school grounds prohibited. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle owned, rented or consigned to a school. 
(2)  School. A public, parochial or private school that provides an educational program for one or more grades between grades 1 and 12 and which is commonly known as an elementary school, middle school, junior high school, senior high school or high school. 
(3)  School administrator. The person designated by the governing body of a school as ultimately responsible for the ordinary operations of a school. 
(4)  School premises. Premises owned, rented or under the control of a school. 
(b)  No person may possess or consume alcohol beverages: 
(1)  On school premises; or 
(2)  In a motor vehicle, if a pupil attending the school is in the motor vehicle. 
(c)  A person who violates this Section is subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200.00, except that Wis. Stats. § 938.344, and Section 38-94(c) and (d) and Section 38-134(c) provide the penalties applicable to underage persons. 
(Code 1998, § 11-4-7) 
State Law reference— Possession on school grounds, Wis. Stats. § 125.09(2).  
Sec. 38-98. - Adult permitting or encouraging underage violation. 
(a)  No adult may knowingly permit or fail to take action to prevent the illegal consumption of alcohol beverages by an underage person on premises owned by the person or under the person's control. This Subsection does not apply to alcohol beverages used exclusively as part of a religious service. 
(b)  No adult may intentionally encourage or contribute to a violation of Section 38-94(a) or (b). 
(c)  A person who violates this Section may be: 
(1)  Required to forfeit not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a previous violation within 30 months of the violation. 
(2)  Required to forfeit not more than $500.00 if the person has committed a previous violation within 30 months of the violation. 
(3)  Required to forfeit not more than $1,000.00 if the person has committed two previous violations within 30 months of the violation. 
(4)  Required to forfeit not more than $10,000.00 if the person has committed three or more previous violations within 30 months of the violation. 
(d)  Interpretation. 
(1)  For purposes of determining previous violations under Subsection (c) the 30-month period shall be measured from the dates of violations that resulted in an imposition of a forfeiture or a conviction. For the purpose of determining whether or not a previous violation has occurred, if more than one violation occurs at the same time all those violations shall be counted as one violation. 
(2)  For purposes of Subsection (a), the term "premises" shall refer to any parcel of land, building or other space regardless of whether it is subject to an alcoholic beverage license. 
(3)  For purposes of determining whether a violation of Subsections (a) or (b) have occurred, it is not necessary that the adult was aware of each underage person that has obtained, possessed or consumed alcohol if it is proved that the circumstances of the adult's knowing or intentional actions with respect to at least one underage person would be reasonably likely to lead to unlawful possession or consumption by other underage persons. 
(Code 1998, § 11-4-8; Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 7-23-2012) 
State Law reference— Adult permitting illegal consumption, Wis. Stats. § 125.07(1)(a)3, 4; penalty, Wis. Stats. § 125.07(b).  
Sec. 38-99. - Additional revocation grounds. 
Any licensee who violates Section 38-33 or permits violation of Section 38-94 in or on licensed premises shall be subject to suspension or revocation of any license for sale of alcohol beverages issued by the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 11-4-10)  
Secs. 38-100—38-126. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES BY JUVENILES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Juvenile justice code, Wis. Stats. § 938.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-127. - Curfew. 
(a)  Curfew established. It shall be unlawful for any minor person pursuant to Subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this Section to be on foot, bicycle or in any type of vehicle on any public cemetery, playground, public building or any other public place unless accompanied by the minor person's parent or legal guardian, or person having lawful custody and control of the minor person, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. The fact that said minor, unaccompanied by parent, legal guardian or other person having legal custody is found upon any such public place during the hours specified in Subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this Section shall be prima facie evidence that said minor is in violation of this Article. 
(1)  For minors 15 years of age and younger, the curfew listed in Subsection (a) of this Section is established for the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday. 
(2)  For minors 16 years of age and older, the curfew listed in Subsection (a) of this Section is established for the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between midnight and 5:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  This Section shall not apply to a child: 
a.  Who is performing an errand as directed by the child's parent, legal guardian or person having lawful custody. 
b.  Who is on the child's own premises or in the areas immediately adjacent thereto. 
c.  Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places or in any motor vehicle during such hours. 
d.  Who is traveling directly between home and a supervised school, house of worship or civic function or a bona fide, organized political or religious gathering or event or attending such gathering or event in the exercise of First Amendment rights under the United States Constitution. 
(2)  These exceptions shall not, however, permit a child to unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys or public places or be in a parked motor vehicle on the public streets. 
(3)  These exceptions shall be considered affirmative defenses; however, no arrest shall be made unless the police officer has probable cause to believe that the exception in Subsection (b)(1)d of this Section does not apply. 
(c)  Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the lawful care, custody and control of any person under 18 years of age to allow or permit such person to violate the provisions of Subsection (a) or (b) of this Section. The fact that prior to the present offense a parent, guardian or custodian was informed by any law enforcement officer of a separate violation of this Section occurring within 30 days of the present offense shall be prima facie evidence that such parent, legal guardian or custodian allowed or permitted the present violation. Any parent, legal guardian or custodian herein who shall have made a missing person notification to the Police Department shall not be considered to have allowed or permitted any person under 18 years of age to violate this Section. 
(d)  Responsibility of places of amusement. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business to permit any minor under 18 years of age to loiter in such place during the hours prohibited by this Section. Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business during the hours prohibited by this Section shall find persons under 18 years of age loitering in such place of business, the owner or person in charge shall immediately order such person to leave and if such person refuses to leave said place of business, the operator shall immediately notify the Police Department and inform them of the violation. 
(Code 1998, § 11-5-1; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1, 4-8-2002; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1, 9-27-2004; Ord. No. 2009-13, §§ 1, 2, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 38-128. - Purchase or possession of tobacco, nicotine products or controlled substances by juveniles. 
(a)  Purchase or possession of tobacco or nicotine products prohibited. 
(1)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
a.  Cigarette. Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 139.30(1). 
b.  Law enforcement officer. Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 30.50(4s). 
c.  Tobacco products. Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 139.75(12). 
d.  Nicotine product. Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 134.66(1)(f). 
(2)  Except as provided in Subsection (a)(3) of this Section, no person under 18 years of age may do any of the following: 
a.  Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette, tobacco product or nicotine product. 
b.  Falsely represent such person's age for the purpose of receiving any cigarette, tobacco product or nicotine product. 
c.  Possess any cigarette, tobacco product. or nicotine product. 
(3)  A person under 18 years of age may purchase or possess cigarettes, tobacco products or nicotine products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of employment during working hours if employed by a retailer licensed under Wis. Stats. § 134.65(1). 
(4)  A law enforcement officer may seize any cigarette, tobacco product or nicotine product involved in any violation of Subsection (a)(2) of this Section committed in the law enforcement officer's presence. 
(b)  Possession of controlled substances by juveniles. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to possess a controlled substance contrary to the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 961. 
(Code 1998, § 11-5-2; Ord. No. 2017-08 , §§ 1, 2, 3-13-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 1, adopted March 13, 2017, changed the title of § 38-128 from "Purchase or possession of tobacco or controlled substances by juveniles" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Unlawful possession of cigarettes, Wis. Stats. §§ 139.21, 139.321; purchase or possession of cigarettes, etc., by persons under 18 prohibited, Wis. Stats. § 254.92.  
Sec. 38-129. - Petty theft by juveniles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18to intentionally take and carry away, use, transfer, conceal or retain possession of movable property of another with a value of $250.00 or less without the other's consent and with the intent to deprive the owner permanently of the possession thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 11-5-3) 
State Law reference— Theft, Wis. Stats. § 943.20.  
Sec. 38-130. - Receiving stolen goods. 
It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of 18 to intentionally receive or conceal property such person knows to be stolen. 
(Code 1998, § 11-5-4) 
State Law reference— Receiving stolen property, Wis. Stats. § 948.34; receiving stolen property from a child, Wis. Stats. § 948.62.  
Sec. 38-131. - Village jurisdiction over juveniles aged 12 and older. 
(a)  Juvenile defined. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "juvenile" shall have the meaning defined in Wis. Stats. § 938.02(10m). 
(b)  Adoption of Wisconsin Statutes. Wis. Stats. § 938.17(2) is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this Section as if fully set forth herein. 
(c)  Provisions of ordinance applicable to juveniles aged 12 and older. Subject to the provisions and limitations of Wis. Stats. § 938.17(2) complaints against juveniles aged 12 and over may be brought on behalf of the Village and may be prosecuted utilizing the procedures authorized in Wis. Stats. § 938.17(2). 
(d)  Citation process. For violations of Sections 38-127—38-133, the citation forms authorized in Wis. Stats. § 983.237 may be used to commence an action against juveniles for violations of civil laws and ordinances in municipal court. 
(Code 1998, § 11-5-5) 
State Law reference— Juvenile justice code, Wis. Stats. § 938.01 et seq.  
Sec. 38-132. - Truancy and school dropouts. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Dropout. Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 118.153(1)(b). 
(2)  Habitual truant. Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 118.16(1)(a). 
(3)  Truant. A pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable excuse under Wis. Stats. §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4) for part or all of any day on which school is held during a school semester. 
(b)  Habitual truancy. No person under 18 years of age shall be a habitual truant from the school the person is supposed to be attending. 
(c)  Dropout. No person who is at least 16 years of age but less than 18 years of age shall be a dropout. 
(d)  Compulsory school attendance. Any person having under control a child who is between the ages of six and 18 years shall cause the child to attend school regularly during the full period and hours, religious holidays excepted, that the public or private school in which the child should be enrolled is in session until the end of the school term, quarter or semester of the school year in which the child becomes 18 years of age, unless the child is excepted or excused under Wis. Stats. § 118.15 or has graduated from high school. 
(1)  If evidence has been provided by school officials that the activities under Wis. Stats. § 118.16(5) have been completed or were not required to be completed as provided in Wis. Stats. § 118.16(5m), and a person has been found to have violated this Subsection, the court may impose a forfeiture of not more than $500.00, require the person to perform community service work for a public agency or a nonprofit organization in lieu of forfeiture, and the court may order the person to participate in counseling at the person's own expense or to attend school with the child, or both. 
(2)  Section 38-132(d) does not apply to a person who has under such person's control a child who has been sanctioned under Wis. Stats. § 49.26(1)(h) nor does it apply to a person who proves that the person is unable to comply with Section 38-132(d) because of the disobedience of the child. 
(Code 1998, § 11-5-6; Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 99-13, § 3, 10-25-1999) 
State Law reference— Compulsory school attendance, Wis. Stats. § 118.15; truancy and school dropout authority to adopt ordinance, Wis. Stats. § 118.163; habitual truancy, penalty, Wis. Stats. § 948.342.  
Sec. 38-133. - Alcohol related offenses. 
A person under the age of 18 years who violates the provisions of Sections 38-94(a), (b), 38-96(b) or 38-97(b) shall be subject to the dispositions and penalties set forth in Section 38-134(c). 
(Code 1998, § 11-5-7)  
Sec. 38-134. - Dispositions, penalties and sanctions. 
(a)  Disposition. 
(1)  Habitual truancy. If the court finds that a person under 18 years of age violated Section 38-132(b), the court shall enter an order making one or more of the following dispositions: 
a.  Suspend the person's operating privilege, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40) for not less than 30 days nor more than one year. The court shall immediately take possession of the suspended license and forward it to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, together with a notice stating the reason for and duration of the suspension. 
b.  Order the person to participate in counseling or a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). The costs of any such counseling, supervised work program or other community service work may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. 
c.  Order the person to remain at home except during hours in which the person is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time required to get to and from the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a person to leave such person's home if the person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
d.  Order the person to attend an educational program under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(7d). 
e.  Order the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development to revoke, under Wis. Stats. § 103.72, a permit under Wis. Stats. § 103.70 authorizing the employment of the person. 
f.  Order the person to be placed in a teen court program if all of the following conditions apply: 
1.  The Chief Judge of the Judicial Administrative District has approved a teen court program established in the juvenile's county of residence and the judge determines that participation in the teen court program will likely benefit the juvenile and the community. 
2.  The juvenile admits or pleads no contest in open court, with the juvenile's parent, guardian or legal custodian present, to the allegations that the juvenile violated the civil law or ordinance. 
3.  The juvenile has not successfully completed participation in a teen court program during the two years before the date of the alleged civil law or ordinance violation. 
g.  Order the person to attend school. 
h.  Impose a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 plus costs, subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.37. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardians of the person, or both. 
i.  Impose any other reasonable conditions consistent with Wis. Stats. § 118.163, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on specified premises and restrictions on associating with other children or adults. 
j.  Place the person under formal or informal supervision, as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(2), for up to one year. 
k.  Order the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian to participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal custodian's own expense or to attend school with the person, or both. 
(2)  School dropout. If the court finds that a person is subject to and has violated Section 38-132(c), the court may suspend the person's operating privilege, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), until the person reaches the age of 18. The court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license and forward it to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation along with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension. 
(3)  Truancy. If the court finds that a person under 18 years of age violated Section 38-132(b), the court shall enter an order making one or more of the following dispositions: 
a.  Order the person to attend school. 
b.  Impose a forfeiture of not more than $50.00 plus costs for a first violation, or a forfeiture of $100.00 plus costs for any second or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.37, and subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500.00 for all violations committed during a school semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. 
(b)  Disposition; violations of civil law and ordinances. Except as provided in Subsections (a) and (c) of this Section, if the court finds that the juvenile violated a civil law or an ordinance, the court shall enter an order making one or more of the following dispositions: 
(1)  Counsel the juvenile or the parent or guardian. 
(2)  Impose a forfeiture not to exceed the maximum forfeiture that may be imposed on an adult for committing that violation or, if the violation is only applicable to a person under 18 years of age, $50.00. Any such order shall include a finding that the juvenile alone is financially able to pay, and shall allow up to 12 months for the payment. If a juvenile fails to pay the forfeiture, the court, subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 938.343(2), may suspend any license issued under Wis. Stats. Ch. 29, or suspend the juvenile's operating privilege as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), for not less than 30 days nor more than five years. 
(3)  Order the juvenile to be placed in a teen court program if all of the following conditions apply: 
a.  The Chief Judge of the Judicial Administrative District has approved a teen court program established in the juvenile's county of residence and the judge determines that participation in the teen court program will likely benefit the juvenile and the community. 
b.  The juvenile admits or pleads no contest in open court, with the juvenile's parent, guardian or legal custodian present, to the allegations that the juvenile violated the civil law or ordinance. 
c.  The juvenile has not successfully completed participation in a teen court program during the two years before the date of the alleged civil law or ordinance violation. 
(4)  Order the juvenile to participate in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
(5)  If the violation has resulted in damage to the property of another, or in actual physical injury to another excluding pain and suffering, the court may order the juvenile to make repairs of the damage to property or reasonable restitution for the damage or injury if the court, after taking into consideration the well-being and needs of the victim, considers it beneficial to the well-being and behavior of the juvenile. Any such order requiring payment for repairs or restitution shall include a finding that the juvenile alone is financially able to pay and may allow up to the date of the expiration of the order for the payment. Objection by the juvenile to the amount of damages claimed shall entitle the juvenile to a hearing on the question of damages before the amount of restitution is ordered. 
(6)  If the violation is related to unsafe use of a boat, order the juvenile to attend a safety course under Wis. Stats. § 30.74(1). 
(7)  If the violation is of Wis. Stats. Ch. 29, suspension of the license of the juvenile issued under that Chapter for not more than one year or until the juvenile is 18 years of age, whichever occurs first. 
(8)  If the violation is related to the unsafe use of firearms, order the juvenile to attend a course under the hunter education and firearm safety program under Wis. Stats. § 29.225. 
(9)  If the violation is one under Wis. Stats. Ch. 350, concerning the use of snowmobiles, or under an ordinance enacted in conformity with Wis. Stats. § 350.18, order the juvenile to attend a safety course under Wis. Stats. § 350.055. 
(10)  If the violation is one under Wis. Stats. § 23.33, or under an ordinance enacted in conformity with Wis. Stats. § 23.33, concerning the use of all-terrain vehicles, order the juvenile to enroll and participate in an all-terrain vehicle safety course. 
(11)  If the violation is related to the use or abuse of alcohol beverages or controlled substances, order the juvenile to do any of the following: 
a.  Submit to an alcohol and other drug abuse assessment that conforms to the criteria specified under Wis. Stats. § 938.547(4), and that is conducted by an approved treatment facility. The order shall designate an approved treatment facility to perform the assessment and shall specify the date by which the assessment must be completed. 
b.  Participate in an outpatient alcohol and other drug abuse treatment program if an assessment conducted under Wis. Stats. § 938.295(1) or Subsection (b)(11)a of this Section, recommends treatment. 
c.  Participate in a court-approved pupil assistance program provided by the juvenile's school board or in a court-approved alcohol or other drug abuse education program. The juvenile's participation in a court-approved pupil assistance program under this Subsection is subject to the approval of the juvenile's school board. 
(c)  Disposition; certain intoxicating liquor, beer and drug violations. 
(1)  If the court finds a juvenile committed a violation under Wis. Stats. §§ 125.07(4)(b) or 125.09(2), or Sections 38-94(b) or 38-97(b), the court shall order one or any combination of the following penalties. 
a.  For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than $50.00, suspension of the juvenile's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)1, or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
b.  For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, a forfeiture of not more than $100.00, suspension of the juvenile's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)2, or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
c.  For a violation committed within 12 months of two or more previous violations, a forfeiture of not more than $500.00, revocation of the juvenile's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)3, or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
(2)  If the court finds a juvenile committed a violation under Wis. Stats. § 125.07(4)(a), or Section 38-94(a), the court shall order one or any combination of the following penalties: 
a.  For a first violation, a forfeiture of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00, suspension of the juvenile's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)1, or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
b.  For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, a forfeiture of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00, suspension of the juvenile's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)2, or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
c.  For a violation committed within 12 months of two or more previous violations, a forfeiture of $500.00, revocation of the juvenile's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)3, or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
(3)  If the court finds a juvenile committed a violation under Wis. Stats. § 125.085(3)(b), or Section 38-96(b), the court shall order one or any combination of the following penalties: 
a.  For a first violation, a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, suspension of the juvenile's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)1, or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
b.  For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, a forfeiture of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00, suspension of the juvenile's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)2, or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
c.  For a violation committed within 12 months of two or more previous violations, a forfeiture of $500.00, revocation of the juvenile's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)3, or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
(4)  If the court finds a juvenile committed a violation under Wis. Stats. §§ 961.573(2), 961.574(2), 961.575(2), or Section 38-33(a), (b) or (c), the court, subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 938.344(2e), shall suspend or revoke the juvenile's operating privilege, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), for not less than six months nor more than five years and, in addition, shall order one of the following penalties: 
a.  For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than $50.00 or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g), or both. 
b.  For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, a forfeiture of not more than $100.00 or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
c.  For a violation committed within 12 months of two or more previous violations, a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 or the juvenile's participation in a supervised work program or other community service work under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g), or both. 
(5)  After ordering a penalty under Subsections (c)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of this Section, the court, with the agreement of the juvenile, may enter an additional order staying the execution of the penalty order and suspending or modifying the penalty imposed. The order under this Subsection shall require the juvenile to do any of the requirements set forth in Subsections (b)(3) or (b)(11)a., b., or c. of this Section, subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 938.344(2g). 
(6)  The provisions of Subsections (c)(1) through (5) of this Section are subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 938.344(2m) and (3), which are incorporated herein by reference. 
(d)  Sanctions for violation of dispositional orders. Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 938.355(6), if a juvenile who has violated a municipal ordinance violates a condition of a dispositional order imposed by the municipal court, the municipal court may petition the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction under Wis. Stats. Chs. 48 and 938, to impose the sanctions specified in Wis. Stats. § 938.355(6)(d)2., or (d)4, if, at the time of the judgment the municipal court explained the conditions to the juvenile and informed the juvenile of those possible sanctions for a violation, or if, before the violation, the juvenile has acknowledged in writing that the juvenile has read, or has had read to them, those conditions and possible sanctions and that the juvenile understands those conditions and possible sanctions. 
(Code 1998, § 11-5-8; Ord. No. 98-09, § 2, 9-14-1998)  
Chapter 41 - OFFICIAL MAP 
 
Sec. 41-1. - Adoption of Official Map. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the Village Board to establish an Official Map for the purpose of serving and promoting the public health, safety, convenience, economy, orderliness, and general welfare to the community; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to stabilize the location of real property boundary lines; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, parks, playgrounds, and stormwater drainage; and to facilitate the further Subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(b)  Authority. This Chapter is enacted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6). 
(c)  Official Map designated. The Official Map shall show the location, extent, and name, if any, of all platted and existing streets, highways, parkways, parks, and playgrounds within the corporate limits of the Village as hereinbefore laid out, adopted, and established by law. There is hereby established, as the Official Map of the Village, the Map that accompanies and is made a part of this Chapter bearing the date of April 3, 2003. Said Official Map supersedes all prior Official Maps of the Village. This Official Map is hereby designated as the "Official Map of the Village of McFarland" and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this Chapter as though the matters and information thereon were fully described herein. 
(d)  Changes and additions. The Village Board may change or add to the Official Map so as to establish the exterior lines of, widen, narrow, extend, change the name of, or close any platted, existing, proposed, or planned streets, highways, parkways, parks, or playgrounds. The Village Board shall refer any change or addition to the Official Map to the Plan Commission for review and report thereon prior to adoption. The Plan Commission shall report its recommendation to the Village Board within 60 days or forfeit its right to further suspend action. A public hearing of parties in interest and citizens before the Village Board shall be required before any changes or additions to the Official Map are effective. Notice of the public hearing shall be published as a class 2 notice. Actual notice shall be mailed to the owner of record of lands abutting on the affected portion of the street, highway, or parkway at least 20 days prior to the hearing. Changes and additions made by duly approved Subdivision plat shall not require the public hearing if the changes and additions do not affect any land outside the area being platted. 
(Code 1998, § 14-2-1)  
Sec. 41-2. - Building permits. 
(a)  For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map, a building permit shall be required for any structure or part thereof that shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered. No permit shall hereafter be issued for any building in the bed of any existing or proposed street, highway, or parkway shown on the Official Map. No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless a street, highway, or parkway giving access to such proposed structure has been duly placed on this Official Map. 
(b)  The Building Inspector may require each applicant for a building permit to submit a plan, prepared, and certified by a registered land surveyor, showing accurately the location of any proposed building with reference to any street, highway, or parkway shown on the Official Map. 
(Code 1998, § 14-2-2)  
Sec. 41-3. - Municipal improvements. 
No public sewer or other municipal street utility or improvement shall be constructed in any street, highway, or parkway within the corporate limits of the Village until such street, highway, or parkway is duly placed on the Official Map. 
(Code 1998, § 14-2-3)  
Sec. 41-4. - Appeals. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to review any administrative decision of the Village Building Inspector to deny a permit for the erection of a structure under this Chapter and to grant relief from the requirements of this Chapter under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6)(d), (f), and (g). 
(Code 1998, § 14-2-4)  
Sec. 41-5. - Certified copy of Official Map. 
There shall be a certified copy of the Official Map described in Section 41-1(c). The certified copy shall be kept in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall be available for the inspection by any interested person during regular office hours. The certified copy shall bear on its face a certification that it is a true copy of the Official Map described in and accompanying this Chapter and shall show the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived and shall be signed by the Village President and countersigned by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Thereafter no change or addition to such Official Map shall become effective until it shall have been indicated by the appropriate convention on the aforesaid certified copy of the Official Map and a certificate placed thereon or attached thereto, bearing the number and date of adoption of the amending ordinance. The certificate shall be signed by the Village President and countersigned by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(Code 1998, § 14-2-5; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 180, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 41-6. - Map to be filed with register of deeds. 
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible immediately upon adoption of the Official Map or any amendment thereto for recording a true copy of the amended Official Map with the register of deeds. 
(Code 1998, § 14-2-6; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 181, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 2, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 41-7. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 14-2-7)  
Chapter 44 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire and dispose of park property, Wis. Stats. § 61.34(3); authority over parks and watercourses, etc., Wis. Stats. § 61.36; imposition of impact fees for parks authorized, Wis. Stats. § 66.0617; parks included in comprehensive plan, Wis. Stats. § 66.1001. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 44-1—44-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 44-19. - Purpose and definition. 
In order to protect the parks, parkways, recreational facilities and conservancy areas within the Village from injury, damage or desecration, these regulations are enacted. The term "park" as hereinafter used in this Chapter shall include all grounds, structures and watercourses that are or may be located within any area dedicated to the public use as a park, parkway, recreation facility or conservancy district in the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 12-1-1(a))  
Sec. 44-20. - Specific regulations. 
(a)  Littering prohibited. No person shall litter, dump or deposit any rubbish, refuse, earth or other material in any park. 
(b)  Sound devices. No person shall operate or play any amplifying system unless specific authority is first obtained from the Parks and Recreation Committee, unless the person is seeking a special event license, for which the Public Safety Committee has initial jurisdiction. 
(c)  Pets. No person shall permit any dog, cat or other pet owned by him to run at large in any park. A dog shall not be considered to be running at large if it is within the fenced enclosure of a designated dog exercise area and under the direct observation and voice control of its owner or other person in lawful custody and control. 
(d)  Bill posting. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any placard, bill, notice, sign or advertising matter upon any structure, tree or other natural object in any park, except park regulations and other signs authorized by the Parks and Recreation Committee. 
(e)  Throwing stones and missiles prohibited. No person shall throw stones or other missiles in or into any park. 
(f)  Removal of park equipment prohibited. No person shall remove benches, seats, tables or other park equipment from any park. 
(g)  Trapping. No person shall trap in any park unless specific written authority is first obtained from the Parks and Recreation Committee. 
(h)  Making of fires. No person shall start, tend or maintain a fire except in personal grills or designated fireplaces. Personal grills shall be used only in designated picnic areas. The use of personal grills is permitted, provided lawns and vegetation are not endangered. Unburned fuel and ashes shall be disposed of in such a manner as to prevent fire or damage to any park property. 
(i)  Protection of park property. No person shall kill, injure or disturb or attempt to injure or disturb waterfowl, birds or animals, wild or domestic, within any park, except as permitted by this Chapter. No person shall climb any tree or remove flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon, remove or in any manner injure, deface, write upon or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, soil, sand, fountain, ornament, building, structure, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign or other property within any park. 
(j)  Motorized vehicles. Except for authorized maintenance and emergency vehicles, no person shall operate an unlicensed or licensed motorized vehicle outside of areas specifically designated as parking areas or areas where the operation of such vehicles is specifically permitted. Motor vehicles are restricted to the roads and drives and parking areas. No motor vehicles of any nature may be used on the seeded areas except vehicles that have Village authorization for shows, rides or exhibits and then only for the purpose of loading and unloading. No person shall operate any off-the-road vehicle, motorcycle, trail bike, all-terrain vehicle, truck or other motorized vehicle in any park, playground or other public ground where pathways or trails have been developed and/or designated for walking, hiking, jogging, running, bicycling, cross-country skiing, sledding or other pedestrian use. All motorized vehicles are limited to use of roadways specifically for their use and according to other restrictions in this Code. 
(k)  Snowmobiles. No person shall operate a snowmobile in a Village park except in designated areas. 
(l)  Speed limit. No person shall operate any vehicle in a Village park in excess of 15 mph unless otherwise posted. 
(m)  Glass beverage bottles in parks prohibited. No person shall bring into, carry onto or possess while in any public park glass bottles or glass beverage containers, including those containing or normally used for containing soda water, fermented malt beverages or alcohol. A glass-lined thermos bottle shall not be construed to be a glass beverage container. 
(n)  Reckless driving in parks prohibited. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a reckless manner in any of the public parks of the Village. 
(o)  Parking in parks. No person shall park any motor vehicle in any park in the Village except in a designated parking area. 
(p)  Horse and carriages. No person shall ride a horse or drive a horse-driven vehicle in any park, except on roads or designated bridle paths, except when approval of the Parks and Recreation Committee is first obtained. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or drive a horse-driven vehicle in a careless, negligent or reckless manner, which may endanger the safety and well-being of others. Horseback riding shall be allowed only during the daylight hours. No person shall ride a horse that cannot be held under such control that it may be easily turned or stopped. No horse shall be ridden in a reckless manner. Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way when crossing a bridle path, and whenever groups of people are visible within 300 feet horses shall be ridden at slow gait. 
(q)  Removing tree protectors. No person shall remove any device for the protection of trees or shrubs. 
(r)  Golfing and sporting activities. No golfing or practicing golf in Village parks or recreation areas shall be allowed except with the use of a whiffle ball. 
(s)  Arrows. No person shall use or shoot any bow and arrow in any Village park, except in authorized areas. 
(t)  Fees and charges. The Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Committee, shall have the authority to establish such fees as deemed necessary for use of any park facility, shelter or land area. It shall be unlawful to use such areas without payment of such fee or charge when required. 
(u)  Firearms; hunting. Possessing or discharging of any firearm or weapon of any kind is prohibited in all Village parks. 
(v)  Fish cleaning. Cleaning of fish in shelters, toilet facilities or picnic areas is prohibited in all Village parks. 
(w)  Controlled substances. Possessing, using or dispensing of a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act is prohibited in all Village parks. 
(x)  Camping. Overnight camping is not permitted in any Village park. 
(y)  Utility installation and construction. Any private construction that may in any manner encroach upon or affect the parks and parkways shall be under the direction and jurisdiction of Parks and Recreation Committee and no such installation, repair or construction shall commence without the written permission therefor from the Parks and Recreation Committee. All public works, including construction and installation of power lines, hydrants, sewers and the like shall be commenced only after notice to the Parks and Recreation Committee of the Village's intention to do so. Where practicable, such construction and installation shall be performed pursuant to recommendations by the Parks and Recreation Committee. 
(Code 1998, § 12-1-1(b); Ord. No. 2009-14, § 2, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 44-21. - Radio-controlled model airplanes prohibited in parks. 
No person shall fly a radio-controlled model airplane or helicopter in any park in the Village except in areas specifically designated and posed for such purpose. 
(Code 1998, § 12-1-2)  
Sec. 44-22. - Turf protection on public property. 
Except as authorized by the Public Works Director, or designee, no person shall dig into the turf of any Village-owned property for any purposes whatsoever or remove any trees or flowers. Absent authorization by the Public Works Director, or designee, the use of metal detectors and digging for buried objects on Village property, except beaches where no vegetation is present, is prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 12-1-3; Ord. No. 2019-01 , § 1, 1-28-2019)  
Sec. 44-23. - Park hours. 
(a)  Generally. Except for authorized events and subject to certain exceptions listed below, all Village parks shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. the following day, and it shall be unlawful to enter in or be upon any park, playground or swimming pool after the hour designated. 
(b)  Exceptions to closing hours. A person driving through a park on a public road; however, stopping shall not be permitted within a park. The Village Board may modify closing hours for particular events. 
(c)  Park closing and opening dates. The Village Board will have full authority to open and close any park, swimming pool, recreational facility or area because of season, condition, construction or when, in the interest of public safety, it is deemed necessary. 
(Code 1998, § 12-1-4)  
Sec. 44-24. - Reservation of park space. 
(a)  Policy on reservation. The Village-owned park and park facilities and shelter areas are primarily for the nonexclusive use of the residents and visitors of the Village. However, under proper circumstances, exclusive use of the same or parts thereof may be permitted. This Section is intended to regulate exclusive use of municipally-owned parks, park facilities, park shelters or parts thereof in the Village to the end that the general welfare of the Village is protected. 
(b)  Reservation of park space. A permit is required for any special usage of any park within the Village. An organized gathering desiring to reserve a specific portion of any park in the Village shall constitute a special usage. A person or group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation may reserve the use of a park facility or a park shelter by written application filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer for a permit for exclusive use of the same. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue permits for the exclusive use of a portion of a park or park shelter, while the Village Board shall issue permits for the exclusive use of the Village parks. Park facilities are reserved on a first-requested, first-reserved basis. Certain proposed uses and gatherings may require the issuance of an event permit, subject to the requirements of Chapter 36, instead of a permit issued under this Section. 
(c)  Application. Reservation or special use permit applications shall be filed with the Public Works Department at least seven days prior to the date on which the exclusive use of the entire park is requested, or at least three days prior to the date on which a park shelter or a portion of a park is to be reserved, and shall set forth the following information regarding the proposed exclusive use: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  If the exclusive use is proposed for a group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the same and the responsible and authorized heads or partners of the same. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for the use of the said park, area or facility. 
(4)  The date when the exclusive use is requested and the hours of the proposed exclusive date. 
(5)  The anticipated number of persons to use the said park, area or facility. 
(6)  Any additional information which the Village Board or Village Clerk-Treasurer finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(7)  Whether applicant contemplates consumption of alcohol beverages and, if so, copies of permits issued pursuant to Sections 11-61, 11-66 and 38-127. 
(d)  Fee. All applications for reservation of park space, shelters or baseball diamonds for which a permit is required shall pay the application fees established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(e)  Deposit. At the time of application, all applicants shall also provide a deposit as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code, which is refundable in full or in part after completion of the event if the Village incurs expenses of less than the amount of the deposit established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A in clean up or repair of the Village facility rented. 
(f)  Reasons for denial. Applicants may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  If it is for a use that would involve a violation of federal or state law or any provision of this Code. 
(2)  If the granting of the permit would conflict with another permit already granted or for which application is already pending. 
(3)  If the application does not contain the information required by Subsection (c) of this Section. 
(4)  The application is made less than the required days in advance of the scheduled exclusive use. 
(5)  If it is for a use of the park or park facility at a date and time when, in addition to the proposed use, anticipated nonexclusive use by others of the park or park facility is expected and would be seriously adversely affected. 
(6)  If the law enforcement requirements of the exclusive use will require so large a number of persons as to prevent adequate law enforcement to the park, park facility or shelter area involved or of the rest of the Village. 
(7)  The exclusive use will reasonably create a substantial risk of injury to persons or damage to property. 
(8)  The exclusive use is so poorly organized that participants are likely to engage in aggressive or destructive activity. 
(g)  Indemnification. A permit shall be issued only upon condition that the applicant submit to the Village Clerk-Treasurer satisfactory written evidence that applicant has in force and will maintain during the time the permit is in effect public liability insurance of not less than $500,000.00 per one person, $500,000.00 for one accident and property damage coverage of not less than $500,000.00. The policy shall name the Village as the third party insured. 
(h)  Permit not required for Village activity. A permit is not required for exclusive use of the park or a park facility sponsored by the Village. 
(i)  Permit revocation. The Village Board and/or Chief of Police after granting a permit may revoke a permit already issued if it is deemed that such action is justified by an actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot, other catastrophe or likelihood of a breach of the peace or by a major change in the conditions forming the basis of the issuance of the permit. 
(j)  Form of permit. Each permit shall be in a form prescribed by the Village Board and shall designate the park, park facility or shelter area involved, date, hours of the exclusive use, purpose of the exclusive use and the name of the person, group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation to which the permit is issued. 
(k)  Class B fermented malt beverage licenses. When fermented malt beverages are sold at any event authorized by this Section, a valid fermented malt beverage license shall be obtained and the provisions of Sections 11-44, 11-66 and 38-127 shall be fully complied with. Said license must be held by the person who filed the original license and shall be presented to any law enforcement officer upon request. 
(Code 1998, § 12-1-6; Ord. No. 98-20, § 4, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 99-24, § 1, 12-13-1999; Ord. No. 2002-02, §§ 7, 8, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 138—141, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 5, 2-23-2006; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 133—135, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 4, 3-11-2019)  
Sec. 44-25. - Public piers and access areas. 
(a)  Conduct regulated. On or at all public piers and public access areas, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Swim at your own risk. 
(2)  No diving from piers. 
(3)  No littering piers or access areas. 
(4)  No rafts allowed in public access areas. 
(5)  No rough play on piers. 
(6)  No profane or obscene language allowed. 
(b)  Hours. All public piers and public access areas shall be closed to the public between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless prior approval for use has been obtained from the Police Department. 
(c)  Additional regulations. Pursuant to the authority granted under Wis. Stats. §§ 27.08(2)(a) and 27.13, all public access areas are hereby deemed to be Village parks and shall be subject to all park use regulations adopted in this Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 12-1-7)  
Sec. 44-26. - Dog exercise areas. 
(a)  Establishment of dog exercise areas. The Village Board may establish one or more dog exercise areas. All dog exercise areas shall be designated by erecting adequate fencing to fully enclose such area and by erecting conspicuous signage at the entrance of such area indicating it has been designated as a dog exercise area. 
(b)  Permit. No person may allow any dog they own or that is within their custody or control to be present in a dog exercise area without having obtained a dog exercise area permit for the dog in accordance with this Subsection. Permits from other jurisdictions shall not be a substitute for a permit from the Village. 
(1)  Permits shall be obtained from the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall establish an application form, which shall request all information necessary to determine whether the dog is eligible for a permit. The Village Clerk-Treasurer may, in cooperation with other Village departments, establish self-service application and payment facilities located at any dog exercise area. 
(2)  Permits may be issued on an annual or daily basis. The annual permit shall be issued in the form of a tag made of any durable material that may be worn on a dog's collar. Upon application and payment of the prescribed fee, a copy of the application shall be given to the applicant, which shall serve as a temporary permit until a tag can be issued. For a daily permit, the copy of the application shall constitute the permit. 
(3)  If, upon review of any application, it is determined that any of the information provided is false or if it is determined the dog is not eligible for a permit, the permit shall be considered void and notice thereof shall be sent by regular mail to the applicant. The fee for the permit shall not be refunded. 
(4)  To be eligible for a permit: 
a.  The dog must display a valid dog license tag issued by the Village or other local government where the dog resides. This requirement shall not apply if the jurisdiction where the dog resides does not require the dog to be licensed or if the dog is less than five months of age. 
b.  The dog must be current on rabies vaccinations. 
c.  The dog may not be considered a dangerous dog pursuant to Chapter 5, Article IV, of the McFarland Municipal Code or pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 173.21(1)(b) and 173.23(4)(b) or (c) and 174.02(3a). 
d.  The appropriate fee shall be paid. Fees for a dog exercise permit shall be as follows: 
	Village Residents 	Nonresidents 
Annual permit 	$15.00 	$25.00 
Daily permit 	3.00 	4.00 
Seniors (55 and older) 	10.00 	N/A 
Each additional dog 	6.00 	6.00 
 
e.  Annual permits shall be renewed each year as of January 1. Fees shall not be prorated; however, permits issued 15 days prior to January 1 shall be valid through the following year. 
(c)  Rules. The following rules shall be observed at all times. Failure to observe the rules established herein shall be grounds for suspension, revocation, or refusal to issue any dog exercise permit for the individual dog or any dog owned by the person found to be in violation. 
(1)  Dogs shall be under the control of the owner or other person in lawful custody at all times. 
(2)  Dogs shall not intimidate, attack or threaten any person or another pet. 
(3)  All feces shall be picked up and placed in designated receptacles. 
(4)  Female dogs in heat are prohibited. 
(5)  At all times while present in the dog exercise area, each dog shall wear the permit tag issued for it or, where no tag has been issued, the owner or person in custody and control shall carry a copy of the permit. 
(6)  Unless expressly provided in this Section, all other Village ordinances applicable to Village parks shall apply to dog exercise areas. 
(d)  Notwithstanding Subsections (b)(4)d and (b)(4)e of this Section, annual permits issued prior to December 15, 2009, shall be valid until January 1, 2011. The fee for such permits shall be as follows: 
	Village Residents 	Nonresidents 
Annual permit 	$20.00 	$30.00 
Seniors residents (55 and older) 	15.00 	N/A 
Each additional dog 	6.00 	6.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2009-14, § 3, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 136, 6-26-2017)  
Secs. 44-27—44-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AIRCRAFT RECREATION 
 
Sec. 44-54. - Ultralight aircraft regulated. 
(a)  Definition. For the purposes of this Section, the term "ultralight aircraft, vehicle or hang glider" means an unpowered or powered aircraft, which is not subject to extensive regulation by the Federal Aviation Administration by virtue of its characteristics and which is defined as an ultralight vehicle by 14 CFR 103.1 and which is defined as an ultralight aircraft by Wis. Stats. § 114.195. 
(b)  Regulations regarding use. 
(1)  No person shall operate any ultralight aircraft within the Village in such a manner or in such a location as to endanger or injure any person or property. No person shall operate an ultralight aircraft in the Village in violation of any applicable state and federal regulations and standards. No person shall cause an ultralight aircraft to land or to take off from any property without permission of the owner or occupant of said property, provided that an emergency landing may be made to prevent a catastrophe. In the case of landing or taking off from a Village public park or other Village property, the operator of such ultralight aircraft shall first obtain a permit from the Village Board. No fee shall be charged by the Village Board for such permit, which may be issued for a period up to 30 days nor shall the Village Board sponsor such activity. 
(2)  Any person desiring to land or to take off from any property owned by the Village, shall, prior to receiving a permit, procure evidence of insurance providing for not less than $1,000,000.00 of coverage for personal injury for one person, $2,000,000.00 of coverage for personal injury for each occurrence and $1,000,000.00 of coverage for each occurrence for damage to property. Evidence of such insurance shall include a certificate of insurance naming the Village as an additional insured and said certificate shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time the applicant seeks a permit. 
(Code 1998, § 12-1-5; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 137, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 137, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Ultralight aircraft, Wis. Stats. § 114.195.  
Secs. 44-55—44-81. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER RECREATION AND BOATING CODE 
 
Sec. 44-82. - Intent. 
The intent of this Article is to provide safe and healthful conditions for the enjoyment of aquatic recreation consistent with public rights and interest and the capability of the water resource. 
(Code 1998, § 12-2-1)  
Sec. 44-83. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Slow-no-wake. The slowest possible speed so as to maintain steerage. 
(b)  Untrailered boat. Any boat that is transported to the boat landing without a trailer and capable of launching by carrying such boat to the landing. 
(Code 1998, § 12-2-2)  
Sec. 44-84. - Applicability and enforcement. 
The provisions of this Article shall apply to the waters of the Yahara River within the jurisdiction of the Village. The provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the Village Police Department, the Dane County Sheriff's Department and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(Code 1998, § 12-2-3)  
Sec. 44-85. - Slow-no-wake zone. 
The entire length of the Yahara River in the Village, including Mud Lake is designated as a slow-no-wake zone. No persons shall operate a motorboat in this zone at a speed faster than the slowest possible speed so as to maintain steerage. 
(Code 1998, § 12-2-4)  
Sec. 44-86. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this Article shall forfeit not more than $50.00 for the first offense and shall forfeit not more than $100.00 upon a second or subsequent conviction within one year. 
(Code 1998, § 12-2-5)  
Chapter 47 - PUBLIC UTILITIES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 47-1—47-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 47-19. - Water utility regulations and rates. 
The Wisconsin Public Service Commission's rate order and regulations, as amended, for the Village Water Utility are adopted by reference and incorporated herein. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-1)  
Sec. 47-20. - New construction water use fee. 
No building permit for new construction shall be issued unless the applicant pays the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code to cover the cost of unmetered water use during construction. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-3; Ord. No. 2003-01, § 1, 1-13-2003)  
Secs. 47-21—47-43. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE WATER WELLS 
 
Sec. 47-44. - Permit. 
(a)  No person owning property that is served by the public water system of the Village shall permit the continuance of use as a private well on the premises unless granted a permit under this Section. 
(b)  A private well operation permit may be granted by the Director of Public Works to a well owner for a period not to exceed five years if the following requirements are fulfilled: 
(1)  The well and pump installation meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 812, and a well constructor's report is on file with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, or certification of the acceptability of the well has been granted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(2)  The well has a history of producing safe water and currently produces bacteriologically and chemically safe water as evidenced by three samplings two weeks apart within three months preceding the request for the well operation permit. 
(3)  The proposed use of the well is justified as necessary in addition to water supplied by the public water system. 
(4)  No physical connection shall exist between the pipings of the public water system and the private well. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-2(a))  
Sec. 47-45. - Permit procedures. 
Applicants shall submit applications on forms provided by the Village and pay the processing fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for the processing of the application. Upon submission of the application and fee, the Village water utility shall collect water samples to be analyzed at a state certified laboratory for the presence of bacteria and volatile organic chemicals. If the samples show no violation of state or federal water quality standards, and the applicant pays the water analysis fees charged by the laboratory, the Director of Public Works shall issue a private well operation permit. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-2(b))  
Sec. 47-46. - Subsequent testing and renewal of permits. 
(a)  On or about the first anniversary of issuance of the permit, the water utility shall collect another sample to be analyzed at a state certified laboratory for the presence of bacteria. If the sample shows no violation of state or federal bacteria water quality standards, no further action is required. 
(b)  Prior to the expiration of a private well operation permit, if the well owner wishes to renew the permit for an additional five-year term, the owner shall file an application for renewal of the permit. The same water quality tests required at the initial grant of the permit are required at the owner's expense within three months preceding the requested renewal date. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-2(c))  
Sec. 47-47. - Prohibited operation. 
If water from a private well is known to produce water that exceeds a health advisory of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, a primary standard in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 109, or an enforcement standard in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 140, the Director of Public Works shall not issue a well operation permit without the approval of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-2(d))  
Sec. 47-48. - Standards. 
Persons abandoning wells shall fill them according to the procedures of Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 812. In addition, the owner shall cause removal of the pump, piping and any obstruction or liner prior to plugging the well. The owner shall notify the Director of Public Works prior to the scheduled date of filling said well, so that the Director of Public Works or a designated representative may observe the filling of said well. Filling with unapproved materials or unacceptable procedures is prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-2(e))  
Sec. 47-49. - Abandonment report. 
The well owner shall submit a well abandonment report to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources on forms provided by that agency immediately upon completion of filling of the well. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-2(f))  
Sec. 47-50. - Upgrading noncomplying wells. 
Where feasible, noncomplying wells and pump installations may be upgraded to comply with Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 812. A private well may be temporarily abandoned as set forth in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 112. A well constructed for potable use may not be considered a nonpotable well to avoid the applicability of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-2(g))  
Sec. 47-51. - Violations. 
Violations of this Section are subject to a forfeiture pursuant to Section 1-16. 
(Code 1998, § 9-1-2(h))  
Secs. 47-52—47-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACK FLOW PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 47-60. - Purpose. 
(a)  To protect the health and welfare of users of the public potable water supply of the Village of McFarland from the possibility of contamination or pollution of the public water system under the direct authority of the McFarland Public Water Utility. 
(b)  To control and promote the elimination of existing cross connections (actual or potential) between potable water systems containing potable water from the public water system and water from other sources containing substance(s) which may contaminate or pollute the water supply. 
(c)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing comprehensive program of cross connection control to systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of potable water systems under the direct authority of the McFarland Public Water Utility. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 10-25-2010)  
Sec. 47-61. - Definitions. 
(a)  Back flow means the unwanted reverse flow of liquids, solids or gases or other substances under positive or reduced pressure into the Village of McFarland water supply. 
(b)  Back flow preventer means any generic back flow prevention device or assembly. 
(c)  Back siphonage means the creation of a back flow as a result of a sudden reduction of pressure in the utility's potable water supply system. 
(d)  Cross connection means any connection between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from a public water system and the other water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 10-25-2010)  
Sec. 47-62. - Cross connection prohibited. 
No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established between the public water supply or the McFarland Water Utility and potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply have been approved by the Utility and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 10-25-2010)  
Sec. 47-63. - Responsibility. 
The McFarland Water Utility shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to back flow of contaminants or pollutants. The McFarland Water Utility shall adopt policies consistent with this division, Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 82.41 and § NR 811.09. Such policies shall be known as the "Cross Connection Control Manual." The Utility may establish fees, which shall be set forth in the Cross Connection Control Manual, for maintaining the comprehensive cross connection control protection plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 10-25-2010)  
Sec. 47-64. - Customer responsibility. 
The owner of each property served by the McFarland Water Utility shall be responsible for the protection of the customers' potable water system. 
(a)  The owner shall, at their own expense, install and maintain all back flow preventers in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 82.21 and the Utility's cross connection control manual. All malfunctions revealed shall be corrected as soon as practicable and without delay. 
(b)  The owner shall inform the McFarland Water Utility of any proposed or modified cross connections and any existing cross connections not protected by an approved back flow preventer. 
(c)  The owner shall not install any bypass around any back flow preventer unless a back flow preventer of the same type exists in the bypass. 
(d)  Whenever a water system cannot be shut down for testing of a back flow preventer, additional assemblies shall be installed to permit necessary testing and maintenance. 
(e)  Whenever fixtures, equipment or appurtenances using potable water are installed upstream of a back flow preventer, such fixtures, equipment or appurtenances shall have its own approved back flow prevention means. 
(f)  All back flow prevention practices shall be in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code § COMM 82-84 and the utility's cross connection control manual. 
(g)  The owner shall eliminate or protect from all cross connections on their premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 10-25-2010)  
Sec. 47-65. - Inspections. 
The McFarland Water Utility shall cause surveys to be made of all properties serviced by the Utility where cross connections with the public water system are possible. 
(a)  All properties shall be surveyed a minimum of once every ten years. 
(b)  All nonresidential properties serviced by the Utility may be surveyed more often than once every ten years as defined in the cross connection control manual. 
(c)  The Utility may perform cross connection surveys. The Utility may require the property owner, at the owner's expense, to have the water system surveyed for cross connections by a person trained in accordance with the American Society of Sanitary Engineers ("ASSE") Standard No. 5120 as a cross connection control surveyor. 
(d)  The McFarland Water Utility may require more frequent surveys in its discretion where justified by the presence of potential public health hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 10-25-2010; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 47-66. - Right of entry. 
Upon presentation of credentials, representatives of the McFarland Water Utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine the property served by a connection to the public potable water system for cross connections. If entry is refused, the Utility shall obtain a special inspection warrant pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 10-25-2010)  
Sec. 47-67. - Authority to discontinue service. 
(a)  The Utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary in the Utility's discretion to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. 
(b)  If the danger of contamination is not imminent, water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and an opportunity for hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 2, Article XI, of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(c)  In the event of imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare, water service may be discontinued immediately. In such instance, a hearing shall be held no later than ten days after the emergency discontinuance unless agreed to in writing by the property owner. The hearing shall be held before the Village of McFarland Utility Committee according to the procedures set forth in Section 2-996 of the McFarland Municipal Code. A final written determination shall be issued within five days of the completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 10-25-2010)  
Secs. 47-68—47-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Sewer and stormwater systems, Wis. Stats. § 66.0821; laterals and service pipes, Wis. Stats. § 66.0911; service to manufactured homes communities, Wis. Stats. § 101.937; water and sewer rate increases, Wis. Stats. § 196.193; sewer districts, Wis. Stats. § 200.01 et seq.; water and sewage, Wis. Stats. § 281.01 et seq.; sewer use regulations, Wis. Stats. § 283.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 47-76. - Introduction; general provisions; compliance with rules. 
(a)  This Article regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains, connections to the public sewerage system, discharge of septage into the public sewerage system, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewerage systems within the Village. It also provides for and explains the method used for levying and collecting wastewater treatment service charges, sets uniform requirements for discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment systems and enables the Village to comply with administrative provisions, and other discharge criteria, which are required or authorized by the state or federal law. Its intent is to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the characteristics of wastewater discharged into the sewerage system. 
(b)  This Article provides a means for regulating the use of the public sewers, effectuating connections thereto, determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics, the setting of charges and fees, and the issuing of permits to certain users. Revenues derived from the application of this Article shall be used to defray the costs of operating and maintaining the wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide sufficient funds for capital outlay, debt service costs and capital improvements. The charges and fees herein have been established pursuant to requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes. This Article shall supersede any previous ordinances, rules or regulations of the Village relating to the subject matter hereof; and shall repeal all parts thereof that may be inconsistent with this Article. If there is any conflict between this Article and any applicable Wisconsin Statutes, the Wisconsin Statutes shall control in such instance. 
(c)  All persons now receiving sewer service from the Village Sewer and Water Utility or who may hereafter make application therefor shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by rules and regulations as filed with the Wisconsin Public Service Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-1)  
Sec. 47-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Actual customer. The number of water meters serving a user. If a user's water consumption is not metered, the Director shall estimate the number and size of the water meters that would otherwise be required to measure such consumption. The Director's estimate shall be in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices. 
(b)  Applicable pretreatment standard. That most restrictive provisions contained in any pretreatment limitations or prohibitive standards (enacted by any federal, state or local governmental entity) and incorporated in this Article, which applicable pretreatment standard shall be complied with by nondomestic wastewater users of the sewerage system. 
(c)  Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building or structure and conveys it to the building sewer. 
(d)  Building sewer. A sanitary sewer that begins at the immediate outside of the foundation wall of any building or structure being served and ends at its connection with a community sewer or interceptor. 
(e)  Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD). The quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical degradation of organic material in five days at 20 degrees Celsius when the oxidation of reduced forms of nitrogen is prevented by the addition of an inhibitor. This analytical procedure shall be performed in accordance with standard methods. 
(f)  Combined sewer. A sewer designed to receive or receiving both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
(g)  Commission of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. As defined and with such powers as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 200.09 as amended from time to time. 
(h)  Commissioners. The Commissioners of the District. 
(i)  Community or Municipality shall mean the Village. 
(j)  Community sewer. Any sanitary sewer owned and/or operated by the Village, which sewer is tributary to an intercepting sewer or treatment facility owned or operated by the District. 
(k)  Compatible pollutant. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES Permit issued to the District for its wastewater treatment facility, provided that said wastewater treatment facility was designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. 
(l)  Composite sample. A sample consisting of portions of waste taken in proportion to the volume of flow of said waste. 
(m)  Director. The Director of the District or other authorized representative of the Commission or District. 
(n)  District. The Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD), a regional sewerage district governed by the Commission. 
(o)  Domestic wastewater or sanitary sewage. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes and wastewater discharged from toilets, conveniences or other sanitary plumbing facilities, which contain no incompatible pollutants exceeding the limitations set forth in Section 47-107 and which contain no substances prohibited by the terms of this Article. 
(p)  Equivalent meters. The number of equivalent five-eighths-inch meters and shall be based on the following: 
Meter Size 	Number of Equivalent 
5/8 -inch Meters 
5/8 -inch 	1 
¾-inch 	1 
1-inch 	2.5 
1¼-inch 	3.7 
1½-inch 	5 
2-inch 	8 
3-inch 	15 
4-inch 	25 
6-inch 	50 
8-inch 	80 
10-inch 	120 
12-inch 	160 
 
Where a user does not have a water meter for measuring the user's water consumption, the Village Director of the Public Works shall estimate the number and size of water meters that would otherwise be required to serve that user, based upon standard engineering practices; and the equivalent meters shall then be determined on this estimate. 
(q)  Federal Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 to 1387, as amended from time to time, et seq.) or as implemented by Wis. Stats. § 283.001 et seq., or appropriate Sections of the Wisconsin Administrative Code adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 283.001 et seq., as well as any applicable guidelines, limitations and standards promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal Act. 
(r)  Floatable oil. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free from floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and does not interfere with the collection system. 
(s)  Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods or from the handling, storage or sale of food products and produce. 
(t)  Holding tank waste. The scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from holding tanks such as chemical toilets, campers, trailers, privies, septic tanks and other temporary holding facilities and shall include wastes from a soil absorption field. Such term is synonymous with the term "septage." The term does not include the waste from a grease trap. 
(u)  Incompatible pollutant. Any pollutant that is not a compatible pollutant. 
(v)  Industrial discharge or industrial waste. Any water-borne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes, other than domestic wastewater, resulting from, discharging from, flowing from or escaping from any industrial user, including, but not limited to, cooling water and discharges from wastewater pretreatment facilities. Such term includes any wastewater which is not sanitary sewage. 
(w)  Industrial user. Any commercial or industrial user who makes, causes or permits an industrial discharge into the District's wastewater facilities. 
(x)  Intercepting sewer. Any sanitary sewer owned or operated by the District. 
(y)  Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the sewerage system or wastewater treatment processes or operations, which may or does contribute to a violation of any condition of the District's WPDES Permit. 
(z)  May. The term is permissive. 
(aa)  National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Any regulation or order containing pollutant discharge limitations as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1317), which limitations apply to one or more specific categories of industrial users. 
(bb)  Natural outlet. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
(cc)  New source. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a Section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) categorical pretreatment standard, which will be applicable to such source. 
(dd)  Person. Any individual, firm, company, partnership, municipality, association, private or public, corporation, cooperative, society, institution, enterprise, government agency, or other entity. 
(ee)  Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the limitation of pollutants or the alteration of the nature or characteristics of the pollutant properties of the wastewater of a user prior to or in lieu of discharge to a public sewerage system. 
(ff)  Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. 
(gg)  Public sewer. A sewer owned and maintained by the Village. 
(hh)  Public sewerage system. All structures, appurtenances, conduits and pipelines by which wastewater is collected and disposed of, including the wastewater treatment works, excepting plumbing inside of and in connection with buildings and properties served and excepting building sewers. 
(ii)  Sanitary sewage. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with such groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters as may have inadvertently entered the sewerage system. 
(jj)  Sanitary sewer. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants or institutions. 
(kk)  Septage. The wastewater or contents of septic or holding tanks, dosing chambers, grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches, privies or portable restrooms. 
(ll)  Sewer. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
(mm)  Sewer service charge. A service charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of use-related capital expenses as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs, of said facilities. 
(nn)  Sewer system. The public sanitary sewers within a sewerage system. The facilities that convey wastewater from individual structures, from private property to the public sanitary sewer, or its equivalent, are specifically excluded from the definition of "sewer system"; except that pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of structures may be included as part of a "sewer system" when such units are cost effective and are owned and maintained by the Village. Lift stations or pumping stations and all appurtenances thereto are included in this definition. For example, a Building Sewer is not part of the sewer system. 
(oo)  Shall. The term is mandatory. 
(pp)  Significant industrial contributor. A user that has a discharge flow that: 
(1)  Is greater than 25,000 gallons on any day of the year; 
(2)  Is greater than five percent of the total flow rate or design compatible pollutant loading received at the municipal wastewater treatment plant and/or is subject to pretreatment standards for incompatible pollutants as defined in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 211; or 
(3)  Has been notified in writing by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, the District or any municipality within the District that it is necessary to provide information concerning the concentration and quantity of the pollutants discharged. 
(qq)  Slug load. Any substance released at a discharge rate and/or concentration that causes interference to the wastewater treatment processes. 
(rr)  Standard methods. The analytical procedures performed in accordance with 40 CFR 136, or as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency otherwise determines. 
(ss)  Storm drain. Any device for the drainage of stormwater from land or the protection of land from water, including open ditches, tiles, pipelines, pumps and levees. 
(tt)  Stormwater runoff. That portion of the rainfall that is collected and drained into the storm sewers. 
(uu)  Suspended solids. Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "standard methods" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
(vv)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN). The quantity of organic nitrogen and ammonia as determined in accordance with standard methods. 
(ww)  Total phosphorus (TP). The quantity of total phosphorus as determined in accordance with standard methods. 
(xx)  Unpolluted water. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
(yy)  User. Any person who discharges, or causes to be discharged, domestic wastewater, industrial discharges or any other wastewater into the public sewerage system. 
(zz)  User charge. The charges levied on the District customers, municipalities and/or users of the wastewater facilities for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement of such wastewater facilities. The user charge is a component of the sewer service charge. 
(aaa)  Wastewater facilities. The District's structures, equipment and processes that are designed to collect, carry and treat domestic wastewater and industrial discharges. 
(bbb)  Wastewater parameters. Volume, CBOD, suspended solids, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, total phosphorus, actual customers, equivalent meters and such additional parameters as may, from time to time, be determined by the District. 
(ccc)  Wastewater treatment plant. The District's arrangement of devices and structures for treating domestic wastewater and industrial discharges. Sometimes used as synonymous with "wastewater treatment" or "wastewater treatment works" or "water pollution control works." 
(ddd)  WPDES permit. The District's permit to discharge pollutants, obtained under the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 283.001 et seq. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-2) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 283.01.  
Sec. 47-78. - Application for service. 
(a)  Application for permission to connect a building sewer to a community sewer shall be made to the Village sewer utility on a form furnished by the sewer utility. The application must describe fully and truthfully all the wastes, which are anticipated to be discharged. If the applicant is not the fee simple owner of the property, the written consent of the owner must accompany the application. By submitting such an application, all users are deemed to have agreed to be bound by this Article, as amended from time to time. 
(1)  The application shall include at least the following information: 
a.  Name of property owner; 
b.  Legal description of property being served; 
c.  The number and type of plumbing fixtures to be connected. 
(2)  If it appears that the service applied for will not provide adequate service for the contemplated use, the Public Utilities Committee may reject the application. If the Public Utilities Committee approves the application, it shall issue a connection permit as shown on the application. No service shall be provided or application approved without prior payment of all applicable fees. 
(b)  The applicant shall agree to install the building sewer in accordance with sewer utility and District specifications. No building sewer may be connected to a community sewer unless the community sewer is adequately sized to transport the additional flow. The size and kind of pipe for the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works, but in no case shall a pipe of less than four-inch diameter be used. The slope of the building sewer shall be no less than one-eighth-inch per foot. Such sewers shall be backfilled in the manner for water laterals as set forth in this Code. Prior to connection, each building sewer shall be inspected and approved by the Village Plumbing Inspector. All applications for disposal of industrial waste shall be on forms provided by the District and shall be approved by the Director of the District prior to connection to any community sewer. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-3)  
Sec. 47-79. - User charge system. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Debt service charges. All costs associated with repayment of debts incurred for the construction and/or rehabilitation of the wastewater collection system and treatment facility. 
(2)  Normal domestic strength wastewater. Wastewater with concentrations of CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus no greater than 200, 250, 40 and ten milligrams per liter (mg/l) respectively. 
(3)  Normal user. A user whose contributions to the sewerage system consist only of normal domestic strength wastewater originating from a house, apartment, flat, or other living quarters occupied by a person constituting a distinct household, business or commercial enterprise. 
(4)  Operation and maintenance costs. All costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system. 
(5)  Replacement costs. All costs necessary to replace equipment as required to maintain capacity and performance during the design life of the facility. A separate, segregated, distinct replacement fund shall be established and used for only replacement of equipment. 
(b)  Policy. It shall be the policy of the Village to obtain sufficient revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, including debt service and a replacement fund (i.e., a cash account to be used for future expenditures for obtaining or installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the sewerage system during the service life for which such facilities were designed and constructed), through a system of sewer service charges as defined in this Section. The system shall assure that each user of the sewerage system pays their proportionate share of the costs of such facilities. 
(c)  Basis for charges. 
(1)  Determinations of charges. Sewer service charges to each user shall be based on wastewater parameters recommended from time to time by the Public Utilities Committee and adopted by the Village Board. The sewer service charges shall consist of the sum of the annual debt service charges, all annual operation and maintenance costs, all replacement costs, and all sewer service charges levied or assessed to the Village by the District, plus an amount to be used for working capital and capital improvements as determined by the Public Utilities Committee. 
(2)  Biennial review. The sewer service charges of the Village shall be reviewed not less than biennially. Sewer service charges will be adjusted, as required, to reflect actual number and size of users and actual costs. Users will be notified annually of the portion of such sewer service charges attributable to operation and maintenance, debt service and replacement costs. For purposes hereof, the Public Utilities Committee may satisfy this notice requirement by including in the budget summary required to be published under Wis. Stats. § 65.90, a statement of the aforementioned components of the sewer service charges, based on the results of operations for the preceding fiscal year. 
(3)  Rates determinations. The Public Utilities Committee shall review each year the rates referred to in Subsection (d) of this Section and may recommend amendments to the rates at any time to the Village Board. 
(d)  Sewer service charges. A sewer service charge is hereby imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises served by the public sewer and wastewater facilities or otherwise discharging sewage, including industrial wastes, into the public sewerage system. Such sewer service charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided, and in an amount determinable as follows: 
(1)  There shall be three classes of users. 
a.  Category A metered users shall be those discharging normal domestic strength wastewater with up to 250 milligrams per liter for CBOD, and/or 250 milligrams per liter of suspended solids, and/or 40 milligrams per liter or TKN, and/or ten milligrams per liter of TP. 
b.  Category B users shall be those whose wastewater meets the criteria applicable for category A users, but whose water use is unmetered. 
c.  Category C users shall be metered users whose wastewater discharges are high strength wastewater having organic concentrations of CBOD greater than 250 milligrams per liter and/or suspended solids greater than 250 milligrams per liter and/or TKN greater than 40 milligrams per liter, and/or TP greater than ten milligrams per liter. 
(2)  Each user shall be charged a bimonthly customer charge based upon the size of the water meter serving the user. The customer charges shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(3)  Each user shall also be charged a volume charge expressed in dollars per 1,000 gallons of metered water. The charge for each 1,000 gallons of normal domestic strength wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer system shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(4)  Category A users shall be charged a service charge consisting of the customer charge plus the volume charge for each applicable billing cycle. 
(5)  Category B users discharging normal domestic strength wastewater shall be billed at the rate established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. This rate shall be applied only to single-family residential and small commercial customers, and approximates the costs for 12,500 gallons bimonthly discharged to the sewer system. If it determined by the sewer utility that the user discharges more than 12,500 gallons bimonthly to the system, an additional charge established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code will be made for estimated additional usage. 
(6)  Category C users be billed, in addition to the applicable customer charge and volume charge, a high strength surcharge as part of their service charge. The BOD charge shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The suspended solids charge shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The TP charge shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The TKN charge shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. All category C users shall have their wastestreams sampled periodically to determine the extent to which the wastewater stream is subject to the high strength surcharge. 
(e)  Reassignment of sewer users. The Village will reassign sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater sampling programs and other related information indicate a change of categories is necessary. 
(f)  Billing, payment and penalty. Sewer service charges shall be billed to each user once every two months, or more frequently, if so determined by the Public Utilities Committee. Such charges shall be payable not later than 20 days after the end of each billing period, unless the time for payment has been extended. A penalty of one percent per month shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed for payment. 
(g)  Charges a lien. All sewer service charges shall be a lien upon the property serviced pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0821(4)(d), and shall be collected in the manner therein provided. 
(h)  Disposition of revenue. The amounts received from the collection of charges authorized by this Section shall be credited to a sanitary sewerage account, which shall show all receipts and expenditures of the sewerage system. Charges collected for replacement expenses shall be credited to a segregated, nonlapsing replacement account. These funds are to be used exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by the Village, the credits to the sanitary sewerage account shall be available for the payment of the requirements for operation, maintenance, repairs, and depreciation of the sewerage system consistent with 40 CFR 35.929. Any surplus outside the preview of 40 CFR 35.929, in said account, shall be available for the payment of principal and interest of bonds issued and outstanding, or which may be issued, to provide funds for said sewerage system, or part thereof, and all or part of the expenses for additions and improvements and other necessary disbursements or indebtedness, and the Village may resolve to pledge such surplus or any part thereof for any such purpose. All present outstanding sewer system general obligation bonds, including the refunding bonds, shall be paid from this fund as to both principal and interest. 
(i)  Excess revenues. Excess revenues collected from a user class will be applied to operation and maintenance costs attributable to that class for next year. 
(j)  Annual audit. The Village shall authorize and conduct an independent annual audit, the purpose of which shall be to maintain proportionality between users and user classes of the user charge system and to ensure that adequate revenues are available relative to increasing operation, maintenance and replacement costs and debt retirement. The findings and recommendations of this audit shall be published in the Village's official newspaper. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-4; Ord. No. 98-01, §§ 1—3, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 99-01, §§ 1—3, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 2000-01, §§ 1—3, 1-10-2000; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 30, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2007-05, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 1-14-2008)  
Sec. 47-80. - Credit for water not discharged to sewer. 
If a portion of the water furnished to any customer is not discharged into the sewer system, the quantity of such water will be deducted in computing the charge for sewer service provided a meter has been installed to measure such water. The customer must, at the customer's own expense, make necessary changes in the water piping and install couplings so that a meter can be set. A charge as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code per quarter shall be made for each such meter up to a one-inch meter. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-5)  
Secs. 47-81—47-103. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
Sec. 47-104. - Prohibited connections. 
(a)  Septic tank connections. No connection shall be made to any municipal wastewater collection facility if the connection pipe is carrying any contents from a septic tank, unless said septic tank is serving as a pretreatment process, which has been required or permitted pursuant to the District Sewer Use Ordinance. 
(b)  Building foundation drains. No connection shall be made to any municipal wastewater collection facility if the connection pipe is carrying flow from a building foundation drain. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(a))  
Sec. 47-105. - Mandatory connections. 
(a)  Every owner of a parcel of land shall connect to a public sewer whenever all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The parcel of land is adjacent to a public sewer; 
(2)  There is located upon such parcel a building or other structure used or usable for human habitation or occupancy or for the conduct of any trade, business of industry; and 
(3)  Such building or structure is being served by a private sewage disposal system or treatment works. 
(b)  Such connection shall be made no later than 12 months after the installation of the public sewer adjoining such parcel. Upon failure to do so, the Public Utilities Committee may cause such connection to be made and bill the property owner for all such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days, such costs shall constitute a special tax lien against the property in the manner provided for by law. However, the owner may, within 30 days after the completion of the work, file a written notification with the Public Utilities Committee stating that the owner cannot pay such amount in one sum and ask that the sum be levied in five or less equal installments. The amount shall be so collected with interest at a rate not to exceed 15 percent per annum from the date of completion for the work, all as determined by the Public Utilities Committee. The unpaid balance shall constitute a special tax lien, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.45, as amended. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(b))  
Sec. 47-106. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No person shall discharge wastes to a community or intercepting sewer which cause, or are capable of causing, either alone or in combination with other substances: 
(1)  A fire or explosion; 
(2)  Obstruction of flow or damage to the wastewater facilities; 
(3)  Danger to life or safety or welfare of persons; 
(4)  Air pollution as defined in Wis. Stats. § 285.01(3), as amended from time to time, and any regulations or orders of any regulatory agency issued thereunder; 
(5)  Prevention of effective maintenance or operation of the wastewater facilities; 
(6)  Any product of the District's treatment processes of any of the District's residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with reclamation processes; 
(7)  A detrimental environmental impact, a nuisance or any condition unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over the District; 
(8)  Any sanitary sewer or the District's wastewater facilities to be overloaded; 
(9)  In the opinion of the Director of the District, excessive District collection and treatment costs, or the use of a disproportionate share of the District's facilities; 
(10)  Cause the District to violate its WPDES permit. 
(b)  Specific prohibited discharges. Prohibited discharges shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction or in combination with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a danger to humans, flora or fauna, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than ten or having any other corrective property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or treatment works personnel. 
(4)  Solids or viscous substances including, but not limited to, such substances as ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, improperly shredded garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, dishes, cups, milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fats or greases. 
(6)  Any wastewater that contains organo-sulfur or organo-phosphate pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers. 
(c)  Prohibitions on storm drainage and groundwater. 
(1)  Stormwater, groundwater, rainwater, street drainage, roof runoff and subsurface drainage shall not be discharged into community sewers without prior approval of the community and the District or into intercepting sewers without prior approval of the District. Such approval shall be granted only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. 
(2)  Polluted stormwater runoff from limited areas may be discharged to the sanitary sewer upon approval by the Director of the District, payment of applicable charges and fees and compliance with conditions required by the community and the District. 
(d)  Prohibition of unpolluted water. Unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water, process water or blow-down from cooling towers or evaporative coolers shall not be discharged into community sewers without prior approval of the community and the District or into intercepting sewers without prior approval of the District. Such approval shall be granted when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available and upon payment of applicable charges and fees and compliance with conditions as required by the community and District. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(c))  
Sec. 47-107. - Limitations on discharge characteristics. 
(a)  Limitations related to treatment plant influent. Discharge to the public sewerage system of the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall be limited to the following concentrations or quantities, which concentrations or quantities will not harm the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; will not have an adverse effect on the District's sludge management program; will not endanger persons or property; will not cause air pollution or other detrimental environmental effects; and will not constitute a nuisance. 
(1)  Liquid having a temperature higher than 65 degrees Celsius (149 degrees Fahrenheit) or any wastewater having a temperature that will inhibit biological activity in the District's treatment plant thereby resulting in interference. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no case shall wastewater be discharged having a temperature that causes the influent to the District's treatment plant to exceed 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit), unless the treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature. 
(2)  Wax, grease, oil, plastic or any other substance that solidifies or becomes discernibly viscous. 
(3)  Radioactive wastes that, alone or with other wastes, result in releases greater than those specified by current United States Bureau of Standards Handbooks or which violates rules or regulations of any applicable regulatory agency. 
(4)  Wastewater containing more than 50 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral oil origin. 
(5)  Wastewater containing more than 300 mg/l of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin. 
(6)  Wastewater that, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
(7)  Wastewater that contains in excess of any of the following constituents in a 24-hour flow proportionate sample made up of an aggregate of the total discharge from all of the outfalls of the industrial user: 
1.0 	mg/l aluminum 
0.25 	mg/l cadmium 
0.5 	mg/l hexavalent chromium 
10.0 	mg/l total chromium 
1.5 	mg/l copper 
5.0 	mg/l lead 
0.02 	mg/l mercury 
0.3 	mg/l selenium 
3.0 	mg/l silver 
8.0 	mg/l zinc 
2.0 	mg/l nickel 
0.1 	mg/l cyanide 
 
Samples shall be collected over the period of discharge if the discharge is less than 24 hours in duration. 
(8)  Industrial discharges exceeding applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or state standards. 
(9)  Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solution. 
(10)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair. 
(11)  The District may alter, amend or modify the limitations established in Subsection (a) of this Section, if it determines that it is necessary to meet the objectives of this Article or the conditions of the District's WPDES permit. 
(b)  Limitations related to treatment plant effluent. 
(1)  No person shall discharge any wastewater to the public sewerage system that, in combination with other discharges, results in either: 
a.  The District's treatment plant effluent having concentrations exceeding the following limits: 
1.  One tenth mg/l total phenols; or 
2.  Two one thousandths mg/l polychlorinated biphenols (PCBs). 
b.  The District's treatment plant digested sludge exceeding a PCB concentration of ten ppm on a dry-weight basis. 
(2)  No person shall cause or permit a discharge into any public sewerage system that would cause, or significantly contribute to, either directly or indirectly, a violation of the conditions of the District's WPDES permit and any modification or reissuance thereof. 
(c)  Limitations superseded. Upon promulgation of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial user subcategory, the federal standards, if more stringent than the limitations imposed under this Article, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this Article, and such industrial user shall comply with said federal standards. The District shall notify all affected users of the applicable requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(d)  No dilution of industrial discharges. Dilution of an industrial discharge for purposes of reducing the pollutant characteristics or concentrations to below the limitations established in this Section or below other applicable pretreatment standards is prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(d))  
Sec. 47-108. - Accidental discharge of prohibited wastewater. 
Any person who accidentally discharges into the public sewerage system wastes or wastewater prohibited under this Article shall immediately report such a discharge to the Director of the District and shall report the location of the discharge, the time thereof, the volume thereof and the type of waste or wastewater so discharged. Within 15 days of such discharge, a detailed written statement describing the cause of the discharge and the measures taken to prevent a future occurrence shall be submitted to the Director of the District. Such reporting shall not relieve the person causing the accidental discharge from any penalties imposed by this Article. Where the Director of the District deems necessary, industrial users shall provide facilities to prevent accidental discharges or spills of wastes or wastewaters prohibited under this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(e))  
Sec. 47-109. - Sand and grease trap installations. 
The installation of grease, oil and sand interceptors at repair garages, gasoline stations, car washes and other industrial or commercial establishments shall be required, where necessary in the opinion of the Director of the District, to prevent discharge of sand, flammable wastes, oil and grease in amounts exceeding the limits of Sections 47-106—47-108. All such traps shall be constructed and maintained by the owner at the owner's expense, in accordance with the Wisconsin Plumbing Code and the specifications of the Village, and shall be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(f))  
Sec. 47-110. - Limitations on discharge of septage wastes and other wastes. 
Any septage waste or other waste permitted to be discharged under this Article shall be of domestic origin or contain compatible pollutants only. The person or licensed disposer making the discharge under this Article shall comply with the provisions of any and all applicable rules and regulations and shall comply with this Article. Without intending to limit the application of other provisions of this Article, such person or licensed disposer shall not deposit or drain any gasoline, oil, acid, alkali, grease, rags, volatile or flammable liquids, or other deleterious substances into any manhole or community sewer, or into the District's wastewater facility, nor shall such person or licensed disposer allow any grease, earth, sand or other solid materials to pass into any part of the sewerage system, nor shall such person or licensed disposer discharge any liquid, gaseous or solid wastes determined by the Director of the District to be detrimental to the sewerage system or to the District's employees or to the process of sewage treatment. No discharges shall be permitted directly into any of the District's interceptor sewers, unless the Director of the District so authorizes. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(h))  
Sec. 47-111. - Permits to discharge septage wastes. 
(a)  No discharge shall be made under this Article unless the person or licensed disposer making the discharge has been issued a permit. All applications for a permit shall be in writing, shall contain such information as the Director of the District deems appropriate and shall be submitted to the Director of the District no later than September 1 of each year. No permit once issued shall be assignable or transferable by the person receiving the same. All such permits shall be valid for a period of one year, beginning on October 1, and expiring on September 30 of each year. No holder of any permit shall acquire any vested right or privilege by reason thereof. 
(b)  If the municipality determines to issue a permit under this Article, such permit may be issued upon such terms and conditions as the issuer may provide, and any such permit shall provide as a minimum the following: 
(1)  The permit shall be conditioned upon the holder's faithful compliance with the provisions of the District's Sewer Use Ordinance, as amended from time to time, and this Article. 
(2)  The agreement of the holder thereof to indemnify the District and the municipality, if applicable, from and against any and all liability for injury or damage arising out of or related to the activities of holder in exercising the rights granted. The District and the municipality, if applicable, may require the holder of such permit to post a bond written by a bonding company licensed to transact business in Wisconsin, to guarantee performance of the holder thereof. 
(3)  Evidence that the holder thereof has in full force and effect sufficient worker's compensation insurance, public liability and property damage insurance. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(i))  
Sec. 47-112. - Wastewater measurement, sampling and reporting and monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Wastewater characteristics and constitutes shall be monitored to determine compliance with this Article and to facilitate an equitable system of service charges. 
(b)  A new user who expects to discharge, or who is capable of discharging, wastewater having constituents or characteristics different from domestic wastewater shall install a monitoring facility. 
(c)  An existing user whose discharges are different from domestic wastewater may be required by the District or municipality to install a monitoring facility. Construction of such facility must be completed within 90 days after the user has been notified of the requirement, unless the District grants an extension of time. 
(d)  All monitoring facilities shall be constructed at the owner's expense, in accordance with the plans approved by the municipality and the District. The monitoring facility shall contain the necessary flow monitoring and sampling equipment to facilitate the observation, sampling and measurement of wastes and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(e)  The requirements of Subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this Section may be waived by special written permission of the Director of the District. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(j))  
Sec. 47-113. - Owner's maintenance of building sewer. 
The owner of property abutting a public sewer shall maintain sewer service from the public sewer main to the structure or building on the owner's property, including all controls between the same, without expense to the Village or Public Utilities Committee, except when they are damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of the respective Village or Public Utilities Committee. Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, the owner has the sole responsibility for the repair and maintenance of all building sewers; and the ownership thereof shall at all times be vested in such property owner. All sewer services must be maintained free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property. When any sewer service is to be relayed and there are two or more buildings on such service, each building shall be disconnected from such service and a new sewer service shall be installed for each building. In the event of any obstruction of, damage to or repair of a building sewer, the same shall be the responsibility of the property owner, except as provided for in Section 47-151 or as otherwise provided for herein. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-6(k))  
Secs. 47-114—47-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 47-141. - Damages. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure of pertinence of equipment that is a part of the sewerage system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-7(a))  
Sec. 47-142. - Written notice of violation. 
Any person connected to the sewerage system found to be violating a provision of this Article shall be served by the Village with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-7(b))  
Sec. 47-143. - Accidental discharge. 
Any person found to be responsible for accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewerage system that causes damage to the sewerage system and/or receiving water body shall, in addition to a forfeiture, pay the amount to cover all damages, both of which will be established by the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-7(c))  
Sec. 47-144. - Accidental discharge reporting. 
Any person responsible for an accidental discharge, that may have a detrimental impact on the sewerage system, shall immediately report the nature and amount of the discharge to the Village or the District. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-7(d))  
Sec. 47-145. - Liability to Village for losses. 
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation that the Village may suffer as a result thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-7(f))  
Sec. 47-146. - Damage recovery. 
The system shall have the right of recovery from all persons, any expense incurred by said system for the repair or replacement of any part of the sewerage system damaged in any manner by any person by the performance of any work under their control, or by any negligent acts. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-7(g))  
Sec. 47-147. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article or who shall connect a service pipe or discharge without first having obtained a permit therefor; or who shall violate any provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or any other materials that are incorporated by reference, shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in Section 1-16 and the costs of prosecution. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-7(h))  
Sec. 47-148. - Appeal procedures. 
Any customer affected by any decision, action, or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the Utility in interpreting or implementing the provisions of this Article may file with the Village a written request for reconsideration within ten days of the date of such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration. The Public Utilities Committee shall render a decision on the request for reconsideration in writing within 60 days of filing of the appeal. If the customer is unsatisfied with the determination of the Public Utilities Committee, the customer may, within ten days after notification of the action, file a written appeal with the Village Board. The provisions of this Section are supplemental to, and are not intended to impair, any right of the customer to seek relief from the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-7(i); Ord. No. 2020-03 , § 1, 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 47-149. - Optional penalty for failure to make mandatory connection. 
In lieu of causing a mandatory connection to a public sewer main to be made at its order, the Public Utilities Committee, at its option, may impose a penalty for the period that the violation continues after ten days' written notice to any owner failing to make such connection to the sewer system. The penalty shall be in the amount of $100.00 per day. Upon failure to make such payment, such penalty shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 281.47. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-7(j))  
Sec. 47-150. - Tap permits. 
After sewer connections have been introduced into any building or upon any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations, extensions, or attachments, unless the party ordering such tapping or other work exhibits the proper permit for the same from the Public Utilities Committee. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-8(a))  
Sec. 47-151. - Obstruction of building sewers in public rights-of-way. 
In the event of any blockage, damage or break in any building sewer, which occurs within a public street, alley, highway, or other public right-of-way, the Public Utilities Committee shall have the exclusive right and option to repair the building sewer within said street, alley, highway or right-of-way. In such event, the owner of the building sewer shall promptly reimburse the Public Utilities Committee for all costs so incurred. If not so reimbursed, the same shall be added to the owner's sewer service charges and collected in the same manner as such charges are so collected. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-8(b))  
Sec. 47-152. - Backflow preventer. 
All floor drains shall have a backflow prevention valve installed at the owner's expense. All new construction shall comply from the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-8(c))  
Sec. 47-153. - User use only. 
No user shall allow other persons or other services to connect to the sewer system through their lateral or building sewer. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-8(d))  
Sec. 47-154. - Discontinuance of service. 
Whenever any person desires to discontinue sewer service from the system, the Public Utilities Committee must be notified in writing prior to such disconnection. Disconnection shall only be allowed where a structure is demolished. The fact that a structure is vacant shall not entitle the property owner to discontinue sewer service or to an abatement of sewer service charges. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-8(e))  
Sec. 47-155. - User to permit inspection. 
Every user shall permit the duly authorized agent of the Village or Public Utilities Committee, at all reasonable times, to enter their premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which the drains, and sewer connections operate; and the user must at all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all questions put to them relative to its use, all in accordance with this Section and Wis. Stats. § 196.171, to the extent applicable. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-8(f))  
Sec. 47-156. - Title to real estate and personal property. 
All property, real, personal and mixed, including, but not limited to, easements, acquired for the construction of each sewer system, and all plans, specifications, diagrams, papers, books and records connected therewith, and all buildings, machinery, and fixtures pertaining thereto, shall be the property of and titled in the name of the Village for the benefit of the Public Utilities Committee. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed as revoking, changing, abandoning or otherwise altering any conveyance of property previously made to the Village prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is derived; and such title shall be deemed to be vested in the Village as provided for herein. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-9)  
Sec. 47-157. - Additions to Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District. 
Whenever any real estate or any easement therein or use thereof shall in the judgment of the Public Utilities Committee be necessary to the sewer system, and whenever for any reason an agreement for purchase from the owners cannot be made, the Public Utilities Committee, after approval of the Village Board, shall proceed with all necessary steps to take such real estate easement or use by condemnation in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes and any other applicable federal or state provisions. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-10)  
Sec. 47-158. - Disconnection and refusal of service. 
(a)  Reasons for disconnection. Sewer service may be disconnected or refused for the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of this Article, as amended from time to time; 
(2)  Violation of the District ordinance, as amended from time to time; 
(3)  Failure to pay the application fee, any connection fee or delinquent account of the user. 
(b)  Discontinuation for delinquent accounts. A bill for service is delinquent if unpaid after the due date shown on the bill. The Public Utilities Committee may disconnect service for a delinquent bill by giving the user at least eight calendar days prior to disconnection, a written disconnect notice, which may be included in the bill for service. For purposes of this rule, the due date shall not be less than 20 days after issuance of the bill. The Public Utilities Committee may disconnect without notice where a dangerous condition exists for as long as the condition exists. Service may be denied to any user for failure to comply with the applicable requirements of these rules and regulations or if a dangerous or unsafe condition exists on the user's property. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-11)  
Sec. 47-159. - Connection fees. 
(a)  Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District charges. For each connection of a building sewer to a public sewer within the Village, there shall be paid a connection charge as determined pursuant to Section 4.7 of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Utility charges. For each connection of a building sewer to a public sewer within the Village there shall be paid connection charges. Such connection charges shall be assessed to the person seeking the connection and shall be paid as a condition precedent to the actual connection. The following connection charges shall apply: The charge established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for sewer hookup and lateral for new buildings. 
(c)  Failure to pay violation of Article. For purposes of this Article, the connection charges described in Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section are collectively referred to as "connection fees." The failure to pay any connection fee is a violation of this Article, and the Public Utilities Committee may pursue all rights and remedies provided for herein. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-12)  
Sec. 47-160. - Abatement procedures. 
(a)  Violations constituting public nuisance. A violation (other than the failure to pay sewer service charges or other fees or costs due under this Article) of any provision of this Article or any other rule or order of the Public Utilities Committee or Village is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Enforcement. The Public Utilities Committee or Village shall have the right to enforce the provisions of this Article and shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this Article to abate a public nuisance unless the Public Utilities Committee or Village shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and shall have satisfied itself that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(c)  Summary abatement. If the Public Utilities Committee or Village determines that a public nuisance exists within the Village and that there is great and immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare, the Public Utilities Committee or Village may cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(d)  Abatement after notice. If the Public Utilities Committee or Village determines that a public nuisance exists on the private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to present great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the Public Utilities Committee or Village shall serve notice to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the same within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within such ten days, the Public Utilities Committee or Village shall cause the nuisances to be removed as provided in Subsection (c) of this Section. 
(e)  Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Public Utilities Committee or the Village or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(f)  Court order. Except when necessary under Subsection (c) of this Section, the Public Utilities Committee or Village shall not use force to obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance, but shall request permission to enter upon private property if such premises are occupied, and, if such permission is denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of the public nuisance. 
(g)  Cost of abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Article for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Public Utilities Committee or Village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, and such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. For purposes hereof, costs shall include, but not be limited to, actual attorneys' fees and court costs. 
(Code 1998, § 9-2-13)  
Secs. 47-161—47-188. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER UTILITY EXTENSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 47-189—47-214. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER SERVICE EXTENSION 
 
Sec. 47-215. - Within the Village. 
The Village Water Utility will extend water mains within the Village and will decide the size of pipe to be used and whether fire protection is to be provided and whether or where hydrants are to be located on the following basis: 
(a)  Public way frontage. In accordance with past practices, rules and policies, water main extensions will be made and water service provided only to those premises that have a frontage on a regularly dedicated and accepted public street, alley or other public strip. 
(b)  Special assessment basis. Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, the total cost of extending water distribution mains will be specially assessed pursuant to law including Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0627, 66.0701 and 66.0703, and acts amendatory thereto. 
(c)  Customer financed basis. Where the Village Board decides that, because of present density of prospective customers or because the amount reasonably assessable being in excess of benefits afforded by the extension or because of substantial opposition by owners of property along the line of the requested extension or because of other conditions, the existence of which make it inexpedient and not in the best interest of the utility, its customers, or the residents and taxpayers of the Village or because of any combination of such conditions found to exist, an extension on a special assessment basis is not then warranted, then extensions will be made upon a customer financed basis as follows: 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
a.  Contribution. The owner of property at the time a contribution is made or a refund is payable unless a specific written agreement approved by the Village Board otherwise provides. 
b.  Customer. The owner of premises to which water is to be furnished unless a specific written agreement approved by the Village Board otherwise provides. As to contributions or refunds, the term "customer" more specifically means the owner of the premises at the time the contribution is to be made or the refund becomes payable. 
(2)  Contributions from original customers. The entire cost of the extension, including street crossings and fire hydrants, will be computed and such cost will be divided by the number of feet of main in the proposed extension. The cost of the extension must be advanced and paid to the Village Water Utility by the applicants for the extension before the extension will be made. 
(3)  Additional customers and refunds. When new customers are connected to a water main extension that was paid for in part by initial customers, the Village Water Utility shall require a contribution from each subsequent customer equal to the existing average customer contribution made prior to the new customer's connection. The amount of the average contribution paid by the new customer will be refunded pro-rata within ten years of the date of installation of the water main extension to all contributors (including the new customer) whose remaining unrefunded contribution exceeds the amount that would have been assessed to such customer's property at the time of the original extension if the assessment were computed on a foot basis under Subsection (b) of this Section. When refunds have so reduced the contribution of any contributor, no further refund will be made and after all contributors have received refunds reducing their contribution to such level, then the charge to additional customers who connect to the extension will be assessed at the amount that would have been assessed to their property if it had been assessed under Subsection (b) of this Section on a front-foot basis. 
(4)  When additions to extension will be considered a separate extension. When an addition to an existing extension is required to serve a new customer and the cost of the addition per customer exceeds the remaining average contribution in the original extension then the addition will be treated as a new, separate and distinct extension project; but if the cost of the addition per customer on the addition to an extension is lower than the average remaining contribution in the original extension, then the new customer shall pay the amount of the average remaining contribution from which will be first deducted the cost of the addition and the balance of the contribution refunded as hereinbefore provided for new extensions. 
(5)  Utility financed basis. Where the Village Board decides that it is in the best interests of the public that an extension pursuant to Subsection (b) of this Section on a special assessment basis is not warranted, then extension may be made upon a utility financed basis. New customers that are connected to a water main extension paid for by the utility shall be required to contribute and a pro-rata refund shall be given to the utility. 
(Code 1998, § 9-3-1(a); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 31, 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 47-216. - Water service and extensions beyond the municipal limits of the Village. 
(a)  In order to provide and maintain adequate fire protection for persons and property within the corporate limits of the Village and to ensure protection of the public and welfare of the Village residents without placing an undue financial burden on the Village taxpayers and to effectively coordinate water department operations with other municipal public works activities and for the purpose of conserving the available water supply, it is hereby determined that it is necessary to specifically limit the territory to an extent to which the Village water utility will serve areas outside of the municipal boundary limits of the Village, and further reserves the right to deny water service to any territory outside of the Village. 
(b)  When water mains are extended outside the corporate limits of the Village, the property owner requesting water service shall pay the total cost of such extensions, including engineering, legal and administrative expense, prior to commencement of work, and any other persons that receive water service from such extension shall be required to pay to the Village Water Utility an amount representing benefits therefrom, based on pro-rata costs of such extension and laterals, and after the Village has, as determined by the Village Board, received in full its costs for said extension and laterals, the balance thereof shall be paid to the persons that paid the original cost of extension thereof. Standard rates to apply. 
(c)  The Village Board, upon request, deems it necessary where practical to extend the water service outside the corporate limits of the Village, from such mains that lay in the Village adjacent to the property to be served and previously installed by special assessment. The property owner desiring such water service shall pay to the Village Water Utility, before commencement of work, a sum as determined by the Village, which amount includes the cost of lateral to property line. Standard water rates to apply. 
(d)  The extension of and/or furnishing of water service to such areas outside the Village shall be subject to all the provisions governing extensions and furnishing of water service to customers that are within the Village limits with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The Village shall not pay any sum for fire protection service afforded by any extension or service outside the Village, and shall be paid by the municipality wherein the same is extended on the same basis as paid by the Village. 
(2)  Water rents charged for service afforded may be in such additional amounts as shall be from time to time provided and approved by the Wisconsin Public Service Commission and shall be payable in advance. 
(3)  Water will be furnished to applicants living outside the Village limits only when such service can be furnished without any adverse effect upon the service inside the Village and the Village Board must approve all applications for extensions and service before extensions will be made or service given. 
(4)  If the application is for water service from an existing main and the application is approved, the main will be tapped and upon installation of the service to the point of use the water will be turned on, but no work will be performed by the utility and no water turned on until: 
a.  The Village Water Utility has been advanced the full cost of the work to be done and materials to be used and provided by the Utility incidental to making the connection including the cost of installation service pipe from the main to the premises. 
b.  The first advance payment for water rental is made. 
(5)  If the application for service requires an extension or addition to the distribution mains, the application will not be approved unless the applicants have secured, in writing, acceptable easements or franchises over the highway, street, public way or public strip where the main is to be extended and unless the applicants agree, in writing, with the Village Board to pay the total cost of the extension and connections thereto pursuant to such specifications as may be made by the Village Board, including the cost of such fire hydrants and hydrant connections as may be required by the Village Board and including the cost of installation across the street and highway intersections and across any other public ground without any free limit provided. Upon such agreement being made and executed, the Village Board shall, if it approves the application, and before the commencement of any work, require the applicants to advance to the utility the total estimated cost to the utility of the extension, the connections thereto and the first advance payment of water rental for each proposed initial connection. 
(6)  All plans and specifications for such extensions must be approved by the State Board of Health. 
(e)  Water mains and connections thereto outside the Village limits shall be under the supervision of the Village Board. 
(f)  All applications for extensions outside of the Village shall be submitted with the understanding and condition that if and when any portion of the property supplied comes into the Village by operation of law, annexation or other proceedings, the ownership of the water main within such area shall become the property of the Village Water Utility without compensation. 
(Code 1998, § 9-3-1(b))  
Secs. 47-217—47-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS 
 
Sec. 47-241. - Application and approval. 
The extension of public sewer system to serve new customers/users is subject to the prior review and approval of the Public Utilities Committee and Village Board and any other governmental agency having appropriate jurisdiction. Any person seeking to develop real property and requiring sewer service in connection with such development, shall make application to the Village for a public sewer main extension, if so required, in order to serve such development. Such application shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
(a)  The name of development, the legal description of the property involved, the owner of the property if different than the applicant, and written consent of the owner must accompany application; 
(b)  The plat map or Certified Survey Map or other map showing street layout and lot sizes; 
(c)  The proposed plans and specifications for the sewers; 
(d)  The name and address of the consulting engineer; 
(e)  The number of housing units and/or other units to be constructed; 
(f)  Such additional information as the Public Utilities Committee or Village Board may require. 
(Code 1998, § 9-3-2(a))  
Sec. 47-242. - Conditions of approval. 
Subject to recommendation by the Public Utilities Committee, the Village Board shall have the sole discretion to approve or disapprove the requested public sewer system extensions. In granting such approval, the Village Board may condition its approval upon compliance with: 
(a)  Any applicable ordinances of the Village, the District or Dane County; 
(b)  Any applicable statute, rules, orders, or codes of the state; 
(c)  The preparation of plans and specifications for the public sewer system extension, subject to the approval of the Public Utilities Committee and its consulting engineer; 
(d)  The applicant making and installing the public sewer system extension at the applicant's sole cost and expense or otherwise providing a surety bond or other security to ensure that the public sewer system will be so constructed within a reasonable period of time; 
(e)  The dedication of such rights-of-way, easements, and sewerage facilities as the Village may reasonably require; 
(f)  The payment of all costs and expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Village or Public Utilities Committee in connection with the review and approval of such public sewer system extension, including, but not limited to, engineers' fees, attorneys' fees, inspection fees and other similar costs and expenses; 
(g)  The payment of any applicable connection fees due or to become due pursuant to Section 47-159; 
(h)  Any other condition determined by the Public Utilities Committee or Village to be fair and reasonable in order to protect the interest of the Village in connection with the proposed development. 
(Code 1998, § 9-3-2(b))  
Sec. 47-243. - Contract for sewer improvements. 
The Public Utilities Committee or Village may require the person filing an application pursuant to Section 47-241 to enter into a written development agreement with the Village as a condition of the approval of the public sewer system extension. Such agreement shall define the scope of the work, the obligations of the applicant to construct the sewer facilities, the requirement of security for performance of the applicant's obligations set forth therein, and such other matters as the Public Utilities Committee and/or Village may reasonably determine. The applicant shall reimburse the Public Utilities Committee or Village for all attorneys' fees incurred hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 9-3-2(c))  
Sec. 47-244. - Village sewer extension. 
The Public Utilities Committee or Village may, on its own, cause any public sewer system to be extended at such time and under such conditions as the Public Utilities Committee or Village deems appropriate. 
(Code 1998, § 9-3-2(d))  
Secs. 47-245—47-266. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER UTILITY 
 
Sec. 47-267. - Purpose. 
The Village Board finds that the management of stormwater and other surface water discharges draining to the Yahara River watershed and Lake Waubesa is a matter that affects the health, safety and welfare of the Village, its citizens and businesses and others in the surrounding area. In addition, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources have implemented new standards for stormwater management that will require significant upgrades to the existing stormwater practices of the Village, as well as increased costs for complying with these standards. Failure to effectively manage stormwater affects the sanitary sewer utility operations of the Village by, among other things, increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. Surface water runoff may cause erosion of lands, threaten residences and businesses with water damage, and create environmental damage to the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within and adjacent to the Village. A system for the collection and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the Village and surrounding areas including properties not currently served by the systems. The cost of operating and maintaining the Village stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the system. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the Village Board hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility and establish the rates for stormwater management services adopting and publishing as required by law the regulations contained in this Section, the Village is acting pursuant to the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 66.0821. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1(9-6-1), 11-12-2007)  
Sec. 47-268. - Creation, power and authority of utility. 
(a)  In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the Village Board hereby exercises its authority to establish the McFarland Stormwater Utility. 
(b)  The management, operation and control of the McFarland Stormwater Utility shall be vested in the Public Utilities Committee. 
(c)  Subject to the approval of the Village Board, the McFarland Stormwater Utility, shall have the power and authority to acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage, and finance such utilities, operations and activities, as are deemed by the Village to be proper and reasonably necessary for a system of stormwater and surface water management. These facilities may include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining walls, ponds, streets, roads, ditches and such other facilities relating to collection, runoff and retention. This includes facilities that will support a stormwater management system, whether such facilities are owned and operated directly by the Village or are provided under statutory or contractual provisions and furnishing of which facilities create or impose a cost or charge upon the Village for the services afforded by such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1(9-6-2), 11-12-2007)  
Sec. 47-269. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Commercial building. A building for business and commercial uses. 
(b)  Customer. The owner of a developed parcel. 
(c)  Developed parcel. Any parcel where the property has been altered to add any impervious area. 
(d)  Duplex. A building containing two dwelling units, or as otherwise identified in the Village's Building and Zoning Codes. 
(e)  Equivalent runoff unit (ERU). The impervious area of a developed parcel relative to the statistical average of impervious area of a single-family unit within the Village. One ERU is equal to 3,456 square feet of impervious area. 
(f)  Fixed cost. The portion of the stormwater fee that is applied to each residential, commercial, industrial and public entity customer where the charge arises from the administrative and general expenses of the Stormwater Utility. The fixed costs shall include the following: 
(1)  Stormwater salaries, social security and fringe benefits based upon percentage of time spent by Village employees on stormwater management and related overhead functions; 
(2)  Membership in the Madison Area Municipal Stormwater Partnership (MAMSWP); 
(3)  Audit; costs for audits of the Stormwater Utility; 
(4)  The Village's share of the cost for the Joint Municipal Stormwater Discharge Permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that covers the Village and the other MAMSWP communities and UW Madison; 
(5)  Stormwater facility rental cost; 
(6)  Allocated share of liability, property and worker's compensation insurance costs; 
(7)  Stormwater newsletter expenses; 
(8)  Stormwater office supplies; 
(9)  Stormwater equipment maintenance; 
(10)  Stormwater education and travel; 
(11)  Stormwater street sweeping; and 
(13)  Stormwater sinking fund. 
(g)  Impervious area. A surface as measured on a horizontal plane that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by rainwater. It includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, loading docks, parking lots, sidewalks, and compacted clay and gravel which are used as driveways or parking lots. Impervious area is deemed to generate excess or increased runoff as compared to property in its undeveloped state. 
(h)  Industrial building. A building for manufacturing and industrial activities. 
(i)  Institutional building. A building intended for governmental, educational or religious activities that has obtained exemption from Wisconsin property taxes under Wis. Stats. § 70.11(1), (2), (2m), (3), (4), (6), (7), (20), (32) and (34). 
(j)  Multifamily residential building. A building, or portion thereof, containing three or more dwelling units. 
(k)  Parcel. The legal unit of land division as recorded by the Dane County Register of Deeds. Multiple contiguous parcels with the same owner shall be considered to be one parcel for the purposes of calculating Stormwater Utility charges. 
(l)  Single-family. A building containing one dwelling unit, or as otherwise identified in the Village's Building and Zoning Codes. 
(m)  Undeveloped or undeveloped parcel. A parcel with no impervious area. Undeveloped parcels are not deemed to generate excess or increased runoff. 
(n)  Variable costs. The portion of the stormwater fee reflecting the costs incurred by the Stormwater Utility related to activities in the construction, maintenance and operations of the Village Stormwater Management System, including costs related to acquisition of land and land rights, structures and improvements, accessories, dry and wet stormwater detention basins, swales, storm sewers, outfall limited release stormwater structures such as weir structures, treatment of and removal of solids from existing stormwater structures. These costs include variable portions of: 
(1)  Stormwater salaries, social security and fringe benefits; 
(2)  Stormwater overtime; 
(3)  Stormwater legal services; 
(4)  Stormwater engineering services; 
(5)  Stormwater detention basin maintenance; 
(6)  Stormwater storm sewer maintenance; 
(7)  Stormwater yard waste services; 
(8)  Stormwater monitoring and testing; 
(9)  Stormwater locates; 
(10)  Allocated costs for facilities based in the Public Works Facility and Municipal Center used by employees who have a percentage of their labor time allocated to the Stormwater Utility; 
(11)  Stormwater equipment rental; 
(12)  Stormwater operating supplies; 
(13)  Stormwater capital projects; and 
(14)  Debt service from stormwater capital projects. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1(9-6-3), 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 2010-02, §§ 1—3, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 47-270. - Applicability of charges. 
A stormwater utility charge to cover the costs of the stormwater management system necessary to fulfill the purposes set forth in Section 47-267 shall apply to each developed parcel in the Village. The Village Engineer shall prepare a map depicting all such properties in the Village other than single-family and duplex units and which shall be approved by the Public Utilities Committee. In the alternative, the Village Engineer may submit data justifying the calculation of impervious surface areas for properties other than single-family and duplex units not yet included on such map. A copy of such map or such calculations of impervious areas shall be kept on file in the office of the Director of Public Works. Stormwater charges shall not apply to public highways, railroad rights-of-way or cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1(9-6-4), 11-12-2007)  
Sec. 47-271. - Calculation of stormwater utility charges. 
(a)  Customer classification. All property subject to stormwater utility charges shall be classified into one of the following customer classes: 
(1)  Single-family or duplex unit. 
(2)  Non-single-family or duplex unit. 
(b)  Stormwater fee. Each customer shall be charged a stormwater fee based upon a charge as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code unless a different charge is recommended by the Public Utilities Committee and adopted by the Village Board by resolution. The stormwater fee shall include amounts for the fixed costs of the Stormwater Utility, as well as the Variable Costs of the Stormwater Utility based on its actual experience in the administration of the Stormwater Utility. The Public Utilities Committee shall assure that the fixed cost component and the Variable Cost component of the stormwater fee are accounted for separately on an ongoing basis. A copy of any such resolution shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer and Village Engineer upon adoption. 
(c)  Single-family and duplex units. Each single-family and duplex unit shall equal one ERU. 
(d)  Non-single-family or duplex units. Each other parcel, whether multifamily residential, commercial, industrial or institutional, shall be charged for one ERU or a number of ERUs equal to the ratio of the total impervious area of the parcel to the square footage of one ERU whichever is greater. (For example, a parcel with 5,200 square feet of impervious area shall be charged for 1.5 ERUs.) The number of ERUs shall be rounded to the nearest tenth. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1(9-6-5), 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 4, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 138, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 47-272. - Credits. 
Credits may be obtained toward a reduction of the stormwater fee chargeable to a given parcel which is attributable to operation and maintenance expenses of the Utility. Such credits may be obtained as follows: 
(a)  Discharge rate reduction. Owners of developed parcels having impervious area with greater than one ERU assigned to such parcels and not containing single-family or duplex units may receive a credit calculated against the stormwater fee in accordance with Subsection (i) of this Section, arising from the portion of the stormwater fee related to impervious areas that are in excess of one ERU if new on-site stormwater facilities not specifically required by ordinance, permit, statute or regulation are installed which reduce stormwater discharge rates below levels specified in the Stormwater Credit Manual. In all cases, reduction shall be calculated in accordance with the then-current calculation methodologies by the Wisconsin Department of Resources and by Dane County as set forth in the Stormwater Credit Manual. 
(b)  Runoff volume reduction. Owners of developed parcels having impervious area with greater than one ERU assigned to such parcels and not containing single-family or duplex units may receive a credit against the stormwater fee calculated in accordance with Subsection (i) of this Section, arising from the portion of the stormwater fee related to impervious areas that are in excess of one ERU if new on-site stormwater facilities not specifically required by ordinance, permit, statute or regulation are installed which reduce the total volume of runoff to levels specified in the Stormwater Credit Manual. In all cases, reduction shall be calculated in accordance with the then-current calculation methodologies approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and by Dane County as set forth in the Stormwater Credit Manual. 
(c)  Quality improvement. Owners of developed parcels having impervious area with greater than one ERU assigned to such parcels not containing single family or duplex units may receive a credit against the stormwater fee calculated in accordance with Subsection (i) of this Section, arising from the portion of the stormwater fee related to impervious areas that are in excess of one ERU if new on-site stormwater facilities not specifically required by ordinance, permit, statute or regulation are installed which reduce suspended solids discharges below levels specified in the Stormwater Credit Manual. In all cases, reduction shall be calculated in accordance with the then-current calculation methodology approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and by Dane County as set forth in the Stormwater Credit Manual. 
(d)  Education. A credit not to exceed 20 percent of the total stormwater fee due against the stormwater fee related to impervious areas for that property that is in excess of one ERU for any elementary, middle or high school, property may be granted where an established stormwater education curriculum is taught. Such credit shall apply only to the property of the school where the stormwater education curriculum is taught. The method of calculation of the credit shall be established by the Village Board upon review of a proposed curriculum. A qualified stormwater education curriculum shall present stormwater and water resources management education to every student at least one time during each student's time at the particular school and shall be reasonably calculated to encourage appreciation and stewardship of water resources and thereby reduce negative impacts on local streams and lakes. Subsections (h) through (l) of this Section shall not apply to obtain this credit. Application for this credit shall be made by submitting a proposed curriculum to the Village Administrator with a written request for consideration of a credit. The Village Administrator shall review the proposed curriculum and shall submit a recommendation to the Village Board within 45 days of receipt of the request unless an extension of time is agreed to, in writing, by the school or district. The Village Administrator may negotiate with the school or district during the 45 days regarding the specifications of the curriculum and the amount of credit to be recommended, however, the Village Board shall have final approval authority. 
(e)  Direct discharge. Owners of developed parcels having impervious area with greater than one ERU assigned to such parcels and not containing single-family or duplex units may receive a credit against the stormwater fee calculated in accordance with Subsection (i) of this Section, arising from the portion of the stormwater fee related to impervious areas that are in excess of one ERU if the owner demonstrates as set forth in the Stormwater Credit Manual that more than 50 percent of the parcel area drains directly to Lake Waubesa or Upper Mud Lake without passing through any portion of the stormwater collection and conveyance system operated or maintained by the Village or without crossing any public rights-of-way. 
(f)  Combined. Where a stormwater fee credit is sought by an owner for multiple reductions or improvements, the maximum credit allowed shall not exceed that portion of the total stormwater fee calculated in accordance with Subsection (i) of this Section, that exceeds one ERU. 
(g)  Effect of credits. In the event the Village grants any stormwater fee credits, the cost of any credits may be reallocated across other Village properties by increasing the amount of a single ERU so that the total revenue available to the Stormwater Utility shall not be reduced by the amount of the credits allowed. 
(h)  Application. To obtain a stormwater fee credit, the owner must submit an application on a form prescribed by the Village Clerk-Treasurer including design calculations as specified in the Stormwater Credit Manual. The Village Engineer shall review the application and supporting materials to determine eligibility and amount of the credit. No property shall receive a credit unless the calculation methodology conforms to the calculation methodologies specified in the Stormwater Credit Manual. If the information submitted is complete, the Village Engineer shall make a determination within 30 days of submittal. 
(i)  Calculation of credit. If any property qualifies for a stormwater fee credit under Subsections (a) through (e), the maximum available credit shall be applied only against the Variable Cost component of the stormwater fee. No credit is available against the Fixed Cost component of the stormwater fee. In no event may a credit reduce the stormwater fee below the charge for one ERU per year. 
(j)  Appeal. Appeal of the determination of the Village Engineer shall be heard by the Public Utilities Committee. Written notice of appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer within 15 days of receipt of the Village Engineer's determination. The notice of appeal shall describe the basis of the appeal. 
(k)  Fees. The credit application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Any notice of appeal under Subsection (j) of this Section shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(l)  Effective date. No credit shall take effect unless the stormwater management facilities for which the application was filed are installed and approved by the Village Engineer. Any stormwater facility approved by the Village Engineer shall receive a credit as of July 1 in the year of completion if completed prior to April 1 of such year. Any stormwater facility approved by the Village Engineer after April 1 of any year shall receive a credit on January 1 of the next succeeding year. 
(m)  Maintenance. Once installed, the owner of developed parcels shall maintain the practices for which credit was granted. In order to qualify for a credit in each succeeding year, owners shall certify in writing to the Village no later than November 1 of each succeeding year of their continued maintenance of the practice for which credit was granted. Failure to maintain the practice shall result in cancellation of the credit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1(9-6-6), 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 2010-02, §§ 5—19, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 139, 140, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 47-273. - Billing. 
(a)  The Public Utilities Committee shall establish billing procedures and may bill charges on the same invoice as water and sewer charges. 
(b)  Interest on late payments may be charged not to exceed 1.5 percent per month. 
(c)  On October 15 of each year, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall cause a notice to be mailed or delivered to the owner or occupant of any parcel to which stormwater utility charges, plus any interest are in arrears. All balances in arrears on November 1 of each year shall become a lien on the parcel and shall be inserted on the tax rolls for collection in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0809(3) as amended. 
(d)  Stormwater utility charges shall not be paid in installments. 
(e)  Billing methods and charge calculations may be modified for governmental customers by intergovernmental agreement pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0301. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1(9-6-7), 11-12-2007; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 141, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 47-274. - Annual budget; enterprise fund. 
The McFarland Stormwater Utility shall prepare an annual budget, which shall separately account for the revenue and expense of the McFarland Stormwater Utility. Stormwater utility expenses shall include all operation and maintenance costs, cost of borrowing, planning costs and other costs related to the operation of the McFarland Stormwater Utility. The budget is subject to approval by the Village Board. Stormwater charges collected shall be deposited in the McFarland Stormwater Utility enterprise fund and shall be used for no other purpose. Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year shall be retained in the enterprise fund and used for stormwater utility expenses in subsequent years. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1(9-6-8), 11-12-2007)  
Secs. 47-275—47-331. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STORM SEWERS 
 
Sec. 47-332. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Village and protect the waters of the state through the regulation of illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system as required by federal and state law. This Article establishes methods for controlling the discharge of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system owned or operated by the Village in order to comply with the requirements of the Clean Water Act, Wis. Stats.§ 283.33 and the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) municipal storm waste discharge permit program under Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 216. The objectives of this Article are: 
(a)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system associated with discharges from any user of the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 9-5-1; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 11-22-2004)  
Sec. 47-333. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Illicit connection. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows the discharge of sanitary waste to the municipal storm sewer system and any connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system from indoor drains and sinks. 
(b)  Illicit discharge. Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges with a Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or discharges otherwise permitted by law. 
(c)  Municipal separate storm sewer system. A conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, public streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Owned or operated by the Village. 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater. 
(3)  That is not a combined sewer conveying both sanitary wastewater and stormwater. 
(4)  That is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more stringent treatment. 
(d)  Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(e)  Person. An individual, owner, operator, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or association. 
(f)  Stormwater. Surface runoff and drainage of rainfall and snow or ice melt. 
(g)  Waters of the state. Those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of Wisconsin, all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private within the state or under its jurisdiction, except those waters that are entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a person. 
(Code 1998, § 9-5-2; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 11-22-2004)  
Sec. 47-334. - Applicability. 
This Article shall apply to all discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system and to all activities that can reasonably be expected to result in a discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Code 1998, § 9-5-3; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 11-22-2004)  
Sec. 47-335. - Responsibility for administration. 
The Village Engineer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 9-5-4; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 11-22-2004)  
Sec. 47-336. - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Article are minimum standards. Therefore, this Article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharges. 
(Code 1998, § 9-5-5; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 11-22-2004)  
Sec. 47-337. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No personal shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the state of any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. The following non-stormwater discharges or flows are generally not considered illicit discharges if done so in a nonpolluting manner: water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool water, street wash water and firefighting. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the municipal separate storm sewer is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this Article if the person connects a line conveying sanitary waste to the municipal separate storm sewer, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Code 1998, § 9-5-6; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 11-22-2004)  
Sec. 47-338. - Monitoring of discharges. 
The Village Engineer shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this Article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Article. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access. 
(Code 1998, § 9-5-7; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 11-22-2004)  
Sec. 47-339. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials that are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer, or water of the state, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and clean-up of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Village Engineer in person, by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized agency within three business days of the phone notice. 
(Code 1998, § 9-5-8; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 11-22-2004)  
Sec. 47-340. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This Article may be enforced by citation issued by the Village Engineer. 
(b)  Any person found to have violated any provision of this Article may be required to forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense. 
(c)  Every violation of this Article is a public nuisance. Compliance with this Article may be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the Village. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
(d)  The Village Engineer or designee may upon discovery of any violation of this Article take any abatement actions reasonably necessary to prevent damage to the waters of the state. The costs incurred by the Village, plus interest and legal costs, shall be billed to the record owner of the property, and if not paid, shall be entered on the tax rolls and collected as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(e)  The Village Engineer is authorized to refer any violation of this Article to the Village Attorney for the commencement of legal proceedings. 
(Code 1998, § 9-5-9; Ord. No. 2004-33, § 1, 11-22-2004)  
Secs. 47-341—47-368. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CABLE TELEVISION 
 
Sec. 47-369. - General provisions. 
The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0420 are hereby incorporated as though fully set forth herein. The additional provisions of this Article supplement those provisions of the state statutes and constitute an expression of the Village's home rule authority. Any person who owns, leases, operates, controls, constructs or maintains a video service or cable television service shall comply at all times with the provision herein when constructing, operating or maintaining a video service or cable television service in the Village.  
Sec. 47-370. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this Article shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0420(2), which is incorporated as though fully set forth herein.  
Sec. 47-371. - Video service provider fee and PEG channel monetary support. 
(a)  Video service provider fee. Video service providers and cable operators shall pay, in addition to the PEG support fee set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section, a video service provider fee to the Village in an amount equal to five percent of the provider's gross receipts. 
(b)  Public, educational and government (PEG) channel monetary support. Video service providers and cable operators shall pay, in addition to the video service provider fee set forth in Subsection (a) of this Section, a monthly fee of $0.25 per subscriber, which payment shall be used to fund PEG access related external costs. The allocation of the PEG channel monetary support fee between public access and government access activities/channels shall be at the sole discretion of the Village, and the Village may alter such allocation at any time and without notice. 
(c)  Supporting documentation. Payment of the fees set forth in Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section shall be accompanied by documentation verified by an agent or officer with the authority to legally bind the provider that is sufficient for the Village to verify the accuracy of the fees being paid by the provider. The failure to provide such documentation shall subject the provider to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $5,000.00 per day until such time the documentation is provided to the Village.  
Sec. 47-372. - PEG channel requirements. 
(a)  Number of PEG channels. Video service providers and cable operators shall provide capacity for three PEG channels. These channels shall be allocated as follows: one specifically designated for the McFarland Cable Channel for the operation by the Village of McFarland of a governmental access channel, one channel dedicated for use by WYOU, which is operated as a public access channel by WYOU Community Television Inc., and one channel dedicated for use as an educational access channel by the McFarland School District. 
(b)  Location of PEG channels. PEG channels must be carried on any service tier that is viewed by more than 50 percent of the video service provider's or cable operator's customers. Video service providers or cable operators may not charge an extra fee nor require the rental of special equipment in order for their customers to view such PEG channels if such fees or equipment are not required to view any of the non-PEG channels on such service tiers. 
(c)  Quality of PEG channels. Video service providers and cable operators shall not carry a PEG television signal in a lesser format or lower resolution than that afforded to a non-broadcast digital programmer carried on the video or cable system. The signal quality of PEG channels shall be indistinguishable or better than the signal of other non-PEG channels carried by the video service provider or cable operator. 
(d)  Crops/origination points. Video service providers and cable operators shall apply and maintain upstream capacity from all current origination points (also known as "live drops") and shall provide sufficient capacity for carriage of a television signal from each of these origination points at all times. These origination points are all located in the Village of McFarland as follows: 
(1)  McFarland Municipal Center, 5920 Milwaukee Street; 
(2)  E.D. Locke Public Library, 5920 Milwaukee Street; 
(3)  McFarland High School, 5101 Farwell Street; 
(4)  Indian Mound Middle School, 6330 Exchange Street; 
(5)  Madison Curling Club, 4802 Marsh Road. 
(e)  Substantial utilization of PEG channels and PEG programming. 
(1)  Procedures for disconnection due to failure to substantially utilize PEG channel. 
a.  Written notice of objection to program as not locally produced. A Video service provider or cable operator must provide written notice to the PEG channel director within ten days of the first or original airing of any program that the video service provider or cable operator is objecting to the program as having not been locally produced. Such notice shall describe with particularity the program being objected to, the date and time the program was first aired and the factual basis supporting the objection. Failure to timely provide this notice waives the objection and, therefore, such program will be counted towards the determination of whether said PEG channel is being substantially utilized. 
b.  Written notification of failure to substantially utilize channel. A video service provider or cable operator must provide written notification to any PEG channel director within ten days following any week in which the video service provider or cable operator objects that the PEG channel has not been substantially utilized. Such notice shall describe with particularity the time period being objected to, the dates and times during the week in which qualifying programming was not aired and the factual basis supporting the objection. Failure to provide this notice in a timely manner waives the objection and, therefore, such programming period will be counted towards the determination of whether said PEG channel is being substantially utilized. 
c.  Written notification of intention to disconnect, reprogram or drop PEG channel. A video service provider or cable operator must provide 120 days' advance written notification to any PEG channel director that the video service provider or cable operator intends to disconnect, reprogram or drop. A video service provider or cable operator may not disconnect, reprogram or drop any PEG channel that it has not provided in a timely manner with such written notice. Furthermore, should any PEG channel director provide the video service provider or cable operator with a written response that the PEG channel was substantially utilized by the Village, the video service provider or cable operator shall not disconnect, reprogram or drop the PEG channel. 
d.  Penalty for failing to provide notice(s). If any video service provider or cable operator disconnects, reprograms or drops any PEG channels without providing the notice(s) as required in Subsections (e)(1)a. through (e)(1)c. of this Section, the video service provider or cable operator shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Immediate reinstatement of the PEG channel to its location in the channel lineup prior to the disconnection, reprogramming or dropping of the channel. 
2.  A forfeiture of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00 for each day that the PEG channel is disconnected, reprogrammed or dropped. 
(2)  Locally produced programming. Locally produced programming shall include all programming produced by any PEG channel and shall include all programming that has not been commercially aired. For the purposes of this Subsection, the term "locally produced programming" includes any program that was in part produced for original airing in the broadcast market in which it was produced either in part or in whole. The term "locally produced" shall not require that the programming was created, filmed or produced in the Village or County area. PEG stations may share and exchange programming content in order to meet the substantial utilization requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.0420(5)(b). 
(f)  Underwriting of programming. PEG channels may transmit non-commercial programming to subscribers generally or specific recipients of video service providers or cable operators. Nothing herein shall in any way prohibit or prevent PEG channels from accepting grants or sponsorships in support of such programming, nor shall PEG channels be prohibited from acknowledging such grants or sponsorships before, during or immediately after such PEG programming has been broadcast in a manner that is similar to the manner in which the Public Broadcasting System (PBS) acknowledges the substantially similar support of its programming content. Such acknowledgements shall comply with the requirements of 47 USC 399b as though the PEG channel were a public broadcast station. 
(g)  Notice of intention to move PEG channel locations/designations. Any video service provider or cable operator who intends to move any PEG channel from the channel designations may only make such a change after providing 60 days' advance written notice to the affected PEG channel(s). Additionally, such video service provider or cable operator shall engage in a public education program of such intensity and duration as to reasonably inform the general public of the proposed PEG channel designations.  
Sec. 47-373. - Police powers, design/construction standards and rights-of-way. 
(a)  Subject to police powers. Video service providers and cable operators are subject to the police power of the Village to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety, health and welfare of the public. The grant of a statewide video or cable franchise does not render or to any extent lose, waive, impair or lessen the lawful powers and rights, now or hereafter vested in the Village under the constitution and statutes of the state to regulate the use of streets and public ways or to regulate any matter affecting the safety, health and welfare of the public. The Village shall make the video service provider's and cable operator's history of compliance with such codes and ordinances available to the Department of Financial Institutions so that the department may determine the provider or operator's legal, financial and technical qualifications to provide video services. 
(b)  Design, permits, construction and excavation. Video service providers and cable operators shall comply with all applicable Village codes and ordinances including, without limitation by expression herein, Section 53-122, and shall be subject to any forfeitures so specified for any violations thereof. The Village shall make the person's history of compliance with such codes and ordinances available to the Department of Financial Institutions so that the department may determine the provider or operator's legal, financial and technical qualifications to provide video services.  
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Recycling, Wis. Stats. § 61.345; solid waste, Wis. Stats. § 287.01 et seq.; solid waste facilities, Wis. Stats. § 289.01 et seq.; hazardous waste management, Wis. Stats. § 291.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this Chapter to enhance and improve the environment and promote the health, safety and welfare of the Village by establishing minimum standards for the storage, collection, transport, processing, separation, recovery and disposal of solid waste, garbage and recyclable material. The weekly collection of solid waste shall be under the direction of the Public Works Department. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-2)  
Sec. 50-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Agricultural establishment. An establishment engaged in the rearing and slaughtering of animals and the processing of animal products or orchard and field crops. 
(b)  Bi-metal container. A container for carbonated or malt beverages that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
(c)  Bulky waste. Items whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal collection, processing or disposal methods. 
(d)  Collector/hauler. The contractor or entity chosen by the Village Board to handle, transport and dispose of the Village's solid waste, recyclables and nonrecyclables or, the person contracting with waste generators for these services. Such collector/hauler shall enforce preparation standards for recyclable materials as well as insure community compliance with the Village source separation recycling program. 
(e)  Commercial unit. All property other than residential units, including boardinghouses, motels and resorts. 
(f)  Container board. Heavy duty Kraft paper packaging material with a corrugated medium between two flat paper liners used in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products, but excluding paperboard such as used in cereal or laundry detergent boxes or holders for beverage cans or bottles. 
(g)  Curb. The back edge or curb and gutter along a paved street or where one would be if the street was paved and had curb and gutter. 
(h)  Demolition wastes. That portion of solid wastes consisting of wastes from the repair, remodeling or reconstruction of buildings, such as lumber, roofing and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken concrete, asphalt and plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation and any other materials resulting from the demolition of buildings and improvements. 
(i)  Disposal. The orderly process of discarding useless or unwanted material. 
(j)  Dump. A land site where solid waste is disposed of in a manner that does not protect the environment. 
(k)  Dwelling unit. A place of habitation occupied by a normal single-family unit or a combination of persons who may be considered as equivalent to a single-family unit for the purposes of this Chapter. 
(l)  Effective recycling plan. At least the following for the classes of properties set forth: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings. Owners or designated agents of multifamily dwellings shall do the following to recycle materials subject to preparation standards pursuant to Section 50-56: 
a.  Provide adequate, separate containers for the disposal of recyclable materials. 
b.  Notify all tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing and at least semi-annually thereafter of all state, county and municipal recycling requirements, as well as the established recycling plan for the multifamily dwelling. 
c.  Provide for the collection of recyclable materials separated from solid waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility. 
d.  Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, location and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number. 
(2)  Nonresidential facilities. Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities shall do the following to recycle materials subject to preparation standards pursuant to Section 50-56: 
a.  Provide adequate, separate containers for the disposal of recyclable materials. 
b.  Notify all users, tenants and occupants in writing at the time of renting or leasing and at least semi-annually thereafter of all state, county and municipal recycling requirements, as well as the established recycling plan for the nonresidential facility. 
c.  Provide for the collection of recyclable materials separated from solid waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility. 
d.  Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, location and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number. 
(m)  Foam polystyrene packaging. Packaging made primarily from foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is designed for serving food or beverages; 
(2)  Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion packaged articles in shipping containers; 
(3)  Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion packaged articles in shipping containers. 
(n)  Garbage. Every refuse accumulation of animals, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables originally used for foodstuffs. 
(o)  Hazardous waste or hazardous substance. An item that requires special handling to avoid illness or injury to persons or damage to property and the environment, as defined in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 181, as amended from time to time pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 291.05 or other acts pursuant to authority vested in the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to describe and list materials that are hazardous, and further including those solid wastes or substances found in household waste. 
(p)  HDPE. High density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code #2. 
(q)  Industrial waste. Waste material, except garbage, rubbish and refuse, directly or indirectly resulting from an industrial processing or manufacturing operation. 
(r)  LDPE. Low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code #4. 
(s)  Lead-acid batteries. Automotive and similar batteries that are comprised of lead plates with an acid electrolyte, excluding nickel-cadmium batteries, dry cell batteries or batteries used in calculators, watches, hearing aids or similar devices. 
(t)  Litter. Solid waste scattered about in a careless manner, usually rubbish. 
(u)  Magazines. Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper. 
(v)  Major appliance. Air compressors, air conditioners, copiers, dehumidifiers, dishwashers, dryers, fluorescent light fixtures, freezers, furnaces, garbage disposals, large commercial appliances, microwave ovens, ovens, ranges, refrigerators, stoves, trash compactors, washers, water heaters, water softeners, and wood stoves or other items commonly referred to as "white goods." 
(w)  Metal container. Tin-coated steel cans, bi-metal cans and aluminum cans used for food and other nonhazardous materials, but excluding aerosol cans and cans that held paint, paint related products, pesticides or other toxic or hazardous substances. 
(x)  Multifamily dwelling. A parcel or property containing five or more residential dwelling units, including condominiums, as well as dwelling units occupied seasonally. 
(y)  Newspaper. Matter printed on newsprint, including daily or weekly publications and advertising materials, but excluding glossy paper, magazines, catalogs or similar materials. 
(z)  Nonrecyclable material. All items of waste not recyclable except hazardous waste or hazardous substances. 
(aa)  Nonresidential facilities and properties. Agricultural, commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties, but excluding multifamily dwellings. 
(bb)  Nonresidential solid waste. Solid waste from agricultural, commercial, retail, industrial or institutional and governmental activities or a building or group of buildings consisting of five or more dwelling units. 
(cc)  Office paper. High grade printing and writing papers from offices in nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This term excludes industrial process waste. 
(dd)  Other paper. All paper except newspaper, container board and office paper, but including grades of fiber materials with available markets for recycling. 
(ee)  Other resins or multiple resins. Plastic materials labeled by the SPI Code #7. 
(ff)  Oversize and bulky waste. Large items such as furniture, mattresses, carpeting, construction or demolition materials of substantial dimensions, and other large items whose proportions are not easily reduced. 
(gg)  Person. Individuals, firms, corporations and associations, and includes the plural as well as the singular. 
(hh)  PETE. Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI Code #1. 
(ii)  Post-consumer waste. Solid waste other than solid waste generated in the production of goods, hazardous waste as defined in Wis. Stats. § 291.01(7), construction and demolition waste, scrap automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(17). 
(jj)  PP. Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI Code #5. 
(kk)  Preparation standards. Criteria establishing acceptable good faith limits for introduction of materials into the source separation recycling program involving either transport to a material recycling center or temporary storage of such materials. 
(ll)  Private collection services. Collection services provided by a person licensed to do same by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(mm)  PS. Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI Code #6. 
(nn)  PVC. Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI Code #3. 
(oo)  Recyclable material. Identified materials meeting preparation standards, and shall include the following: newspapers, container board; unbroken brown, green and clear glass containers; metal containers; blow-molded HDPE and PETE containers; waste tires; waste oil; lead-acid batteries; magazines; yard waste, office paper and major appliances. The term further means identified materials meeting preparation standards where economical markets or short-term storage are available, and shall include the following: other paper; HDPE containers that are not blow-molded; PS containers; PVC containers; PP containers; LDPE containers; other resins or multiple resins; bi-metal containers; and other materials determined to have economical markets available. 
(pp)  Refuse. All matters produced from industrial or community life, subject to decomposition, not defined as sewage. 
(qq)  Residential solid waste. All solid waste that normally originates in a residential environment from residential dwelling units. 
(rr)  Residential unit. An individual household capable of independent habitation by a family unit. A single-family dwelling shall be considered to be one residential unit. A multifamily dwelling shall be considered to be multiple residential units, the number of residential units to equal the number of family units to be housed therein. Residential units shall not include boardinghouses, motels or resorts. 
(ss)  Scavenging. The uncontrolled removal of materials at any point in solid waste management. 
(tt)  Sewage. The water-carried wastes created in and to be conducted away from residences, industrial establishments, and public buildings, with such surface water or groundwater as may be present. 
(uu)  Solid waste. Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded or salvageable materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to pollution discharge elimination permits under Wis. Stats. § 283.001 et seq., or source material as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.31(10), special nuclear material as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.31(11), or bi-product material as defined in Wis. Stats. § 254.31(1). 
(vv)  Solid waste storage. Safe, environmentally sound interim containment of solid waste materials and recyclable materials after generation and prior to collection and disposal. For recyclable materials, such storage shall include preservation in a condition meeting preparation standards. 
(ww)  Storage areas. Areas where persons place containers during non-collection-days as well as areas where containers are set out on collection day. 
(xx)  Waste oil. Any contaminated petroleum-derived or synthetic oil including, but not limited to, the following: engine and other mechanical lubricants; hydraulic and transmission fluid, metal working fluid; and insulating fluid or coolant. 
(yy)  Waste tire. A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or defect, removed from a rim and whose size is less than 1,100 × 24.5. 
(zz)  Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs within intact root balls. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-3; Ord. No. 99-02, § 8, 1-11-1999) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. §§ 281.01, 287.01, 289.01, 291.01.  
Sec. 50-3. - Refuse storage areas. 
Storage areas shall be kept in a nuisance-free and odor-free condition. Litter shall not be allowed to accumulate. Collection crews will not be responsible for cleaning up loose materials from any containers that have become ruptured or broken due to wet conditions, animals, vandalism or other cause. The occupant and/or owner shall be responsible for cleaning up this litter. Litter not collected shall not be allowed to accumulate. Violation will result in the occupant and/or owner being notified to clean up the occupant and/or owner's area with continued violation resulting in the owner being prosecuted under the provisions of this and other Village ordinances. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-4)  
Sec. 50-4. - Approved waste and refuse containers. 
(a)  General standards. Suitable containers of a type provided by or approved by the Village shall be provided by the property owner or tenant in which to store all solid waste except for bulky or certain yard wastes as provided for herein. Containers, in order to be approved, shall provide for efficient, safe and sanitary handling of solid wastes. They shall be maintained in a nuisance- and odor-free condition and shall be sufficient to prevent the scattering of contents by weather conditions or animals. 
(b)  Approved containers. All garbage created, accumulated or produced by residential customers shall be deposited in standardized containers provided by the Village that are compatible with automated collection methods. 
(c)  Solid waste hauler to provide containers. It shall be the duty of the solid waste hauler to provide suitable containers capable of holding all solid waste that would ordinarily accumulate on such premises between the times of successive collections. Every owner, occupant or tenant of any nonresidential facility shall provide a suitable place readily accessible to the solid waste hauler for storage of the containers. The owner of any multifamily dwelling of five or more units shall furnish proper solid waste containers. Solid waste containers located at dwellings with multiple buildings shall be marked so as to indicate the residential unit to which they belong. 
(d)  Sawdust; ashes. Sawdust and cold, completely extinguished ashes may be left for collection in disposable containers. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-5)  
Sec. 50-5. - Solid waste charges. 
A user fee shall be charged by the Village as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627 for recovery of a portion of the solid waste pick up charges for each residential unit in the Village, but excluding multifamily dwellings as defined in Section 50-2. The annual fee will be established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12 , 12-12-2016)  
Secs. 50-6—50-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE 
 
Sec. 50-27. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  Residential solid waste shall be accessible to collection crews. Residential solid waste in Village provided standardized containers shall be placed immediately behind the curb of the public street for collection or containers shall be placed immediately adjacent to the alley if premises abut on an alley. Yard wastes and brush from residential units shall likewise be placed in neat, orderly fashion behind the curb. During winter months, solid waste shall not be placed in the roadway. The owner shall either shovel out an area behind the curb in which to place the container or the owner shall place it in such owner's driveway. Collection crews will not collect residential solid waste unless it is placed at the curb of a public street. Residential units shall bring their solid waste to the terrace adjacent to the street curb for collection. Should collection crews be unable to discharge the contents of the standardized containers into collection vehicles using automated handling procedures, the containers, including contents, will be left at curb side. The owner shall make provisions to assure that the solid waste therein can be collected on the next collection day. Collection crews will not empty containers by means other than automated handling procedures. 
(b)  No containers for refuse other than those provided by the Village shall be placed, kept, stored or located within the right-of-way of a street or alley; provided, however, that the Village Board may authorize the location of such containers within the public right-of-way at specified places and times when such location is necessary for the expeditious collection and disposition of refuse. 
(c)  The Village shall provide or contract for collection of solid waste, garbage and recyclables from each residential unit in the Village, but excluding multifamily dwellings as defined in Section 50-2. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-6(a))  
Sec. 50-28. - Restriction on time of placement. 
(a)  Containers for refuse and garbage shall be placed in collection locations as designated in Section 50-27 prior to 6:00 a.m. of the scheduled collection day, but not more than 24 hours prior to such time. 
(b)  All containers for refuse and garbage disposal shall be removed from the curbside collection point within 24 hours after the regular collection time. 
(c)  Village employees or employees of licensed collectors will not enter any structures to remove garbage or refuse, except by written agreement with the property owner. 
(d)  Special collections will be made only if ordered by the Director of Public Works or Building Inspector and will be billed to the owner. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-6(b))  
Sec. 50-29. - Prohibited activities and noncollectible materials. 
(a)  Dead animals. It shall be unlawful to place any dead animal, or parts thereof, in a container for collection; provided, however, this Section shall not apply to animal parts from food preparation for human consumption. 
(b)  Undrained food wastes. It shall be unlawful to place any garbage or other food wastes in a container for collection unless it is first drained and wrapped. 
(c)  Ashes. It shall be unlawful to place hot ashes for collection. (See Section 50-4(d).) 
(d)  Improper placement. It shall be unlawful to place, or allow to be placed, any solid waste upon the roads, streets, public or private property within the Village contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(e)  Compliance with Chapter. It shall be unlawful to store, collect, transport, transfer, recover, incinerate or dispose of any solid waste within the boundaries of the Village contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(f)  Improper transportation. It shall be unlawful to transport any solid waste in any vehicle that permits the contents to blow, sift, leak or fall therefrom. If spillage does occur, the collection crew shall immediately return spilled materials to the collection vehicle and shall properly clean, or have cleaned, the area. All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall be durable, easily cleanable and leakproof, if necessary, considering the type of waste and its moisture content. Collection vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent nuisances and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(g)  Interference with authorized collector. No person other than an authorized collector shall collect or interfere with any refuse or garbage after it shall have been put into a container and deposited in the proper place for the collector, nor shall any authorized person molest, hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with an authorized garbage collector in the discharge of duties. 
(h)  Scavenging. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any solid waste or refuse placed for collection on the terrace without the permission of the owner. 
(i)  Private dumps. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a dump. 
(j)  Burning of waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste in any manner, except as provided elsewhere in this Code. 
(k)  Noncollectible materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any of the following wastes: 
(1)  Hazardous waste; 
(2)  Toxic waste; 
(3)  Chemicals; 
(4)  Explosives or ammunition; 
(5)  Drain or waste oil or flammable liquids; 
(6)  Large quantities of paint; 
(7)  Tires; 
(8)  Recyclable materials. 
(l)  Human wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place human wastes for collection. These wastes should be disposed of in the sanitary sewer system. 
(m)  Hospital wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any pathogenic hospital wastes. Such items as needles and syringes may be disposed of as long as they are contained to eliminate injury to collection crews. 
(n)  Building waste. All waste resulting from remodeling, construction or removal of a building, roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner, builder or contractor. Building materials of any kind will not be collected. Building materials shall not be burned at the construction site. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-7)  
Sec. 50-30. - Garbage accumulation; when a nuisance. 
The accumulation or deposit of garbage, trash or putrescible animal or vegetable matter in or upon any lot or land or any public or private place within the Village that causes the air or environment to become noxious or offensive or to be in such a condition as to promote the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects, or to provide a habitat or breeding place for rodents or other animals, or which otherwise becomes injurious to the public health is prohibited and declared to constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-8)  
Sec. 50-31. - Refuse from outside the municipality. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, deposit or cause to be deposited, for collection, any waste or refuse not generated within the corporate limits of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-9)  
Sec. 50-32. - Improper use of trash receptacles. 
No person shall place in or on any garbage container, dumpster or other trash receptacle not belonging to or assigned by the owner of such receptacle to such person any garbage, refuse or trash without the permission of the owner or designated assignee of such receptacle, unless such receptacle is designated expressly or implicitly for use by the general public. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-10)  
Sec. 50-33. - Brush and yard waste drop off sites. 
(a)  No person shall, at any site provided by the Village for brush or yard waste deposit, do any of the following: 
(1)  Deposit any materials not authorized to be deposited. 
(2)  Deposit any materials generated from non-residential property or from outside the Village corporate limits. 
(3)  Deposit any materials from a commercial lawncare, landscaping, tree trimming, hauler or similar business regardless of the nature of the property from which the materials originated. 
(4)  Otherwise deposit any materials of a kind or in a manner contrary to official signage posted at the site. 
(b)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-26-2012)  
Secs. 50-34—50-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-53. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to promote recycling, composting and resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 159.11 and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 544. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(a))  
Sec. 50-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Glass. All brown glass, green glass and clear glass bottles, jars and containers. Glass shall be rinsed. The term does not include pyrex, window glass, light bulbs, mirrors, drinking glasses, china or other noncontainer glass. 
(b)  Good faith. Reasonable efforts to adhere to the policies, standards and rules of the Village mandatory source separation recycling program. 
(c)  Person. Any individual, corporation, organization, association, local governmental unit, state agency or authority, or federal agency. 
(d)  Preparation standards. Criteria establishing acceptable good faith limits for introduction of materials into the source separation recycling program involving either transport to a material recycling center or temporary storage of such materials. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(b))  
Sec. 50-55. - Applicability. 
This Article shall apply to all persons, entities and appropriate waste generating activities within the corporate limits of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(c))  
Sec. 50-56. - Preparation standards. 
Acceptable recyclable materials shall be prepared by occupants of residential units, multifamily dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties in accordance with the following standards for collection purposes: 
(a)  Newspaper shall be dry, free of paper not normally included in the newspaper, not sunburned, and placed in brown paper bags. 
(b)  Container board shall be flattened, dry, empty free of food debris and other contaminating materials, cut into pieces no larger than three feet square and bundled with twine. 
(c)  Glass containers shall be empty, clean and free of other contaminants such as window glass, drinking glasses, ceramics, pyrex, light bulbs, mirrors, china and similar material. 
(d)  Metal cans shall be empty and clean, with labels removed. 
(e)  Plastic containers shall be empty, clean, flattened, with caps removed, and shall not be tied together. 
(f)  Magazines shall include catalogs, exclude telephone books, comic books or TV guides, be dry and placed in brown paper bags. 
(g)  Waste oil shall be from motor vehicles, free of contaminants, in tightly sealed, nonleaking containers, and be taken to the collection facility at the Village Public Works Building. 
(h)  Additional preparation standards may be provided by notice to generators of waste and collectors/haulers, or by amendment to this Section when other materials become recyclable depending on available economic markets. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(d))  
Secs. 50-57—50-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MANDATORY SOURCE SEPARATION AND COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 50-86. - Applications of standards. 
The provisions in this Division shall apply to all nonhazardous solid waste generated within the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(e))  
Sec. 50-87. - Separation standards. 
(a)  All garbage, refuse and other nonrecyclable materials shall be collected, removed, and disposed of pursuant to the Village's agreement with its designated collector/hauler or any other person's agreement with a collector/hauler. 
(b)  For residential customers, all garbage shall be well drained, wrapped and deposited in standardized containers provided by the Village. 
(c)  For nonresidential customers, all refuse and other nonrecyclable materials shall be placed in dumpsters or other containers approved by the privately contracted collector/hauler. 
(d)  Any standardized container placed curbside for collection which contains any recyclable materials may be refused by the collector/hauler unless the generator shows good faith. Where dumpsters are used, the collector/hauler may refuse collection from any dumpsters containing recyclable materials unless the owner or generator shows good faith. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(e)(1))  
Sec. 50-88. - Major appliance pickup. 
(a)  No major appliance shall be placed on any terrace, curbside or on any roadway adjoining any premises for collection unless the owner of the major appliance has contacted the Village's recycling contractor to make arrangements for pick up of the major appliance. Every property owner shall be responsible for maintaining such owner's property in accordance with this Section. 
(b)  The Director of Public Works shall cause all appliances which have been placed on any roadway adjoining a premises, at a curbside or on a terrace and have not been collected in a reasonable time period to be removed and disposed of properly. The Director of Public Works shall keep an accurate account of the expenses thereof and report the same to the Village Clerk-Treasurer, who shall annually prepare a statement of the expenses incurred in front of each lot or parcel of land. The amount therein charged to each lot or parcel shall be entered by the Village Clerk-Treasurer as a special charge against said lot or parcel of land, and the same shall be collected in all respects pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(e)(2); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 136, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 29, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 142, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 50-89. - Yard waste. 
The following standards shall apply to the collection of yard waste: 
(a)  Leaves, garden waste, thatch, evergreen clippings and twigs three-eighth-inch or less in diameter and six inches long or less can be collected. Woody vines, cornstalks and grapevines must be broken down into six inch pieces. These items shall be placed in open containers, without raking leaves to the curb. Such items shall be collected on a limited basis several times a year for processing at a composting site. 
(b)  Brush, including clean woody, vegetative material and holiday trees, excluding tree stumps, extensive root systems or shrubs with intact root balls and no greater than six inches in diameter shall be separated from other garbage and recyclable materials. Cut ends of branches should point toward the curb or street. Small items shall be placed in clear plastic bags, and bundling with twine is allowed. Such items shall be collected on a limited basis several times a year. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(e)(3))  
Sec. 50-90. - Recyclable materials. 
(a)  All recyclable materials shall be separated from other solid waste, and shall be placed at curbside for collection as provided herein. Recyclable materials shall meet collection and preparation standards, and persons shall make good faith efforts to ensure recyclable materials are well-drained and reasonably clean. Standardized containers for recyclable materials shall be provided to residential customers by the Village to accommodate automated handling methods used by the recycling contractor. If a residential recycling container is lost or damaged, the Village shall replace the container free of charge. 
(b)  Glass, aluminum, metal cans, plastic containers, newspapers, magazines, cardboard and mixed paper shall be placed in standardized containers furnished by the Village. All recyclable materials may be co-mingled in the standardized container. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(e)(4))  
Sec. 50-91. - Requirements for multifamily dwellings, commercial, industrial and governmental facilities. 
Owners of multifamily dwellings, commercial, industrial and governmental facilities shall submit an effective recycling plan for handling and collection of recyclable materials to ensure separation of recyclables that meet preparation standards which is appropriate for the property to the Village Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall cooperate with the owners of such property to develop standards of source separation and preparation that are appropriate for the volume and manner of generation of solid waste, recyclables and nonrecyclables. Owners of multifamily dwellings shall notify tenants at the time of leasing of the recycling programs provided herein. All owners of multifamily dwellings, commercial, industrial and governmental facilities shall exercise good faith to ensure that residents and occupants comply with the recycling requirements of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(e)(5))  
Sec. 50-92. - Prohibited practices in collection and handling of recyclables. 
No person generating solid waste within the Village shall do any of the following unless good faith is shown: 
(a)  Mix or permit intermixing of recyclable and nonrecyclable materials intended for collection by a collector/hauler or intended to be processed at a materials recycling facility. 
(b)  Deposit or cause to be deposited any recyclable material at any authorized collection point when the site is closed or not operating. 
(c)  Deposit or cause to be deposited any recyclable material in or upon any public street, public waters or public grounds in the Village except at authorized locations within appropriate packaging or placed into appropriate containers during specifically authorized collection periods if any such periods are provided. 
(d)  Deposit or cause to be deposited any recyclable material in any container not provided by the Village or not specifically intended for the collection of that type of group of recyclable material. 
(e)  Deposit or cause to be deposited any nonrecyclable material into any container specifically intended for the collection or deposit of recyclable material. 
(f)  Pilfer or disturb recyclables once placed for collection. All recyclables placed for collection shall thereupon become Village property or the property of the Village's authorized agent or collector/hauler. Only persons authorized by the Village or the generator of the waste shall collect or handle recyclable materials once these materials have been placed appropriately for collection. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(f))  
Sec. 50-93. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this Article shall, in addition to other penalties, be assessed a forfeiture pursuant to Section 1-16. Each incident or violation of this Article shall be a separate offense. Each day or part thereof during which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(g))  
Sec. 50-94. - Additional regulations; notices. 
The Village Board shall prepare regulations, standards and schedules as necessary to make this Chapter effective. Periodically, upon the Village's schedule, the Director of Public Works shall prepare notices and distribute other information to persons and entities generating waste within the Village for the purpose of informing the public about the requirements dictated by this mandatory source separation recycling Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(h))  
Sec. 50-95. - Enforcement. 
For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this Article, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the Village Public Works Department or Police Department, or employee or representative of the solid waste hauler under contract to the Village, may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multifamily dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any such duly authorized officer, employee, representative or agent who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper or interfere with such an inspection. 
(Code 1998, § 8-3-11(j))  
Chapter 53 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Village authority to lay out, change, improve, or discontinue streets, sidewalks, and other public grounds, Wis. Stats. § 61.36; curbs, Wis. Stats. § 66.0909; snow removal, Wis. Stats. § 86.105. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 53-1—53-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GRADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Street grades, Wis. Stats. § 61.36. 
 
Sec. 53-19. - Grades to be established. 
The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established by vote by the Public Works Committee and the same recorded by the Director of Public Works in the Director of Public Works' office. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established. In all cases where the grade of sidewalks shall not have been specifically set by ordinance, the sidewalks shall be laid to the established grade of the street. All such grades heretofore established are hereby confirmed. 
(Code 1998, § 6-1-1(a); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 51, 1-27-2002)  
Sec. 53-20. - New sidewalk grade. 
Whenever a street shall be improved for the first time or the grade thereof changed and the street improved so as to conform to the new grade, the grading of the sidewalk shall be considered a part of the improvement, shall be let by contract with the other work of improving such street, and the expense thereof shall be provided for and borne in all respects like that of improving the street, but the construction shall be done by the owners of the abutting lots or parcels of land or at their expense as hereinafter provided. Before such construction is commenced by the owners of the abutting lots or parcels of land, the Village Engineer or Director of Public Works shall, upon application by the respective owners for a sidewalk grade, cause such sidewalk grade to be established. If a Village project changes the grade, the Village shall be responsible for the cost of establishing the new grade. If a property owner's project changes the grade, the property owner shall be responsible for the cost of establishing the new grade. 
(Code 1998, § 6-1-1(b))  
Sec. 53-21. - Alteration of grade. 
No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof in the Village by any means whatsoever unless authorized or instructed to do so by the Director of Public Works. All such alterations of grade shall be recorded in the office of the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1998, § 6-1-2; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 52, 1-27-2002)  
Sec. 53-22. - Underground utilities. 
(a)  Elevation. The grade or elevation of all underground construction shall be a minimum of three feet below the established grade of the street, alley, park, public property or easement. The three feet shall be measured between the top of the established grade and the top of the underground construction. 
(b)  Approval of location. The location of any and all such underground construction must have the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
(c)  Filing plans. Complete plans for any such construction must be filed with and be approved by the Director of Public Works before construction can begin. 
(d)  Inspection. On request of the Director of Public Works, the utility company must provide opportunity for the Director of Public Works to check any construction before it may be covered. 
(e)  Conflict with other utilities. If the grade or elevation herein set for the underground construction of utilities shall, in any instance, conflict with other existing utilities, the utility shall be required to lower the elevation of its underground construction, or of the storm sewer, at the election of the Director of Public Works and in accordance with the Director of Public Works' directions and specifications. 
(f)  Establishment of grade. At the request of the utility company, the Director of Public Works shall, at the expense of the requestor, give the utility company an established grade on any streets, alleys, public parks or easements where it proposes to install underground utilities. 
(g)  Emergency. In case of an emergency, when immediate action is necessary in order to protect life or property, the utility company may proceed with underground construction subject to obtaining the approval of such work by the Director of Public Works as soon thereafter as is reasonably possible. 
(h)  Restoration of surface. In the event of any such underground construction, the utility company shall leave the surface of the ground, or road, in the same condition as before said work was commenced, and in the event of its failure so to do, the Village may proceed to place the surface of the ground or street in such condition at the utility company's expense. Such work shall comply with the provisions of Article IV, Divisions 2 and 3 of this Chapter. 
(i)  Nonrelief from obligations. Compliance with this Section does not relieve the utility company from any responsibility of any kind whatsoever by reason of the widening of the travelway, or any other improvements which may become necessary; nor does it relieve it from any liability of any kind or nature whatsoever. Compliance with this Section shall not relieve the utility company from the responsibility or obligation of removing, relocating or moving any of its mains, pipes or property due to the opening, widening or improving of streets, or due to any other changes which may occur by reason of which such moving, relocation or removing may be necessary. 
(Code 1998, § 6-1-3)  
Secs. 53-23—53-67. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Streets, sidewalks, etc., Wis. Stats. § 61.36; streets and sidewalk improvements, Wis. Stats. § 61.47; public works, Wis. Stats. § 62.15; repair of sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 66.0627(1); sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 66.0907. 
 
Sec. 53-68. - Removal of rubbish and dirt from sidewalks. 
No owner or occupant shall allow the sidewalk abutting on the owner or occupant's premises to be littered with rubbish or dirt. If such owner or occupant shall refuse or fail to remove any such rubbish or dirt when notified to do so by the Director of Public Works, the Director of Public Works may cause the same to be done and report the cost thereof to the Village Clerk-Treasurer who shall spread the cost on the tax roll as a special charge against the premises, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627, or such cost may be recovered in an action against the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-1; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 53, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 143, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Special charges for services, Wis. Stats. § 66.0627.  
Sec. 53-69. - Vaults. 
All new vaults and cisterns under sidewalks shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-9)  
Sec. 53-70. - Downspouts and eaves of buildings not to drain on sidewalks. 
No downspouts from any building shall terminate on or upon, or in such position that the contents of such spout be cast upon or flow back or over any public sidewalk in the Village. When the eaves of a building extend over or are so constructed that water may fall therefrom or run back upon any public sidewalk, such eaves shall be so protected by proper spouts or otherwise that no water shall fall or drain therefrom or run back upon or over any public sidewalk. The owner of any building and the officers of any association or corporation owning any building on which any spouts or the eaves thereof shall be maintained contrary to this Section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-16. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-10)  
Sec. 53-71. - Construction and repair of sidewalks. 
(a)  Board may order. The Village Board shall determine whether sidewalks, curb ramps, curb and gutter and suitable street surface material shall be constructed, laid, rebuilt or repaired along or upon any public street, right-of-way or highway within the Village. The Village Board may determine or change the width or grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(b)  Apportionment of costs. The apportionment of costs, if any, for such projects shall be as provided in the special assessment regulation for the specific project. 
(c)  Standard specifications for sidewalk. Concrete sidewalk construction shall meet the specifications and provisions that are available from the Public Works Department and shall be constructed in locations and to line and grade as established by the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-2(a)—(c); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 54, 1-27-2002)  
Sec. 53-72. - Repair or replacement of defective sidewalks. 
(a)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0907, the Village Board may order at any time property owners to repair or remove and replace any sidewalk that is unsafe, defective, or insufficient at the property owner's expense, except as herein provided. If the property owner shall fail to repair or remove and replace such sidewalk to meet Village standards and specifications within 20 days after service of the notice provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0907(3)(c), the Village Board shall repair or construct such sidewalk and the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall enter the property owner's share of the total cost thereof upon the tax roll as a special assessment against said lot or parcel of land. If an emergency situation exists that is caused by a sidewalk in need of repair, the Director of Public Works shall direct the property owner to make repairs within seven days. If the property owner shall fail to repair such sidewalk within the required period, the Village Board shall make the necessary repairs and the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall enter the property owner's share of the total cost thereof on the tax roll as a special tax against said parcel. 
(b)  (1)  Before a special charge for the repair of sidewalks, curbs or gutters may be imposed, a public hearing shall be held by the Village Board on whether the service in question will be funded in whole or in part by a special charge. Any interested person may testify at the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be by class 1 notice under Wis. Stats. Ch. 985, published at least 20 days before the hearing. A copy of the notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the hearing to each interested person whose address is known or can be ascertained with reasonable diligence. The notice under this Subsection shall state the date, time and location of the hearing, the subject matter of the hearing and that any interested person may testify. 
(2)  A special charge is not payable in installments. If a special charge is not paid within the time determined by the Village Board, the special charge is delinquent. A delinquent special charge becomes a lien on the property against which it is imposed as of the date of delinquency. The delinquent special charge shall be included in the current or next tax roll for collection and settlement under Wis. Stats. Ch. 74. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-2(d); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 54, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 144, 6-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Construction and repair of sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 66.0907(3)(d); special charge for repair of sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 66.0627(3)(b).  
Sec. 53-73. - Illegal sidewalks. 
No sidewalk which shall be constructed contrary to the provisions of this Division shall be considered a legal sidewalk. The sidewalk may be ordered to be replaced with a legal sidewalk and with one that is in conformity with this Division, the same as if no sidewalk whatever had been built or constructed in the place where any such sidewalk is located. Such replacement shall be accomplished at the adjacent property owner's cost. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-2(e); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 17, 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Construction and repair of sidewalks, Wis. Stats. § 66.0907(3)(d).  
Secs. 53-74—53-104. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 53-105—53-121. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 53-122. - Required. 
No person, partnership or corporation, or their agents or employees or contractors, shall make or cause to be made any opening or excavation in any public street, public alley, public way, public ground, public sidewalk or Village-owned easement within the Village, including the installation of any facilities related to the operation of a utility service, including cable service, phone service and other types of utility services, without a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works, except for emergency excavations under Section 53-161. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-3(a))  
Sec. 53-123. - Application. 
The application for a permit shall be in writing and signed by the applicant or the applicant's agent. The applicant shall submit to the Director of Public Works, at the time the permit is applied for, sufficient information relating to the work to be done including the general location and nature of the work and the method applicant proposes to use in doing the work. The Director of Public Works shall determine if sufficient information is submitted. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-3(b))  
Sec. 53-124. - Exception. 
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to Village excavation work done under the direction of the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-3(c))  
Sec. 53-125. - Validity. 
Permits shall be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of approval, except this period may be extended by the Director of Public Works for specific projects. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-3(d); Ord. No. 2020-06 , § 1, 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 53-126. - Renewal. 
If operations have begun under an approved permit and will continue beyond the 30-day validation period, the permittee shall apply for a 30-day permit renewal by written request to the Director of Public Works and payment of a renewal permit fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and stated in Appendix A to this Code. Permit renewals shall be issued at the discretion of the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-3(e))  
Sec. 53-127. - Village standards; fees. 
(a)  All work performed under this Section and under Division 3 of this Article shall be performed in accordance with current Village standards. At the conclusion of permittee's work, any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk or grass-covered area damaged or disturbed by the permittee shall be restored to the condition prior the permittee's work, unless otherwise directed by the Director of Public Works. 
(b)  The fee for an excavation permit shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and stated in Appendix A to this Code plus actual Village expenses. Permit fees shall be paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer who shall issue a receipt therefor. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-3(f); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 55, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 145, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2020-06 , § 2, 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 53-128. - Insurance required. 
(a)  Except as provided in this Section, a permit shall be issued only upon [the] condition that the applicant provide satisfactory written evidence to the Village Clerk-Treasurer that the applicant has in force and will maintain during the time the permit is in effect public liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00 per one person, $2,000,000.00 for one accident and property damage coverage of not less than $1,000,000.00. The policy shall name the Village as the third party insured. An applicant may keep satisfactory proof of insurance on file with the Village for multiple projects on an annual basis. 
(b)  In this Section, "Utility" means a public utility, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 196.01(5), and includes a telecommunications carrier, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 196.01(8m), but does not include any subcontractor of a Utility. A Utility is not required to comply with the insurance requirements of this Section, or provide a surety bond under Section 53-129, unless there are reasonable grounds to question the financial responsibility or compliance ability of the Utility, as may be determined by the Village Administrator. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-3(g); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 56, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 146, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2020-06 , § 3, 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 53-129. - Bond. 
(a)  A permittee to any permit issued under this Article shall: 
(1)  Indemnify and save harmless the Village and its officers and employees from all liability for accidents and damage caused by any of the work covered by the permit; 
(2)  Fill in all excavations and openings made pursuant to the permit, and replace and restore the pavement over any opening the permittee makes as near as can be to the state and condition in which the permittee found it; 
(3)  Keep and maintain any restored area in such condition, normal wear and tear excepted, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, for a period of one year; 
(4)  Pay all fines and forfeitures imposed upon such permittee for any violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance governing street excavations or drainlaying adopted by the Village Board; 
(5)  Repair any damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation in accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village; 
(6)  Guarantee payment to the Village its costs both in making any street repair needed because of the permittee's work under the permit and in maintaining the same for one year; and, 
(7)  Provide a surety bond to the Village in a form acceptable to the Director of Public Works in an amount not exceeding $10,000.00. 
Before a permit under this Article may be issued, the applicant shall sign a statement that the applicant will comply with the requirements set forth above. 
(b)  A permittee shall immediately replace faulty work or materials upon notice by the Village. If the permittee fails to complete the repairs in a timely manner satisfactory to the Village, then the Village may make the repairs and bill the permittee for all labor, materials and equipment used, plus 20 percent for administration costs, and the Village may demand payment of the same under the surety bond. No new permit shall be issued to any permittee who has not replaced faulty work or material until said work is complete, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, or full payment is made to the Village if the Village completed this work. 
(c)  Any entity or person completing repairs or restoration for a permittee pursuant to this Section shall be responsible therefor for one year from the date of the completion of the work and shall file a written guarantee or surety bond to that effect with the Village in an amount determined by the Director of Public Works, not to exceed $10,000.00. 
(d)  Whenever the Director of Public Works shall find that any such work has become defective within one year of the date of completion, the Director of Public Works shall give written notice thereof to the permittee or to the permittee's surety stating the defect, the work to be done, the cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the Director of Public Works to be reasonably necessary to complete said work. After receipt of such notice, the permittee or the surety must, within the time specified, repair the defect or indemnify the Village for the cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. 
(e)  An annual bond may be given under this Section covering all excavation work done by the permittee, which shall be conditioned as specified above and in the amount determined by the Village Board as necessary to adequately protect the public and the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-3(h); Ord. No. 2020-06 , § 4, 2-10-2020)  
Secs. 53-130—53-156. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXCAVATIONS AND OPENINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Standard Specifications on file at the office of Department of Public Works. 
 
Sec. 53-157. - Frozen ground. 
No openings in the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ways shall be permitted between November 15 and April 1 except where it is determined by the Director of Public Works to be an emergency excavation. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-4(a))  
Sec. 53-158. - Protection of public. 
(a)  Every opening and excavation shall be enclosed with sufficient barriers, signing, and such other traffic control devices as may be required by the Director of Public Works, and in accordance with Section VI of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Sufficient warning lights shall be kept on from sunrise to sunset. No open flame warning devices shall be used. Except by special permission from the Director of Public Works, no trench shall be excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe or conduit laying nor left unfilled more than 500 feet from where pipe or conduit has been laid. 
(b)  All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectively from accidents or damage to persons or property through the period of the work. Each person making such opening shall be held liable for all damages, including costs incurred by the Village in defending any action brought against it for damages, as well as cost of any appeal, that may result from the neglect by such person or such person's employees of any necessary precaution against injury or damage to persons, vehicles or property of any kind. 
(c)  Unless otherwise approved, a minimum of one lane of traffic in each direction shall be provided. Every effort shall be made on the part of the permittee to provide reasonable access to all properties adjacent to such permittee's project. In the event traffic is limited to less than one lane in each direction, a flagperson or temporary traffic control signal shall be provided so as to safely cycle traffic in each direction past the work area. 
(d)  The permittee shall perform the work in such a manner so as not to disrupt the flow of traffic in the area or endanger the safety of workers or passersby. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to prevent traffic backup during construction operation. The permittee shall notify the Police Department 24 hours prior to commencement of excavation of the location and extent of the excavation, unless the excavation is an emergency excavation as identified in this Section. 
(e)  When the operations will result in the loss of any utility service to private properties, the private properties shall be notified in writing or by personal contact at least 12 hours prior to the loss of service, unless the operations are part of an emergency excavation as defined in this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-4(b))  
Sec. 53-159. - Manner of piling excavated material. 
(a)  All excavated material shall be piled in a manner such that pedestrian and motor traffic is not unnecessarily disrupted. Gutters shall be kept clear or other satisfactory provisions made for street drainage, and natural watercourses shall not be obstructed. 
(b)  Excavated material to be used for backfilling of the trench must be so handled and placed as to be of as little inconvenience as practical to public travel and adjoining tenants. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-4(d))  
Sec. 53-160. - Notice. 
It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the Director of Public Works and all public and private individuals, firms and corporations affected by the work to be done at least one business day before such work is to commence. The Director of Public Works shall also be notified at least four hours prior to backfilling and/or restoring the surface. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-4(f))  
Sec. 53-161. - Emergency excavation. 
In the event of an emergency, any person, firm or corporation owning or controlling any sewer, gas main, water main, conduit or other utility in or under any public street, alley, easement, way or ground and such person's agents and employees may take immediate proper emergency measures to remedy dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health or safety without obtaining an excavation permit, provided that such person, firm or corporation shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the next business day and shall notify the Police Department immediately. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-4(h))  
Sec. 53-162. - Excavation in new streets limited. 
Whenever the Village Board determines to provide for the permanent improvement or repaving of any street, such determination shall be made not less than 30 days before the work of improvement or repaving shall begin. Immediately after such determination by the Village Board, the Director of Public Works shall notify in writing each person, utility or other agency owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in or under said street or any real property abutting said street, that all such excavation work in such street must be completed within 30 days. After such permanent improvement or repaving, no permit shall be issued to open or excavate said street for a period of five years after the date of improvement or repaving unless, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, conditions exist that make it absolutely essential that the permit be issued. Every effort shall be made to place gas, electric, telephone and television cable lines in street terraces. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-4(i))  
Secs. 53-163—53-192. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 53-193. - Prohibited. 
No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which the person is the owner or occupant, except as provided in Sections 53-194 and 53-212. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-5(a))  
Sec. 53-194. - Exceptions. 
The prohibition of Section 53-193 shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit under Division 3 of this Article pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0315. 
(b)  Building materials for the period authorized by the Building Inspector, which shall not obstruct more than one-half of the sidewalk or more than one-third of the traveled portion of the street and which do not interfere with the flow in the gutters. 
(c)  Excavations and openings permitted under Article IV, Divisions 2 and 3 of this Chapter. 
(d)  Situations where a street use permit is issued under Division 4 of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-5(b); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 18, 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-195. - Removal by Village for sidewalk obstructions and encroachments. 
In addition to any other penalty imposed, if any Village enforcement official determines that a sidewalk is unlawfully obstructed in violation of this Section, the Village enforcement official shall issue a written notice to the owner or occupant of the premises that adjoins the obstructed sidewalk directing that the obstruction be removed within 24 hours. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-5(d))  
Sec. 53-196. - Removal by Village for obstruction and encroachments located in the Village streets, alleys, public grounds or lands dedicated for public use. 
In addition to any other penalty imposed, if any Village enforcement official determines that a Village street, alley, public grounds or land dedicated for public use is obstructed or encumbered, the Village enforcement official shall issue a written notice to the property owner of the premises that adjoins the obstructed public area directing that the obstruction be removed within 24 hours. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-5(e))  
Sec. 53-197. - Failure to remove obstruction. 
(a)  If the owner or occupant fails to remove the obstruction within the time period established in Sections 53-195 and 53-196 respectively, any Village enforcement official shall cause the removal of the obstruction, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by such property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the obstruction shall be mailed to the owner of the premises and shall be payable within ten calendar days from receipt thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall enter those charges onto the tax roll as a special charge as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(b)  The failure of the Village Clerk-Treasurer to record such claim or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to place the Village expense on the tax rolls for unpaid bills for abating the obstruction as provided for in this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-5(f); Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 59, 60, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 19, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 147, 6-26-2017)  
Secs. 53-198—53-211. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SIDEWALK PRIVILEGE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 53-212. - Required. 
(a)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer, upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Works and/or Building Inspector, is authorized to issue a sidewalk privilege permit that allows property owners to place certain fixtures, such as for the sale of merchandise, on sidewalks that immediately adjoin their property. In determining if a sidewalk privilege permit shall be authorized, all of the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  The property must be located in an area zoned for commercial uses. 
(2)  The fixture shall not be physically attached to the sidewalk, any street fixture or any adjacent building, and shall be of a temporary design. 
(3)  The placement of the fixture shall not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk. In no event shall the fixture reduce the unobstructed sidewalk width to less than five feet at any point. 
(4)  The property owner shall provide the Village with proof of liability insurance coverage. The insurance coverage shall be an amount of not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence and the policy shall specifically state that it includes coverage for the fixtures located on the Village sidewalks. In addition, the Village shall be identified as a third-party insured. 
(5)  The fixture shall not be for sale nor shall the fixture be used for the sale of merchandise. Specifically excluded are all forms of vending machines, vendors carts or tables, etc. 
(6)  The property owner whose property adjoins the Village sidewalk shall file the permit application or authorize the occupant of the subject property to file the permit application. 
(7)  The property owner or the occupant of the subject property shall display the approved sidewalk privilege permit in the window of the building so that it can be seen from the sidewalk. 
(b)  Upon reviewing the permit application if it is determined by the Village Clerk-Treasurer that all of the requirements listed in this Section have been met, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the sidewalk privilege permit. Said permit may be revoked by the Village President, Director of Public Works, Village Clerk-Treasurer, Building Inspector or any Village law enforcement officer ("Village enforcement officials") at any time when one or more of the requirements listed in this Section are not complied with or if it is determined that the placement of the fixture endangers the safety of the pedestrians who utilize the sidewalks. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-5(c); Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 57, 58, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-12 , §§ 148, 149, 6-26-2017)  
Secs. 53-213—53-238. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STREET PRIVILEGE PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Street privileges, Wis. Stats. § 66.0425. 
 
Sec. 53-239. - When required. 
Street privilege permits for the use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways or places of the Village may be granted to applicants by the Village Clerk-Treasurer for the purpose of encumbering the street, alley, sidewalk or way with materials, storage pods, and equipment, or other items, provided such applicant has complied with the other requirements of this Section and has obtained a building permit if required by this Code. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall request advisory recommendations from the Chief of Police, Director of Public Works and Building Inspector prior to issuance of any street privilege permit. Village officials may also require the applicant submit proof of liability insurance with the application in an amount the Village determines necessary to protect the Village and the public. Regulations concerning the moving of buildings and structures upon public ways are contained in Article VI of Chapter 8 of this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-6(a); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 61, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 20, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 150, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2020-06 , § 5, 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 53-240. - Bond. 
No street privilege permit shall be issued until the applicant shall execute and file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer a bond in an amount determined by the Director of Public Works not exceeding $10,000.00, conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and save harmless the Village from all liability for accidents or damage caused by reason of operations under said permit and will remove such encumbrance upon termination of the operations and will leave the vacated premises in a clean and sanitary condition and repair any and all damage to the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public property of the Village resulting from such building or moving operations. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-6(b); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 62, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 20, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 151, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 2020-06 , § 6, 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 53-241. - Fee. 
The fee for a street privilege permit shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and stated in Appendix A to this Code, plus any actual Village costs. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-6(c); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 20, 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-242. - Conditions of occupancy. 
The permission to occupy or obstruct the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds is intended only for use in connection with the issued permit, and shall be given upon the following terms and conditions and subject to revocation without notice by the Director of Public Works, Chief of Police or Building Inspector for violation thereof: 
(a)  Such temporary obstruction shall cover not more than one-third of any street or alley. 
(b)  Obstructions shall be sufficiently lighted at night so as to be in full view of the public from all directions. 
(c)  Sidewalk traffic shall not be interrupted, but temporary sidewalks of not less than four feet in width guarded by a closed fence at least four feet high on both sides may be maintained during the period of occupancy. 
(d)  No fire hydrant may be blocked from ready access, as determined by the Fire/EMS Chief, Building Inspector or Director of Public Works. 
(e)  Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all parts of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds occupied under the street privilege permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and obstructions and placed in a safe condition for public travel at the expense of the permittee. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-6(d); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 20, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2020-06 , § 7, 2-10-2020)  
Sec. 53-243. - Termination. 
All street privilege permits shall automatically terminate at the end of three months from the date of issuance unless an earlier termination date is specified thereon at the discretion of the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-6(e); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 63, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 20, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 152, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 53-244. - Removal by Village. 
In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the owner or occupant of the premises adjoining any lawfully obstructed sidewalk shall remove or neglect to remove such obstruction within 24 hours after such notice from the Director of Public Works, Chief of Police or Building Inspector to do so, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works, Chief of Police or Building Inspector to remove such obstruction and make return of the costs and expenses thereof to the Village Clerk-Treasurer who shall enter such cost on the next annual charge roll as a special tax against the property abutting such obstructed sidewalk pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-6(f); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 64, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 20, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 153, 6-26-2017)  
Secs. 53-245—53-266. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 3, adopted March 11, 2019, repealed former art. V, div. 4, §§ 53-267—53-277, which pertained to street use permits. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 53-267—53-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Special charges for snow and ice removal, Wis. Stats. § 66.0627; snow removal in driveways, Wis. Stats. § 86.105; snowmobiles, Wis. Stats. § 350.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 53-301. - Removal from sidewalks. 
The owner, occupant or person in charge of any parcel or lot that fronts upon or abuts any sidewalk shall keep said sidewalk clear of all snow and ice. In the event of snow accumulating on said sidewalk due to natural means and/or by any other means, said sidewalks shall be cleared of all accumulated snow and/or ice within 24 hours from the time the snow ceases to accumulate on said sidewalk. Sidewalks are to be kept clear of snow and ice to a minimum of four feet in width. In the event that ice has formed on any sidewalk in such a manner that it cannot be removed, the owner, occupant or person in charge of the parcel or lot which fronts upon or adjoins said sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk sprinkled with sand and/or salt to permit safe travel by pedestrians. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-7(a); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 21(a), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-302. - Notice and removal of snow from sidewalks. 
If the owner, occupant or person in charge of any parcel or lot that fronts upon or adjoins any sidewalk shall fail to keep said sidewalk clear of snow and ice as set forth in Section 53-301, the Director of Public Works or Village police officers shall take the following action: 
(a)  Hazardous conditions. If the Director of Public Works or any Village police officer determines that the failure to remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk creates an immediate danger to the public health and/or safety, the Director of Public Works or Village police officer shall cause the issuance of a written notice to the owner, occupant or person in charge of any parcel or lot directing that the snow and ice be immediately removed. In the event the property owner, occupant or person in charge of said parcel or lot is unavailable to receive a written notice, the Director of Public Works or a police officer shall immediately cause the removal of the snow and/or ice. The Director of Public Works or police officer shall send a written notice to the last-known address of the property owner notifying the property owner that a hazardous condition existed that required immediate abatement. 
(b)  Nonhazardous conditions. If the owner, occupant or person in charge of the subject parcel or lot fails to remove the snow within the time period established in Section 53-301, the Director of Public Works or a police officer shall cause the issuance of a written notice to said owner, occupant or person in charge of the subject parcel or lot directing the responsible person (as defined) to remove said snow and ice no later than 12:00 noon of the day following the issuance of said notice. The written notice shall be hand delivered when possible or mailed to the last-known address of the owner of the subject property as identified on the records in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-7(b); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 21(b), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 159, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 53-303. - Snow and ice not to encroach. 
No person shall push, shove or in any way deposit any snow or ice onto any public streets or alley, public or private sidewalk or public lands dedicated to public use except for parcels or lots located where existing buildings are constructed within five feet of the street right-of-way and the sidewalks exist from the Village right-of-way to the curbline. In such instances, the owners, occupants and/or employees of parcels or lots shall be permitted to deposit snow and ice from their sidewalks onto the public streets. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-7(c); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 21(c), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-304. - Enforcement. 
The Director of Public Works, designees and all sworn police officers are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-7(d); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 21(d), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-305. - Continued violations. 
Each 24-hour period where a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this Article for enforcement purposes. Repeated violations or subsequent additional accumulations of snow and/or ice shall not nullify any pending notice issued under this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-7(e); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 21(e), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-306. - Abatement after notice. 
Failure of the owner, occupant or person in charge of any parcel or lot to cause the removal of snow and/or ice within the time established under Section 53-302 after receiving a written notice shall result in the Director of Public Works causing the removal of said snow and/or ice. The Director of Public Works shall charge each owner of residential property a fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code to clear said ice and snow. The fee charged under this Section shall be the actual costs incurred by the Village for providing said service. Such charge shall be submitted to the affected property owner within one week after the charges are incurred. In addition, the Director of Public Works shall keep an accurate account of all such charges and report all such charges unpaid within 30 days after submission to the property owner to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-7(f); Ord. No. 99-02, § 2, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 3, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 65, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 21(f), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 160, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 53-307. - Expense. 
An account of the expenses incurred by the Village to abate the snow and/or ice hazard shall be kept and such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the parcel or lot owner. Notice of the bill for the removal of snow and/or ice shall be mailed to the last-known address of the owner of the parcel or lot and shall be payable within ten calendar days from the receipt thereof. Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall enter those charges onto the tax roll as a special charge as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-7(g); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 66, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 21(7), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 161, 6-26-2017)  
Sec. 53-308. - Penalty. 
In addition to the provisions set forth in this Article, any person, firm or corporation which violates the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-16. Prosecution under this Article shall not bar the Village from proceeding under Sections 53-306 and 53-307. Each such charge submitted to the property owner shall notify the property owner of this provision. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-7(h); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 21(h), 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Special charges for snow and ice removal, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0627, 66.0907(3)(f)(5).  
Secs. 53-309—53-334. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TERRACE AREAS 
 
Sec. 53-335. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "terrace area" means the land between the inside of the curb or the inside edge of the drainage ditch of and the street right-of-way line. 
(Code 1998, §§ 6-2-8(a), 6-4-2(e))  
Sec. 53-336. - Noxious weeds; paving. 
All parts of the terrace not covered by a sidewalk shall be kept free and clear of all terrace area noxious weeds and shall not be paved, surfaced or covered with any material that shall prevent the growth of plants and shall be maintained as a lawn, except in areas specifically approved by the Village Board or its designee. Basketball backstops, statuary, structures, flagpoles and other objects shall not be placed in the terrace area. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-8(b))  
Sec. 53-337. - Responsibility to maintain. 
Every owner of land in the Village whose land abuts a terrace area is required to maintain, or have maintained by such owner's tenant, the terrace area directly abutting such land as provided in this Section and elsewhere in this Code. Every owner shall keep mailboxes located on a terrace area on top of a pole or grouped with other mailboxes above and clear of snow. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-8(c))  
Sec. 53-338. - Placement and construction of mailboxes. 
(a)  Mailboxes shall be located so as to not encroach beyond the back face of the curb. 
(b)  Mailboxes shall be set upon single posts constructed to easily break away upon impact from another vehicle in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Wood posts shall be no larger than 4 × 4 if square or rectangular or 4.5 inches in diameter if round. 
(2)  Metal posts shall be no greater than two inches in diameter or if a metal channel post is used, shall be no heavier than two pounds per foot. Metal posts shall not be filled with sand, concrete or similar material. 
(3)  Posts may be set in concrete only if concrete is flush or below grade. 
(4)  Metal posts shall not be attached to anchor plates. Anti-twist flanges are permitted, but may not project more than ten inches into the ground and shall be attached to the post with a two and three-eighths-inch muffler clamp. 
(5)  Concrete, brick, or heavy metal posts, heavy farm equipment or other similar objects which will not break away or give in a manner consistent with the materials described herein are prohibited. 
(c)  New mailboxes shall meet or exceed all U.S. Postal Service installation regulations. 
(d)  Mailboxes lawfully existing as of the date any regulations under this Section are adopted may continue to be used as legal nonconforming mailboxes, however, such mailboxes and accompanying support structures may not be replaced or repaired unless the mailbox is brought into conformity with this Section. Painting, staining or minor repairs which do not require replacement of any portion of the mailbox or support structure shall not be considered a repair under this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-8(d); Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 8-23-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2010-17, adopted Aug. 23, 2010, changed the title of § 53-338 from "Placement of mailboxes" to "Placement and construction of mailboxes."  
Secs. 53-339—53-364. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - STREETS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Streets, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.34, 61.36, 62.22; street grades, Wis. Stats. § 62.16; trees adjacent to highways, Wis. Stats. § 86.03. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 53-365. - Requests for improvements. 
Requests or petitions by Village property owners for new streets, street resurfacing, curb and gutter, storm sewers, utility work and sidewalks shall be presented to the Village Board on or before September 1 to be considered for installation in the following year. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-11)  
Sec. 53-366. - Placing leaves in streets. 
In the interests of public safety, health and general welfare, community appearance and efficiency of operation, it shall be unlawful to rake or place fallen tree leaves or grass clippings on the pavement or in the gutter of any public street. No person shall permit grass clippings from mower swaths to remain upon sidewalks or on abutting property owned or occupied by such person. Any person violating this Section shall be subject to forfeitures in the amounts specified in Section 1-16. In addition, upon failure to remove leaves and grass clippings from any public street following express notice from the Village, the Director of Public Works may direct removal of such leaves and grass clippings from the public street and charge the cost of such removal to the subject property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-12)  
Sec. 53-367. - Unlawful dumping on streets. 
(a)  Unlawful dumping. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited, dump, sort, scatter or leave any rubbish, stone, wire, earth, ashes, cinders, sawdust, hay, glass, manure, filth, paper, snow, ice, dirt, grass, leaves, yard waste, construction waste, garbage or other offensive or noxious material in any public street, sidewalk, alley, or upon any public property or upon any property of another, without the express permission of the owner of occupant thereof. If such materials must be removed by the Village, removal procedures and assessment of costs shall be as prescribed in Subsection (b)(2) of this Section. 
(b)  Dropping of mud or other substances on streets. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle or equipment leaving private property to allow any mud, dirt, construction site debris or other substance to drop therefrom, either intentionally or unintentionally, upon any street or alley in the Village, unless such driver or operator of said vehicle or other equipment shall stop and remove such mud or other substance so deposited from said street or alley, or cause such mud or substance to be removed without cost to the Village. 
(2)  The owners of any real estate where any vehicle or equipment leaving such property shall leave, drop, or throw mud or any other substance upon any street or alley shall be responsible for the prompt removal of the same from such street or alley. The Director of Public Works shall, upon notification or knowledge of mud or other substance being deposited upon any street or alley from private property, immediately take action to clean such mud or other substance from the street, either by use of Village employees or equipment or by hiring of anyone available to do this work. Accurate records of the costs to the Village shall be kept and the Director of Public Works shall bill the actual costs of the same to the property owner, and if not paid, the cost shall be collected as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-13)  
Sec. 53-368. - Obstruction of public waterways. 
No person shall in any manner obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free passage of water in any public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale, inlet, grate, detention basin or drain or place or cause to be placed any rubbish, dirt, sand, gravel or any other matter or thing so that the same is likely to be carried by the elements into any public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale, inlet, grate, detention basin or drain. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-15)  
Secs. 53-369—53-394. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CURB AND GUTTER[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Repair and maintenance, special charges, special assessments, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0627, 66.0701, 66.0703, 66.0721. 
 
Sec. 53-395. - Special assessments and charges. 
The Village may, at any time, construct or have constructed curb and gutter in the Village. As a complete alternative to any other methods provided by law, the Village may collect for said curb and gutter in the manner established by law. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-16(a); Ord. No. 2003-05, §§ 22, 24(a), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-396. - Alternative methods. 
(a)  Petition. Any taxpayer and property owner in the Village may petition the Village for the installation of curb and gutter abutting property owned by said petitioner in said Village. 
(1)  Requirements of petition. The petition for the installation of curb and gutter shall state that the petitioner request curb and gutter abutting property owned by said petitioner, describing said property, stating what type is requested, and further said petition shall state that each petitioner individually shall be responsible and liable for, and thereby is obligated to pay the total costs of installation of said curb and gutter to include surveying and other contingent expenses. 
(2)  Effect of petition. In the event a petition for the installation of curb and gutter is presented to the Village Board, the Village Board shall have the exclusive discretion to accept or reject the same. The Village Board may refer said petition, may table it, but in any event they shall act upon the same in some manner within six months of receipt of said petition. 
(b)  Resolution of intent. In the event the Village should desire to construct curb and gutter in any area of the Village, the Village Board may adopt a resolution of intent to install said curb and gutter and assess the costs thereof to the abutting property owners as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0627, 66.0701, or 66.0703. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-16(b); Ord. No. 2003-05, §§ 23, 24(b), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-397. - Types of curb and gutter. 
All curbs and gutters shall conform to the construction standards adopted by the Village Board, on file with the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-16(c); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 24(c), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-398. - Liability for repair thereof. 
Whenever curb and gutter is installed, all property owners receiving the benefits thereof shall be responsible and liable for all replacements, repairs, damage and maintenance. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2-16(d); Ord. No. 2003-05, § 24(d), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 53-399—53-425. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ACCESS 
 
Sec. 53-426. - Public or private access restricted or prohibited, as applicable. 
(a)  No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of expressways nor to any controlled access arterial street without permission of the highway agency that has access control jurisdiction. 
(b)  No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of the following: 
(1)  Freeways, interstate highways and their interchanges or turning lanes, nor to the intersection of interchanging streets within 1,500 feet of the most remote end of the taper of the turning lanes. 
(2)  Arterial streets intersecting another arterial street within 50 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(3)  Streets intersecting an arterial street within 25 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-105(a), (b); Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-105(a), (b)), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-427. - Public access barriers. 
Access barriers such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping or other topographic barriers shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified streets or highways. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-105(c); Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-105(c)), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 53-428. - Temporary access. 
Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the Village Board after review and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permits shall be temporary and revocable and subject to any conditions required, and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-105(d); Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-105(d)), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 53-429—53-454. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - DRIVEWAYS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 53-455. - Purpose. 
For the safety of the general public, the Village shall determine the location, size, construction and number of access points to public roadways within the Village limits. It is the Village's intent to provide safe access to properties abutting public roadways suitable for the property to be developed to its highest and best use, provided that access is not deficient or dangerous to the general public. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-1(a))  
Sec. 53-456. - Prohibited driveways. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall place, construct, locate in, or cause to be placed, constructed or located in, any obstruction or structure within the limits of any public road, highway or street in the Village except as permitted by this Section. As used herein the term "structure" includes private driveways, a portion of which extends into any public road, highway or street, and which is in nonconformance with this Chapter. 
(b)  No driveway shall be closer than ten feet to the extended street line at an intersection. At street intersections a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the street intersection area and shall not occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the Village for effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals. 
(c)  The grade of that portion of any private driveway or pedestrian path located within the limits of any public road, highway or street shall be such as shall meet the grade of the existing public roadway at its edge and not cause an obstruction to the maintenance or clearing of such public roadway. 
(d)  No driveway apron shall extend out into the street further than the facing of the curb and under no circumstances shall such driveway apron extend into any gutter area. All driveway entrances and approaches shall be constructed as not to interfere with the drainage of streets, side ditches or roadside areas, or with any existing structure on the right-of-way. 
(e)  No portion of any curb, parapet or retaining wall, rising above the grade of the driveway, erected by the owner of the premises involved shall extend beyond the culvert spanning the watercourse located in such public way. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(e))  
Secs. 53-457—53-480. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRIVEWAY PERMIT 
 
Sec. 53-481. - Permit required to construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge. 
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge any private driveway within the limits of the dedicated portion of any public street under the control and jurisdiction of the Village without first obtaining a driveway permit therefor as provided by this Chapter. A sidewalk permit is not required when a new sidewalk is to be constructed in conjunction with the construction of a new driveway. The sidewalk is included in the driveway permit/building permit process in such cases. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-1(b))  
Sec. 53-482. - Application. 
Application for such permit shall be made to the Building Inspector on a form provided by the Village and shall be accompanied by a drawing accurately depicting the portion of the proposed private driveway to be constructed, reconstructed, altered or enlarged lying within the dedicated portion of the public street, the dimensions thereof and a statement of the materials proposed to be used. The applicant shall pay the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and declared in Appendix A to this Code. Upon receipt of the application and the fee if required, unless the proposed private driveway is a part of construction for a building or other structure for which a building permit has been applied for, in which case no additional fee is required, the Building Inspector may approve such application if the proposed driveway complies with the terms and conditions of this and any other applicable Village ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-1(c); Ord. No. 2003-02, § 68, 1-27-2002)  
Sec. 53-483. - Application provisions. 
All driveway permit applications shall contain the applicant's statement that: 
(a)  The applicant represents all parties in interest, and that such proposed driveway is for the bona fide purpose of securing access to the applicant's property and not for the purpose of parking or servicing vehicles, advertising, storage or merchandising of goods within the dedicated portion of the Village street, or for any other purpose. 
(b)  The Village, notwithstanding the construction of such driveway, reserves the right to make any changes, additions, repairs or relocations within the dedicated portion of the Village street at any time, including relocation, reconstruction, widening and maintaining the street without compensating the owner of such private driveway for the damage or destruction of such private roadway. 
(c)  The permittee, successors or assigns, agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officials, officers, agents or employees, against any claim or any cause of action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of the exercise of such permit. 
(d)  The Village does not assume any responsibility for the removal or clearance of snow, ice or sleet or the opening of any windrows of such material upon such portion of such driveway within the dedicated portion of the Village street. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-1(d))  
Sec. 53-484. - Appeal from permit refusal. 
Any person feeling aggrieved by the refusal of the Village Building Inspector to issue a permit for a private driveway may appeal such refusal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 20 days after such refusal to issue such permit is made. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(d))  
Secs. 53-485—53-506. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVEWAY LOCATION, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 53-507. - Requirements. 
The location, design and construction of driveways shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Division. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a))  
Sec. 53-508. - Design. 
Private driveways shall be of such width and so located that all of such driveways and their appurtenances are within the limits of the frontage abutting the street of the property served. Driveways shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from any street intersection area and shall not encroach upon or occupy areas of the street right-of-way required for effective traffic control or for street signs or signals. A driveway shall be so located and constructed that vehicles approaching or using it shall have adequate sight distance along the street. Driveway approaches shall be at least ten feet apart except by special permission from the Village Board, and driveways shall in all cases be placed wherever possible as not to interfere with utilities in place. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(1))  
Sec. 53-509. - Number. 
The number of driveways to serve an individual property fronting on a street shall be one, except where approved by the Plan Commission as part of a site/design review under Section 62-310 or when approved by the Village Board under Section 53-518. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(2); Ord. No. 2020-13 , § 1, 5-26-2020)  
Sec. 53-510. - Curb cut spacing. 
Where the public sidewalk is adjacent to the curb, a space of a minimum length of six feet measured along the curbline shall be placed between each entrance to a Village street. The curb shall be left intact for the length of this island. Where the public sidewalk is remote from the curb, an island of a minimum length of ten feet measured along the right-of-way line shall be maintained along each entrance to the Village street. All flares shall be tangent to the curbline. A curb length of not less than three feet shall be left undisturbed adjacent to each property line to serve as a space in the event an adjoining property owner applies for a driveway permit to serve the owner's property. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(b)(3))  
Sec. 53-511. - Drainage. 
The surface of the driveway connecting with rural type street cross sections shall slope downward and away from the highway shoulder a sufficient distance to preclude ordinary surface water drainage flowing onto the street roadbed. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(4))  
Sec. 53-512. - Culverts. 
Driveways shall not obstruct or impair drainage in street ditches or roadside areas. Driveway culverts, where required, shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the street and shall not be less than the equivalent of a 12-inch diameter pipe. The distance between culverts under successive driveways shall not be less than ten feet except as such restricted area is permitted to be filled in pursuant to the provisions of Section 53-514. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(5))  
Sec. 53-513. - Reconstruction of sidewalks and curb and gutter. 
When the construction of a driveway requires the removal of a curb or gutter the new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable material and curb returns shall be provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway surface shall be connected with the highway pavement and the sidewalk, if any, in a neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway construction shall include the replacement of such sidewalk areas that are inadequate or which are or may be damaged by means of vehicle travel across the sidewalk. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(6))  
Sec. 53-514. - Restricted areas. 
The restricted area between successive driveways may be filled in and graded only when the following requirements are complied with: 
(a)  The filling or draining shall be to grades approved by the Director of Public Works and, except where highway drainage is by means of curb and gutter, water drainage of the area shall be directed away from the street roadbed in a suitable manner. 
(b)  Culvert extensions under the restricted area shall be of the same size and of equivalent acceptable material as the culvert under the driveway. Intermediate manholes adequate for cleanout purposes may be required where the total culvert length is excessive. 
(c)  Where no street side ditch separates the restricted area from the street roadbed, permanent provision may be required to separate the area from the street roadbed to prevent its use for driveway or parking purposes by construction of a border, curb, rail or posts as may be required by the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(7))  
Sec. 53-515. - Relocation of utilities. 
Any costs of relocating utilities shall be the responsibility of the property owner with approval of the Village Board necessary before any utility may be relocated and the driveway installed. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(8))  
Sec. 53-516. - Construction across sidewalks. 
All driveway entrances and approaches that are constructed across sidewalks shall be of concrete constructed in accordance with the requirements for sidewalk construction in Sections 53-71—53-73 insofar as such requirements are applicable, including thickness requirements. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(9))  
Sec. 53-517. - Erosion control. 
The Director of Public Works, Village Engineer or Building Inspector may require that erosion control measures be utilized where made necessary by the physical characteristics of the site. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(10))  
Sec. 53-518. - Variances. 
Any of the requirements listed in this Article may be varied by the Village Board in such instances where the peculiar nature of the property or the design of the street may make the rigid adherence to the requirements listed in this Article impossible or impractical, or when the Village Board determines that a variance is appropriate in order for the property to have reasonable and adequate street access, after considering the risk to the public, the volume of traffic on the affected street, and any other factor the Village Board determines relevant in making this determination. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(a)(11); Ord. No. 2020-13 , § 2, 5-26-2020)  
Secs. 53-519—53-544. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL, RURAL HOME, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DRIVEWAYS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 16, adopted March 26, 2018, changed the title of div. 4 from "Special Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Driveways" to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 53-545. - Applicability. 
The regulations in this Division are applicable to driveways serving agricultural, rural home, commercial and industrial properties. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(b); Ord. No. 2020-13 , § 3, 5-26-2020)  
Sec. 53-546. - Width of driveways. 
No part of a private driveway located within the dedicated area of a public street shall, except as hereinafter provided, have a width greater than 30 feet measured at right angles to the centerline of said driveway, except as increased by permissible radii. In instances where the nature of the land use activity or the physical characteristics of the land would require a driveway of greater width than herein specified, the Plan Commission, as part of a site/design review under Section 62-310, or the Village Board under Section 53-518 in cases of modifications to existing driveways, may permit a driveway of additional width. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(b)(1); Ord. No. 2020-13 , § 4, 5-26-2020)  
Sec. 53-547. - Angular placement of driveways. 
The angle between the centerline of the driveway and the curbline shall not be less than 45 degrees. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(b)(2))  
Secs. 53-548—53-574. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR URBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONED DRIVEWAYS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 17, adopted March 26, 2018, changed the title of div. 5 from "Special Requirements for Residential Driveways" to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 53-575. - Applicability. 
The regulations in this Division are applicable to driveways serving urban residential properties. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(c); Ord. No. 2020-13 , § 5, 5-26-2020)  
Sec. 53-576. - Width of driveways. 
Openings for vehicular ingress and egress for urban residential district properties shall be at least ten feet wide at the property line, but shall not exceed 24 feet at the property line, with a maximum of 30 feet at the curb opening. In instances where the nature of the land use activity or the physical characteristics of the land would require a driveway of greater width than herein specified, the Plan Commission, as part of a site/design review under Section 62-310, or the Village Board under Section 53-518 in cases of modifications to existing driveways, may permit a driveway of additional width. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(c)(1); Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 18, 3-26-2018; Ord. No. 2020-13 , § 6, 5-26-2020)  
Sec. 53-577. - Angular placement of driveways. 
The centerline of the driveway may be parallel to the side property line of the lot where access is required or at right angles to the curbline. 
(Code 1998, § 6-3-2(c)(2))  
Chapter 56 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Platting lands and recording and vacating plats, Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 56-1. - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as, referred to, or cited as the "Village of McFarland Subdivision Chapter/Ordinance" or "Village of McFarland Land Division and Subdivision Chapter/Ordinance." 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-6)  
Sec. 56-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Alley. A public right-of-way that normally affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property. 
(b)  Arterial street. A street that provides for the movement of relatively fast or heavy traffic to, from or within the Village. It has a secondary function of providing access to abutting land. 
(c)  Block. An area of land within a Subdivision that is entirely bounded by a combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of the Subdivision and streams or water bodies. 
(d)  Building line. A line parallel to a lot line and at a distance from the lot line to comply with the Zoning Code's yard and setback requirements. 
(e)  Certified Survey Map. A map of land division, resulting in the creation of four or fewer lots, any one of which is 35 acres or less, prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.34, and in full compliance with this Chapter. 
(f)  Collector street. A street that collects and carries traffic within an area such as a residential neighborhood between arterial streets and local streets. It includes principal entrance streets to residential Subdivisions. It provides access to abutting property. 
(g)  Comprehensive Plan. A Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Village pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1001 indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the general physical development of the Village and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
(h)  Condominium development. A real estate development in which a condominium form of ownership pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 703, is utilized. 
(i)  Cul-de-sac. A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround. 
(j)  Division of land. Where the title or any part thereof is transferred by the execution of a land contract, an option to purchase, an offer to purchase and acceptance, a deed, or a certified survey. 
(k)  Easement. The area of land set aside or over or through which a liberty, privilege or advantage in land, distinct from ownership of the land, is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public. 
(l)  Extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction. The unincorporated area within 1½ miles of a fourth-class city or a village and within three miles of all other cities. 
(m)  Final plat. The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of Subdivision is presented for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County Register of Deeds. 
(n)  Frontage road. A road auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial street for control of access and for service to the abutting development. 
(o)  Improvement, public. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open channel, curb and gutter, water main, roadway, park, parkway, public access, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip or other facility for which the Village may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
(p)  Local street. A street used primarily for access to abutting properties and connecting with not more than two local or collector streets and not exceeding 1,000 feet in length. 
(q)  Lot. A parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other officially approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area and other open space provisions of this Chapter and any applicable zoning ordinance. 
(r)  Lot area. The area contained within the exterior boundaries of a lot excluding streets, and land under navigable bodies of water. 
(s)  Lot, corner. A lot abutting intersecting streets at their intersection. 
(t)  Lot, reversed corner. A corner lot that is oriented so that it has its rear lot line coincident with or parallel to the side lot line of the interior lot immediately to its rear. 
(u)  Lot, through. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a "through lot," both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
(v)  Lot lines. The peripheral boundaries of a lot as defined in this Section. 
(w)  Lot width. The width of a parcel of land measured along the front building line. 
(x)  Official Map. Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6) provides that the Village Board may establish an Official Map for the precise designation of the right-of-way lines and site boundaries of streets, highways, parkways, parks, and playgrounds, both existing and proposed. The statutes further provide that the Official Map may be extended to include areas beyond the corporate limits but within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the municipality. 
(y)  Outlot. A parcel of land, other than a lot or block, so designated on the plat. 
(z)  Owner. Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean either a natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or combination of these. 
(aa)  Pedestrian pathway. A public way, usually running at right angles to street, which is intended for the convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public right-of-way for utilities. 
(bb)  Planned unit development (or cluster development or PUD). A form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units. The concept usually involves clustering buildings, providing common open space, and mixing different types of housing (single-family, duplexes, and apartments). Ordinances permitting planned unit development permit planning a project and calculating densities for the entire development rather than on an individual lot by lot basis. It is hereby declared that regulating planned unit developments requires greater involvement of public officials in site plan review and development aspects of both zoning and Subdivision regulation since such developments require exceptions from both types of regulation. 
(cc)  Plat. The map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plat of Subdivision is presented to the Village for approval. 
(dd)  Preliminary Plat. The Preliminary Plat map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the Subdivision to be submitted to the Plan Commission and Village Board for their consideration as to compliance with the Village Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Code and these regulations along with required supporting data. 
(ee)  Protective covenants. Contracts entered into between private parties or between private parties and public bodies pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.293, which constitute a restriction on the use of all private or platted property within a minor land division or Subdivision for the benefit of the public or property owners and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development, which would tend to impair stability of values. 
(ff)  Replat. The process of changing, or a map or plat that changes, the boundaries of a recorded Subdivision Plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of a large block, lot or outlot within a recorded Subdivision Plat or Certified Survey Map without changing exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot is not a Replat. 
(gg)  Shorelands. Those lands within the following distances: 1,000 feet from the high-water elevation of navigable lakes, ponds and flowages or 300 feet from the high-water elevation of navigable streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever is greater. 
(hh)  Subdivider. Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land resulting in a Subdivision, Certified Survey Map or Replat. 
(ii)  Subdivision. A division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner thereof or agent for the purpose of sale or of building development where: 
(1)  The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of 35 acres each or less in area; or 
(2)  Five or more parcels or building sites of 35 acres each or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of five years; 
(3)  The act of division or the creation of any parcels or building sites results in the creation or alteration of any street or alley; 
(4)  The definitions herein shall apply with equal effect to the division or creation of parcels or building sites whether or not said tracts shall, at such time, be part of a previously platted Subdivision. 
(jj)  Surveyor. A State of Wisconsin registered land surveyor. 
(kk)  Urban service area. The area expected to be served by public sanitary sewer and water utility within the next 20-year period as mapped in the Village Comprehensive Plan. 
(ll)  Wetlands. An area where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions (Wis. Stats. § 23.32(1)). 
(mm)  Wisconsin Administrative Code. The rules of administrative agencies having rulemaking authority in Wisconsin, published in a loose-leaf, continual revision system, as directed by Wis. Stats. § 35.93 and Ch. 227, including subsequent amendments to those rules. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-10; Ord. No. 99-11, §§ 1, 2, 8-23-1999) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Wis. Stats. § 236.02.  
Sec. 56-3. - Introduction and purpose. 
(a)  In accordance with the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 236.45 and for the purposes listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.01 and 236.45, the Village Board does hereby ordain as follows: 
(1)  The provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted to promote the health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the Village. 
(2)  This Chapter shall not repeal, impair or modify private covenants or public ordinances, except that it shall apply whenever it imposes stricter restrictions on land use. 
(b)  The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the community. The regulations are designed to: 
(1)  Lessen congestion in the highways and streets; 
(2)  Foster the orderly layout and use of land; 
(3)  Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(4)  Provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight for solar collectors and to wind for wind energy systems; 
(5)  Discourage overcrowding of the land; 
(6)  Protect the community's agriculture base; 
(7)  Facilitate adequate provision for transportation, public water and sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public necessities; and 
(8)  Facilitate the further division of large tracts of land into smaller parcels. 
(c)  The regulations are made with the reasonable consideration of, but not limited to, the present character of the Village and its environs, with the objectives of conserving the value of the land and improvements placed thereon, providing the most appropriate environment for human habitation, encouraging commerce and industry, protecting farming and open spaces, and providing for the most appropriate use of land in the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-1) 
State Law reference— Purpose, Wis. Stats. § 236.01.  
Sec. 56-4. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-2)  
Sec. 56-5. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-3)  
Sec. 56-6. - General provisions. 
(a)  Compliance. No person, firm or corporation shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits of these regulations that results in a Subdivision, Certified Survey Map or a Replat as defined herein; no such Subdivision, Certified Survey Map or Replat, as defined in Section 56-2, shall be entitled to recording; and no street shall be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of this Chapter and the following: 
(1)  The provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 236. 
(2)  The rules of the Department of Commerce, contained in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 85 for Subdivisions not served by public sewer. 
(3)  The rules of the Division of Highways, Wisconsin Department of Transportation contained in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Trans. 233 for divisions of land abutting a state trunk highway or connecting highway. 
(4)  The rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources contained in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 116 for Floodplain Management Program. 
(5)  Comprehensive plans or components of such plans prepared by state, regional, county or municipal agencies duly adopted by the Village Board. 
(6)  All applicable local and county regulations, including zoning, sanitary, building and official mapping ordinances. 
(7)  The Village Comprehensive Plan, or components thereof. 
(8)  All applicable rules contained in the Wisconsin Administrative Code not listed in this Subsection. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. Jurisdiction of these regulations shall include all lands within the corporate limits of the Village and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village. The provisions of this Chapter, as they apply to divisions of tracts of land into less than five parcels, shall not apply to: 
(1)  Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order; 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements; 
(3)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this Chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances; 
(4)  Cemetery plats under Wis. Stats. § 157.07; 
(5)  Assessors' plats made under Wis. Stats. § 70.27, but such assessors' plats shall comply with Wis. Stats. §§ 236.15(1)(a)—(g) and 236.20(1) and (2)(a)—(c). 
(c)  Certified survey. Any division of land other than a Subdivision as defined in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(8), shall be surveyed and a Certified Survey Map prepared as provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(d)  Building permits. The Village shall not issue any building permit relating to any parcel of land forming all or any part of lands included in a Subdivision, land division, Replat or Certified Survey Map originally submitted to the Village on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived until the applicant has complied with all of the provisions and requirements of this Chapter. 
(e)  Applicability to condominiums. This Chapter is expressly applicable to condominium developments within the Village's jurisdiction, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 703.27(1). For purposes of this Chapter, a condominium unit and any associated limited common elements shall be deemed to be equivalent to a lot or parcel created by the act of Subdivision. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-20; Ord. No. 99-11, §§ 3—5, 8-23-1999)  
Sec. 56-7. - Land suitability. 
(a)  Suitability. 
(1)  No land shall be subdivided for residential, commercial or industrial use which is held unsuitable for such use by the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed Subdivision or of the community. 
(2)  The Village Board, in applying the provisions of this Section, shall in writing recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for residential, commercial, industrial or institutional use and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability if the subdivider so desires. Thereafter the Village Board may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability. 
(b)  Existing flora. The subdivider shall make every effort to protect and retain all existing trees, shrubbery, vines, and grasses not actually lying in public roadways, drainageways, building foundation sites, private driveways, soil absorption waste disposal areas, paths, and trails. Such trees are to be protected and preserved during construction in accordance with sound conservation practices, possibly including the preservation of trees by well islands or retaining walls whenever abutting grades are altered, pursuant to a landscaping plan filed by the subdivider. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-21)  
Sec. 56-8. - Condominium developments. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The Village Board hereby finds that certain issues arise in condominium developments that require limited applicability of this Chapter to condominium developments. The state legislature has recognized that Subdivision ordinances may apply to condominiums but that Subdivision ordinances shall not impose burdens upon condominiums that are different from those imposed on other property of a similar character not subject to a declaration of condominium. 
(2)  The factor that makes this Chapter applicable to a condominium development is the creation of multiple, distinct property entities at or near the ground surface, subject to property taxation as separate parcels, with each property entity having different ownership and management. The Village determines that this factor makes a condominium development dissimilar, both physically and in ownership, from developments in which the land and improvements are under unitary ownership, management, and control. 
(3)  Thus, the Village Board hereby finds that new condominium developments can place impacts on community resources in the same manner as other new developments that are characterized by division of land into lots. These impacts include: 
a.  Additional population density. 
b.  Possibility of use of particular land in a manner unsuitable to the land's characteristics. 
c.  Additional demands upon Village parks, recreation areas, utility facilities and schools. 
d.  Additional traffic and street use. 
(b)  Portions of Chapter applicable to condominium developments. The following Sections of this Chapter shall apply to condominium developments: 
(1)  Section 56-7 relating to land suitability and construction practices. 
(2)  Sections 56-35—56-37 relating to Preliminary Plat approval. This stage of approval shall be the only approval required for a condominium development. The technical requirements for Preliminary Plats set forth in Section 56-69 shall not apply, since condominiums have separate technical standards set forth in Wis. Stats. Ch. 703. 
(3)  Article VIII of this Chapter relating to fees for review. 
(4)  Article IV of this Chapter relating to required improvements. 
(5)  Article V of this Chapter relating to design standards for improvements. 
(6)  Article VI of this Chapter relating to dedication requirements. 
(c)  Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to the following condominiums: 
(1)  Any condominium plat recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived. 
(2)  Any conversion of an existing structure to a condominium. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-22)  
Secs. 56-9—56-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL 
 
Sec. 56-35. - Preliminary consultation. 
Before submitting a Preliminary Plat or Certified Survey Map, the subdivider is encouraged to consult with the Community Development Director for advice regarding general Subdivision requirements. Information on meeting dates, agenda deadlines and filing requirements may be obtained from the Community Development Department. The subdivider shall also submit a location map showing the relationship of the proposed Subdivision to traffic arteries and existing community facilities. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory but is intended to inform the subdivider of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan components and duly adopted plan implementation devices of the Village and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning a development. In so doing, both the subdivider and planning agency may reach mutual conclusions regarding the general program and objectives of the proposed development and its possible effects on the neighborhood and community. The subdivider will gain a better understanding of the subsequent required procedures. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-30; Ord. No. 99-11, § 6, 8-23-1999)  
Sec. 56-36. - Submission of Preliminary Plat. 
(a)  Submission. Before submitting a Final Plat for approval, the subdivider shall prepare a Preliminary Plat and complete an application form prescribed by the Community Development Department. The subdivider shall submit 20 copies of the Preliminary Plat. The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared in accordance with this Chapter, and the subdivider shall file copies of the Preliminary Plat and the application as required by this Section with the Village Clerk-Treasurer at least 20 days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall submit a copy of the Preliminary Plat to the Plan Commission, the Village Engineer, the Community Development Department and the Department of Public Works for review and written report of their recommendations and reactions to the proposed plat. 
(b)  Public improvements, plans and specifications. Simultaneously with the filing of the Preliminary Plat, the owner shall file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer five complete sets of engineering reports and plans for the construction of any public improvements required by this Chapter, specifically addressing sewer and water service feasibility, drainage facilities, traffic patterns, typical street cross sections, erosion control plans, pavement design and other improvements necessary in the Subdivision. 
(c)  Property owners association; restrictive covenants. A draft of the legal instruments and rules for proposed property owners associations, when the subdivider proposes that common property within a Subdivision would be either owned or maintained by such an organization of property owners pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.293, and proposed deed restrictions or restrictive covenants, shall be submitted at the time of filing the Preliminary Plat with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(d)  Affidavit. The surveyor preparing the Preliminary Plat shall certify on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and features and that the surveyor has fully complied with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(e)  Supplementary data to be filed with Preliminary Plat. The following shall also be filed with the Preliminary Plat: 
(1)  Use statement. A statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential buildings with number of proposed dwelling units; types of business or industry so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards and congestion of population; 
(2)  Zoning changes. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas, including dimensions; and 
(3)  Area plan. Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the Subdivision, the Plan Commission and/or Village Board may require that the subdivider submit a Preliminary Plat of the remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed Subdivision and future Subdivision. In any event, all Subdivisions must be shown to relate well with existing or potential adjacent Subdivisions. 
(f)  Street plans and profiles. The subdivider shall provide street plans and profiles showing existing ground surface, and proposed and established street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed Subdivision when requested. 
(g)  Soil testing. The subdivider may be required to provide a preliminary soils report, listing the types of soil in the proposed Subdivision, their effect on the Subdivision and a proposed soil testing and investigation program. Pursuant to the public policy concerns prescribed in Section 56-7, the Village Board may require that borings and soundings be made in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and water conditions, including depth to bedrock and depth to ground water table. 
(h)  Referral to other agencies. 
(1)  The subdivider shall, within two days after filing with the Village, transmit two copies to the County Planning Agency, two copies to the Director of the Planning Function in the Wisconsin Department of Administration, additional copies to the Director of the Planning Function for retransmission of two copies each to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation if the Subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or a connecting street and the Wisconsin Department of Commerce if the Subdivision is not served by the public sewer and provision for such service has not been made, and an adequate number of copies to the Plan Commission. The subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer an affidavit indicating full compliance with the requirement of filing with objecting agencies. The County Planning Agency, the Wisconsin Department of Administration, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and the Wisconsin Department of Commerce shall be hereinafter referred to as objecting agencies. 
(2)  Within 20 days of the date of receiving the copies of the plat, any state or county agency having authority to object under Subsection (h)(1) of this Section shall notify the subdivider and all approving or objecting authorities of any objection based upon failure of the plat to comply with the statutes or rules which its examination is authorized to cover, or, if all objections have been satisfied, it shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and return that copy to the approving authority from which it was received. The plat shall not be approved or deemed approved until any objections have been satisfied. If the objecting agency fails to act within the 20 day limit it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat. 
(3)  In lieu of the procedure under Subsection (h)(1) of this Section, the subdivider or the subdivider's agent may submit the original plat to the Wisconsin Department of Administration, which shall forward two copies to each of the agencies authorized to object. The Wisconsin Department of Administration shall have the required number of copies made at the subdivider's expense. Within 20 days of the date of receiving the copies of the plat, any agency having authority to object shall notify the subdivider, and all agencies having the authority to object, of any objection based upon failure of the plat to comply with the statutes or rules which its examination is authorized to cover, or if there is no objection, it shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and return that copy to the Wisconsin Department of Administration. After each agency and the Wisconsin Department of Administration have certified that they have no objection or that their objections have been satisfied, the Wisconsin Department of Administration shall so certify on the face of the plat. If an agency fails to act within 20 days from the date of the receipt of copies of the plat, and the Wisconsin Department of Administration fails to act within 30 days of receipt of the original plat, it shall be deemed that there are no objections to the plat and, upon demand, it shall be so certified on the face of the plat by the Wisconsin Department of Administration. 
(i)  Drafting standards. The subdivider shall submit to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and to those agencies having the authority to object to plats under provisions in Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 copies of a Preliminary Plat (or Certified Survey Map) based upon an accurate exterior boundary survey by a registered land surveyor that shall show clearly the proposed Subdivision at a scale of not more than one inch per 100 feet having two-foot contour intervals, shall identify the improvements (grading, tree planting, paving, installation of facilities and dedications of land), easements that the subdivider proposes to make and shall indicate by accompanying letter when the improvements will be provided. Any proposed restrictive covenants for the land involved shall be submitted. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-31; Ord. No. 99-11, §§ 7—10, 8-23-1999; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 151—155, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-13 , §§ 3—5, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 56-37. - Preliminary Plat review and approval. 
(a)  Plan commission review. After review of the Preliminary Plat and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of public improvements that will be required, the Plan Commission shall, within 60 days, or within such time as extended by agreement with the subdivider of its submission, approve, approve conditionally, or reject the plat. The subdivider shall be notified in writing of any conditions for approval of the reasons for rejection. Such action of the Plan Commission shall be submitted to the Village Board for approval and the subdivider shall be notified in writing of any changes or modifications in the action of the Plan Commission and the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Public hearing. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall schedule a public hearing on the Preliminary Plat before the Plan Commission. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice of the Plan Commission's review and public hearing on the Preliminary Plat or Certified Survey Map by listing it as an agenda item in the Plan Commission's meeting notice published in the official Village newspaper. The notice shall include the name of the applicant, the address of the property in question and the requested action. Property owners within 200 feet of the proposed land division shall receive written notice of the public hearing. 
(c)  Board action. After receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation, the Village Board shall, within 90 days of the date the plat was filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer approve, approve conditionally or reject such plat and shall state, in writing, any conditions of approval or reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. Failure of the Village Board to act within 90 days or extension thereof shall constitute an approval of the Preliminary Plat, unless other authorized agencies object to the plat. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall communicate to the subdivider the action of the Village Board. If the Preliminary Plat is approved, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall endorse it for the Village Board. 
(d)  Effect of Preliminary Plat approval. Approval or conditional approval of a Preliminary Plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the Final Plat, except that if the Final Plat is submitted within 36 months of Preliminary Plat approval and conforms substantially to the Preliminary Plat layout, the Final Plat shall be entitled to approval. The Preliminary Plat shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the Final Plat, which will be subject to further consideration by the Plan Commission and Village Board at the time of its submission. 
(e)  Preliminary Plat amendment. Should the subdivider desire to amend the Preliminary Plat as approved, the subdivider may resubmit the amended plat, which shall follow the same procedure, except for the fee, unless the amendment is, in the opinion of the Village Board, of such scope as to constitute a new plat, in which such case it shall be refiled. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-32; Ord. No. 99-11, § 11, 8-23-1999; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 156, 157, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2010-23, § 1, 11-22-2010; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 6, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 56-38. - Final Plat review and approval. 
(a)  Filing requirements. 
(1)  The subdivider shall prepare a Final Plat and complete an application form prescribed by the Community Development Department in accordance with this Chapter and shall file 20 copies of the Plat and the application with the Village Clerk-Treasurer at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice of the Plan Commission's meeting in the manner prescribed in Section 56-37(a). The owner or subdivider shall file 20 copies of the Final Plat not later than 24 months after the date of approval of the Preliminary Plat; otherwise, the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat will be considered void unless an extension is requested in writing by the subdivider and for good cause granted by the Village. The owner or subdivider shall also submit at this time a current certified abstract of title or registered property report and such other evidence as the Village Attorney may require showing title or control in the applicant. 
(2)  The subdivider shall, within two days after filing with the Village, transmit two copies to the County Planning Agency, two copies to the Director of the Planning Function in the Wisconsin Department of Administration, additional copies to the Director of the Planning Function for transmission of two copies each to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation if the Subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or a connecting street and the Wisconsin Department of Commerce if the Subdivision is not served by a public sewer and provision for service has not been made, and the original Final Plat and adequate copies to the Plan Commission. The subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer an affidavit indicating full compliance with the requirement of filing with objecting agencies. The County Planning Agency, the Wisconsin Department of Administration, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, and the Wisconsin Department of Commerce shall be hereinafter referred to as objecting agencies. 
(3)  The Final Plat shall conform to the Preliminary Plat as approved and to the requirements of all applicable ordinances and state laws and shall be submitted for certification of those agencies having the authority to object to the plat as provided by Wis. Stats. § 236.12(2). The Zoning Administrator, Village Engineer or Village Attorney shall examine the Final Plat and provide a conclusion as to whether the Final Plat conforms substantially to the Preliminary Plat with a recommendation on approval of the Final Plat. The conclusions and recommendations shall be made a part of the record of the proceedings where the Final Plat is being considered. 
(4)  Simultaneously with the filing of the Final Plat or map, the owner shall file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer 12 copies of the final plans and specifications of public improvements required by this Chapter, and a signed copy of the developer's contract required by Section 56-104. 
(5)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall refer two copies of the Final Plat to the Plan Commission, one copy to the Village Engineer, and a copy each to the telephone and power and other utility companies. The abstract of title or registered property report may be referred to the Village Attorney for examination and report. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall also refer the final plans and specifications of public improvements to the Village Engineer for review. The recommendations of the Plan Commission and Village Engineer shall be made within 30 days of the filing of the Final Plat. The Village Engineer shall examine the plat or map and final plans and specifications of public improvements for technical details and, if the Village Engineer finds them satisfactory, shall so certify in writing to the Plan Commission. If the plat or map or the plans and specifications are not satisfactory, the Village Engineer shall return them to the owner and so advise the Plan Commission. 
(b)  Plan Commission review. 
(1)  The Plan Commission shall examine the Final Plat as to its conformance with the approved Preliminary Plat, any conditions of approval of the Preliminary Plat, this Chapter and all applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans and comprehensive plan components, which may affect it and shall recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the Plat to the Village Board. 
(2)  The objecting state and county agencies shall, within 20 days of the date of receiving their copies of the Final Plat, notify the subdivider and all other approving and objecting agencies of any objections, except that the Wisconsin Department of Administration has 30 days in which to make objections. If there are no objections, they shall so certify on the face of the copy of the Plat and shall return that copy to the Village. If an objecting agency fails to act within 20 days, it shall be deemed to have no objection to the Plat. 
(3)  If the Final Plat is not submitted within 24 months of the last-required approval of the Preliminary Plat, the Village Board may refuse to approve the Final Plat. 
(4)  The Plan Commission shall, within 30 days of the date of filing of the Final Plat with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the Plat and shall transmit the Final Plat and application along with its recommendations to the Village Board. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate information. 
(c)  Village Board review and approval. 
(1)  The Village Board shall, within 60 days of the date of filing the original Final Plat with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, approve or reject such Plat unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the Plat is rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to the subdivider. The Village Board may not inscribe its approval on the Final Plat unless the Village Clerk-Treasurer certifies on the face of the Plat that the copies were forwarded to objecting agencies as required herein, the date thereof and that no objections have been filed within 20 days or, if filed, have been met. 
(2)  The Village Board shall, when it determines to approve a Final Plat, give at least ten days' prior written notice of its intention to the Village Clerk-Treasurer of any municipality within 1,000 feet of the Final Plat. 
(3)  Failure of the Village Board to act within 60 days, the time having not been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, the plat shall be deemed approved. 
(d)  Recordation. After the Final Plat has been approved by the Village Board and required improvements either installed or a contract and sureties insuring their installation is filed, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the Plat attesting to such approval to be duly executed and the Plat returned to the subdivider for recording with the county Register of Deeds. The Register of Deeds cannot record the Plat unless it is offered within six months after the date of last approval and within 24 months after the first approval. 
(e)  Copies. The subdivider shall file eight copies of the Final Plat with the Village Clerk-Treasurer for distribution to the approving agencies, affected sanitary districts, and other affected agencies for their files. 
(f)  Partial platting. The Final Plat may, if permitted by the Village Board, constitute only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat, which the subdivider proposes to record at the time. 
(g)  Plats within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction. When the land to be subdivided lies within 1½ miles of the corporate limits of the Village, the subdivider shall proceed as specified in Sections 56-37 and 56-38, except: 
(1)  Transmittal responsibility lies with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, Town Clerk, or to whomever the plat is first submitted; and the subdivider shall indicate which one in the subdivider's application. 
(2)  Approval agencies include the Plan Commission or Village Board, the town board of the town within which the Subdivision is located and the Dane County Zoning and Natural Resources Committee; the subdivider shall comply with the land division ordinances of these agencies. 
(3)  After approval, the subdivider may proceed with the installation of such improvements and under such regulations as the town board of the town within whose limits the plat lies may require. Wherever connection to any Village utility is desired, permission for such connection shall be approved by the Village Board. 
(4)  All improvement requirements, specified by the Town Board or any special improvement district in matters over which they have jurisdiction, shall be met before filing of the Final Plat. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-33; Ord. No. 99-11, §§ 12—16, 8-23-1999; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 158—165, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2010-23, § 2, 11-22-2010; Ord. No. 2017-13 , §§ 7—12, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 56-39. - Certified Survey Map. 
(a)  Use of Certified Survey Map. When it is proposed to divide land into at least two but no more than four parcels or building sites, any one of which is 35 acres in size or less, or when it is proposed to create by land division not more than four parcels or building sites within a recorded Subdivision Plat without changing the exterior boundaries of a block, lot or outlot, the subdivider shall prepare a Certified Survey Map in accordance with this Chapter and shall file 20 copies of the map and the letter of application with the Village Clerk-Treasurer at least 20 working days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. 
(b)  Referral to Plan Commission. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall, within two normal work days after filing, transmit the copies of the map and letter of application to the Plan Commission. 
(c)  Review by other Village agencies. The Plan Commission shall transmit a copy of the map to all affected Village boards, authorities, committees, commissions or departments for their review and recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. Their recommendations shall be transmitted to the Plan Commission within ten days from the date the map is filed. The map shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission for conformance with this Chapter and all ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans, comprehensive plan components and neighborhood plans. 
(d)  Review and approval. Following public hearing by the Plan Commission in the manner used for Preliminary Plats, the Plan Commission shall approve, approve conditionally and thereby require resubmission of a corrected Certified Survey Map or reject such Certified Survey Map within 60 days from the date of filing of the map unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the map is rejected, the reason shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement forwarded to the subdivider. If the map is approved, the Plan Commission shall cause the Village Clerk-Treasurer to so certify on the face of the original map and return the map to the subdivider. 
(e)  Recordation. The subdivider shall record the map with the County Register of Deeds within 30 days of the approval. 
(f)  Copies. The subdivider shall file five copies of the recorded Certified Survey Map with the Village Clerk-Treasurer for distribution to the Village Engineer, Building Inspector, Village Assessor and other affected departments for their files. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-34; Ord. No. 99-11, § 17, 8-23-1999; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 166—169, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-13 , §§ 13—15, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 56-40. - Replat. 
(a)  Except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 70.27(1), when it is proposed to Replat a recorded Subdivision, or part thereof, so as to change the boundaries of a recorded Subdivision, or part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing to Replat shall vacate or alter the recorded Plat as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.40—236.44. The subdivider or person wishing to Replat shall then proceed, using the procedures for Preliminary and Final Plats. 
(b)  The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall schedule a public hearing before the Plan Commission when a Preliminary Plat of a Replat of lands within the Village is filed, and shall cause notices of the proposed Replat and public hearing to be mailed to the owners of all properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed Replat and to the owners of all properties within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed Replat. 
(c)  Where lots are more than double the minimum size required for the applicable zoning district, the Plan Commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow resubdivision of such parcels into normal lots in accordance with the provisions of the Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-35; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 170, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 16, 7-24-2017)  
Secs. 56-41—56-68. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS AND CERTIFIED SURVEY MAPS 
 
Sec. 56-69. - Technical requirements for Preliminary Plats. 
(a)  General. A Preliminary Plat shall be required for all Subdivisions and shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and shall show correctly on its face the following information: 
(1)  Title under which the proposed Subdivision is to be recorded. Such title shall not be the same or similar to a previously approved and recorded plat, unless it is in addition to a previously recorded plat and is so stated on the plat. 
(2)  Location of the proposed Subdivision by government lot, quarter section, township, range, county and state. 
(3)  Date, scale and north point. 
(4)  Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider and land surveyor preparing the plat. 
(5)  Entire area contiguous to the proposed plat owned or controlled by the subdivider shall be included on the Preliminary Plat even though only a portion of said area is proposed for immediate development. The Plan Commission may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this Chapter and undue hardship would result from strict application thereof. 
(6)  General location sketch showing the location of the Subdivision within the U.S. Public Land Survey section. 
(b)  Plat data. All Preliminary Plats shall show the following: 
(1)  Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed Subdivision referenced to a corner established in the U.S. Public Land Survey and the total acreage encompassed thereby. 
(2)  Locations of all existing property boundary lines, structures, drives, streams and watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, railroad tracks and other significant features within the tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(3)  Location, right-of-way width and names of all existing streets, alleys or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way and all section and quarter section lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(4)  Location and names of any adjacent Subdivisions, parks and cemeteries and owners of record of abutting unplatted lands. 
(5)  Type, width and elevation of any existing street pavements within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto, together with any legally established centerline elevations. 
(6)  Location, size and invert elevation of any existing sanitary or storm sewers, culverts and drain pipes, the location of public and private manholes, catchbasins, hydrants, electric and communication facilities, whether overhead or underground and the location and size of any existing water and gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. If no sanitary or storm sewers or water mains are located on or immediately adjacent to the tract, the nearest such sewers or water mains which might be extended to serve the tract shall be indicated by the direction and distance from the tract, size and invert elevations, National Map Accuracy Standards based upon the North American Vertical Datum of 1988. 
(7)  Corporate limit lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(8)  Existing zoning on and adjacent to the proposed Subdivision. 
(9)  Contours within the exterior boundaries of the plat and extending to the centerline of adjacent public streets to National Map Accuracy Standards based upon the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. At least two permanent bench marks shall be located in the immediate vicinity of the plat; the location of the bench marks shall be indicated on the plat, together with their elevations referenced to North American Vertical Datum of 1988 and the monumentation of the bench marks clearly and completely described. Where, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, undue hardship would result because of the remoteness of the parcel from a mean sea level reference elevation, another datum may be used. 
(10)  High-water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages and wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located within 100 feet therefrom. 
(11)  Water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages and wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located within 100 feet therefrom at the date of the survey. 
(12)  Floodland and shoreland boundaries and the contour line lying a vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not available, two feet above the elevation of the maximum flood of record within the exterior boundaries of the plat or within 100 feet therefrom. 
(13)  Location, width and names of all proposed streets and public rights-of-way such as alleys and easements. 
(14)  Approximate dimensions of all lots together with proposed lot and block numbers. The area in square feet of each lot shall be provided. 
(15)  Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways or other public use or which are to be used for group housing, shopping centers, house of worship sites or other nonpublic uses not requiring lotting. 
(16)  Approximate radii of all curves. 
(17)  Any proposed lake and stream access with a small drawing clearly indicating the location of the proposed Subdivision in relation to access. 
(18)  Any proposed lake and stream improvement or relocation, and notice of application for approval by the Division of Environmental Protection, Department of Natural Resources, when applicable. 
(19)  Where the Plan Commission or Village Engineer finds that it requires additional information relative to a particular problem presented by a proposed development in order to review the Preliminary Plat, it shall have the authority to request in writing such information from the subdivider. 
(c)  Other information. The following additional information and data shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plat but need not be on the face of the Preliminary Plat drawing: 
(1)  A feasibility plan for use of adjoining vacant lands in order to demonstrate how the proposed development fits into both existing and planned land uses for the surrounding area. 
(2)  Proposed deed restrictions and protective covenants. 
(3)  Tentative cross-sections and centerline profiles for each proposed street shown on the Preliminary Plat, showing type of pavement and curb installations. 
(4)  A plan of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants or a plan showing the location of individual wells. 
(5)  The following information: 
a.  If the subdivider is a corporation, the full legal name of the corporation as it appears of record in the office of the State Department of Financial Institutions shall be furnished to the Plan Commission the time the Preliminary Plat is submitted, together with the address of the principal officer of said corporation, the name and address of its registered agent, the names and addresses of all officers and directors of said corporation and the names and addresses of all persons, firms or corporations owning stock in said corporation. 
b.  If the subdivider is a partnership, joint venture or other association, the names and addresses of all persons, firms or corporation involved shall be furnished to the Plan Commission at the time the Preliminary Plat is submitted. 
(6)  Grading plans shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plat indicating existing grades, building grades and landscaping. 
(7)  Erosion control and storm runoff. The Preliminary Plat submitted shall be accompanied by an erosion control plan and storm runoff plan which complies with Chapter 8. 
(d)  Additional information. The Plan Commission may require a proposed Subdivision layout of all or part of the contiguously owned land even though division is not planned at the time. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-40)  
Sec. 56-70. - Technical requirements for Final Plats. 
(a)  General. A Final Plat prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.20, and this Chapter. 
(b)  Additional information. The Final Plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Wis. Stats. § 236.20, the following: 
(1)  Exact length and bearing of the centerline of all streets. 
(2)  Exact street width along the line of any obliquely intersecting street. 
(3)  Exact location and description of street lighting and lighting utility easements, as determined by the utilities serving the area. 
(4)  Railroad rights-of-way within and abutting the plat. 
(5)  All lands reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for the common use of property owners within the Plat. 
(6)  Special restrictions required by the Plan Commission relating to access control along public ways or to the provision of planting strips. 
(7)  Setback or building lines required by the Plan Commission or other Village codes and ordinances. 
(8)  Utility and/or drainage easements. 
(c)  Deed restrictions. Restrictive covenants and deed restrictions for the proposed Subdivision shall be filed with the Final Plat. 
(d)  Property owners association. The legal instruments creating a property owners association for the ownership and/or maintenance of common lands in the Subdivision shall be filed with the Final Plat. 
(e)  Survey accuracy. 
(1)  Examination. The Village Engineer shall examine all Final Plats within the Village and may make, or cause to be made by a registered land surveyor under the supervision or direction of the Village Engineer, field checks for the accuracy and closure of the survey, the proper kind and location of monuments, and legibility and completeness of the drawing at the developer's cost. 
(2)  Maximum error of closure. Maximum error of closure before adjustment of the survey of the exterior boundaries of the Subdivision shall not exceed, in horizontal distance or position, the ratio of one part in 10,000, nor in azimuth, four seconds of arc per interior angle. If field measurements exceed this maximum, new field measurements shall be made until a satisfactory closure of the field measurements has been obtained; the survey of the exterior boundary shall be adjusted to form a closed geometric figure. 
(3)  Street, block and lot dimensions. All street, block and lot dimensions shall be computed as closed geometric figures based upon the control provided by the closed exterior boundary survey. If field checks disclose an error for any interior line of the plat greater than the ratio of one part in 5,000, or an error in measured angle greater than one minute of arc for any angle where the shorter side forming the angle is 300 feet or longer, necessary corrections shall be made. Where the shorter side of a measured angle is less than 300 feet in length, the error shall not exceed the value of one minute multiplied by the quotient of 300 divided by the length of the shorter side; however, such error shall not in any case exceed five minutes of arc. 
(f)  Surveying and monumenting. All Final Plats shall meet all the surveying and monumenting requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.15. 
(g)  State plane coordinate system. Where the plat is located within a quarter section, the corners of which have been relocated, monumented and coordinated by the Village or county, the plat shall be tied directly to one of the section or quarter corners so relocated, monumented and coordinated. The exact grid bearing and distance of such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and Wisconsin state plane coordinates of the monument marking the relocated section or quarter corner to which the plat is tied shall be indicated on the plat. All distances and bearings shall be referenced directly to the Wisconsin Coordinate System, South Zone, and adjusted to the Village's control survey. 
(h)  Certificates. All Final Plats shall provide all the certificates required by Wis. Stats. § 236.21; and in addition, the surveyor shall certify that the surveyor has fully complied with all the provisions of this Chapter. 
(i)  Recording. The Final Plat shall only be recorded with the County Register of Deeds after the certificates of the Director of the Planning Function in the Wisconsin Department of Development, of the Village Board, of the surveyor and those certificates required by Wis. Stats. § 236.21 are placed on the face of the plat. The plat shall be recorded within 30 days of its approval by the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-41)  
Sec. 56-71. - Technical requirements for Certified Survey Maps; review and approval. 
(a)  General. A Certified Survey Map prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all land divisions of four lots or fewer. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(b)  Additional information. The Certified Survey Map shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Wis. Stats. § 236.34, the following: 
(1)  All existing buildings, watercourses, drainage ditches and other features pertinent to proper land division. 
(2)  Setbacks or building lines required by the Plan Commission or other Village codes and ordinances. 
(3)  All lands reserved for future acquisition. 
(4)  Date of the map. 
(5)  Graphic scale and north arrow. 
(6)  Name and address of the owner, subdivider and surveyor. 
(7)  Square footage of each parcel. 
(8)  Present zoning for the parcels. 
(9)  Utility and/or drainage easements. 
(10)  Existing and proposed contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet where the slope of the ground surface is less than ten percent and of not more than five feet where the slope of the ground surface is ten percent or more. Proposed elevations shall also include the estimated first floor elevations of the principal structure for each lot shown. Elevations shall be marked on such contours based on National Map Accuracy Standards based upon the North American Vertical Datum of 1988. This requirement may be waived if the parcels created are fully developed and no grade changes are intended. 
(11)  Entire area contiguous to the proposed Certified Survey Map owned or controlled by the subdivider shall be included on the Certified Survey Map even though only a portion of said area is proposed for immediate development. The Plan Commission may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this Chapter and severe hardship would result from strict application thereof. 
(c)  State plane coordinate system. Where the map is located within a U.S. Public Land Survey quarter section, the corners of which have been relocated, monumented and coordinated by the Village or county, the map shall be tied directly to one of the section or quarter corners so relocated, monumented and coordinated. The exact grid bearing and distance of such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and Wisconsin state plane coordinate of the monument marking the relocated section or quarter corner to which the map is tied shall be indicated on the map. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to the Wisconsin Coordinate System, South Zone, and adjusted to the Village's control survey. 
(d)  Certificates. The surveyor shall certify on the face of the Certified Survey Map that the surveyor has fully complied with all the provisions of this Chapter. The Village Board, after a recommendation by the reviewing agencies, shall certify its approval on the face of the map. 
(e)  Street dedication. Dedication of streets and other public areas shall require, in addition, the owner's certificate and the mortgagee's certificate in substantially the same form as required by Wis. Stats. § 236.21(2)(a). 
(f)  Recordation. The subdivider shall record the map with the County Register of Deeds within 30 days of its approval by the Village Board and any other approving agencies. Failure to do so shall necessitate a new review and reapproval of the map by the Village Board. 
(g)  Requirements. The Certified Survey Map shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter relating to general requirements, design standards and required improvements. Conveyance by metes and bounds shall be prohibited where the lot involved is less than 35 acres or 300 feet in width. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-42)  
Sec. 56-72. - Conformance with policies. 
Land divisions and Subdivisions shall be consistent with the following land use objectives and policies: 
(a)  To approach new development within a large framework, with the basic unit being the neighborhood or district, and the conventional Subdivision Plat forming a part of a neighborhood or district; 
(b)  To stage new growth concurrent with public improvements in transportation and urban service facilities; 
(c)  To minimize new development outside the urban service area; 
(d)  To locate new multifamily development and local commercial development convenient to each other and adjacent to arterials; 
(e)  To develop a system of interior open spaces to provide for separation of neighborhoods, stormwater drainage, and for secondary circulation of pedestrian and bicycle traffic; 
(f)  To use environmental corridors provided by other units of government and interior open space systems as guidance tools for the location and form of future development; 
(g)  To encourage the use of clustering of residential development to assist in the development of the policy set forth to provide an interior open space system; 
(h)  To avoid the wasteful use of land for urban purposes and to maintain economic balance in the community through flexible use of the regional urban land demand standards; and 
(i)  To continue to develop a system of parks and open spaces for the recreational needs of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-43)  
Secs. 56-73—56-102. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 56-103. - Required. 
(a)  Payment for public improvements. The public improvements prescribed in this Chapter are required as a condition of approval of a land division. The required improvements described in this Chapter shall be installed, furnished and financed at the sole expense of the subdivider. However, in the case of required improvements in a commercial, institutional or industrial area, the cost of such improvements may, at the sole discretion of the Village Board, be financed through special assessments. 
(b)  General standard. The following required improvements in this Chapter shall be installed in accordance with the Village Standard Specifications that have been adopted by the Village Board. Where standard specifications have not been adopted, the improvements shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices, approved prior to the start of construction by the Village Engineer. 
(c)  Additional conditions. As further conditions of approval, the Village Board may require any or all of the following: 
(1)  That the subdivider make and install any public improvements reasonably necessary or that the subdivider execute a surety bond or provide other security to ensure that the subdivider will make those improvements within a reasonable time. 
(2)  That as a condition for accepting the dedication of public streets, alleys, or other ways, or for permitting private streets, alleys, or other public ways to be placed on the Official Map, designated facilities shall have been previously provided without cost to the municipality, but that are constructed according to municipal specifications and under municipal inspection, such as, without limitation because of enumeration, sewerage, water mains and laterals, grading and improvements of streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways, street lighting, street trees, or other facilities designed by the Village Board, or that a specified portion of such costs be paid in advance as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0709(2). 
(3)  That the subdivider be responsible for the cost of any necessary alterations of any existing utilities which, by virtue of the plat or the Certified Survey Map, fall within the public right-of-way. 
(4)  That the subdivider dedicate easements for the purpose of assuring the unobstructed flow of solar energy across adjacent lots in the Subdivision of land. 
(d)  [Construction in phases.] The developer may construct the project in such phases as the Village Board approves which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. If construction in phases is permitted, the amount of any bond or other security required under Section 56-104(b) shall be limited to the phase of the project currently being constructed. No security shall be required to be provided sooner than reasonably necessary before commencement of the installation of improvements. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-50; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 36, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2010-23, § 3, 11-22-2010)  
Sec. 56-104. - Required development agreement providing for proper installation of improvements. 
(a)  Development agreement. Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of any land division, the subdivider shall enter into a written development agreement with the Village requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct said improvements at the subdivider's sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual development agreement conditions, which shall include provision for inspection of construction details by the Village Engineer. 
(b)  Financial guarantees. 
(1)  The development agreement shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or in lieu thereof to furnish a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit, the amount of the deposit and the penal amount of the bond to be equal to 1¼ times the Village Engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the development agreement, including the cost of inspection. 
(2)  On request of the subdivider, the development agreement may provide for completion of part or all of the improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat, and in such event the amount of the deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or bond shall be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to acceptance of the plat only. If the required improvements are not complete within the specified period, all amounts held under performance bond shall be turned over and delivered to the Village and applied to the cost of the required improvements. Any balance remaining after such improvements have been made shall be returned to the owner or subdivider. The Village Board, at its option, may extend the security period for additional periods not to exceed two years each period. 
(3)  The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be determined by the Village Board upon recommendation of the Village Engineer after consultation with the subdivider. The completion date shall be a component of the development agreement. 
(4)  The subdivider shall pay the Village for all costs incurred by the Village for review and inspection of the land division. This would include review, and preparation at the Village Board's discretion, of plans and specifications by the Village Engineer and Village Attorney, as well as other costs of a similar nature. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-51)  
Sec. 56-105. - Required construction plans; Village review; inspections. 
(a)  Engineering reports, construction plans and specifications. As required by Section 56-36, engineering reports, plans and proposed specifications shall be submitted simultaneously with the filing of the Preliminary Plat unless waived by the Village Engineer. At the Final Plat stage, construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects with the standards of the Village Engineer and the ordinances of the Village shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Wisconsin, and said plans shall contain the engineer's seal. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items, shall be submitted to the Village Engineer for approval and for an estimate of the total cost of the required improvements; upon approval they shall become a part of the contract required. Simultaneously with the filing of the Final Plat with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, or as soon thereafter as practicable, copies of the construction plans and specifications shall be furnished for the following public improvements: 
(1)  Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades, elevations and cross sections of required improvements. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, elevations and materials of required facilities. 
(3)  Storm sewer and open channel plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, cross sections, elevations and materials of required facilities. 
(4)  Water main plans and profiles showing the locations, sizes, elevations and materials of required facilities. 
(5)  Erosion Control Plans prepared in compliance with the Village's Erosion Control Ordinance in Chapter 8, Article XVII. 
(6)  Stormwater Management Plan prepared in compliance with the Village's Stormwater Management Ordinance in Chapter 8, Article XVIII. 
(7)  Landscaping plans showing the locations, age, caliper, species and time of planting of any required grasses, vines, shrubs and trees. 
(8)  Additional special plans or information as required by Village officials. 
(b)  Action by the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall review or cause to be reviewed the plans and specifications for conformance with the requirements of this Chapter and other pertinent Village ordinances and design standards recommended by the Village Engineer and approved by the Village Board. If the Village Engineer rejects the plans and specifications, the Village Engineer shall notify the owner, who shall modify the plans or specifications or both accordingly. When the plans and specifications are corrected, the Village Engineer shall approve the plans and specifications for transmittal to the Village Board. The Village Board shall approve the plans and specifications before the improvements are installed and construction commenced. 
(c)  Other requirements. 
(1)  Approval by Village Engineer. Development agreement and specifications for the construction of street and utility improvements on dedicated street rights-of-way, as well as the contractors and subcontractors providing such work, shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer. 
(2)  Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bond and contract provisions apply may file, in lieu of said contract and bond, a letter from officers authorized to act on their behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions of this Section. 
(3)  Plats outside the corporate limits. Before final approval by the Village of any plat located outside the corporate limits of the Village, but within the plat approval jurisdiction of the Village, the subdivider shall give evidence that the subdivider has complied with all street and utility requirements of the town in which the land being platted is located. 
(4)  Survey monuments. Before final approval of any plat within the Village or its extraterritorial jurisdictional limits, the subdivider shall install survey monuments placed in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.15, and as may be required by the Village Engineer. 
(d)  Construction and inspection. 
(1)  Prior to starting any of the work covered by the plans approved above, written authorization to start the work shall be obtained from the Village Engineer upon receipt of all necessary permits and in accordance with the construction methods of this Chapter. Building permits shall not be issued until all improvements required by this Chapter are satisfactorily completed. 
(2)  Construction of all improvements required by this Chapter shall be completed within two years from the date of approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Village Board, unless good cause can be shown for the Village Board to grant an extension. 
(3)  During the course of construction, the Village Engineer shall make, or cause to be made, such inspections as the Village Board deems necessary to ensure compliance with the plans and specifications as approved. The owner shall pay the actual cost incurred by the Village for such inspections. This fee shall be the actual cost to the Village of inspectors, engineers and other parties necessary to ensure satisfactory work. 
(e)  Record plans. After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made three copies of record plans showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewers and water mains and such other facilities as the Village Engineer shall require. These plans shall be prepared in any material or electronic format capable of clearly legible reproduction in a form satisfactory to the Village Engineer and shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in Wisconsin. The presentation of the record plans shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the surety bond assuring their completion. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-52; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 17, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 56-106. - Street improvements. 
The subdivider shall construct streets, roads and alleys as outlined on the approved plans based on the requirements of this Chapter: 
(a)  General considerations. The streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such as streams and existing tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Construction standards. Construction of all streets shall conform to the current standards as established by the Village Board and this Chapter, and shall be subject to approval of the Village Engineer before acceptance. 
(c)  Conform to Official Map. The arrangement, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the Official Map. 
(d)  Street construction. After sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, and other necessary utilities have been installed, the subdivider shall construct and dedicate as part of the Subdivision, streets and curbs and gutters. The subdivider shall surface roadways to the widths prescribed by Village specifications. Construction shall be to Village standard specifications for street improvements. 
(e)  Completion of street and sidewalk construction. 
(1)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any residential dwelling until sewer, water, grading and graveling are installed in the streets necessary to service the property for which the permit is required. 
(2)  The Village Board may issue a waiver of these requirements in unusual or special circumstances such as excessively severe weather conditions, heavy construction temporarily in area or construction material shortages (i.e., cement, asphalt). The issuance of a waiver shall be at the discretion of the Village Board. 
(3)  The subdivider requesting a waiver shall do so in writing, presenting such information and documentation as required by the Village Board. The waiver shall be in written form and shall detail which improvement requirements are temporarily waived and for what period of time. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-53)  
Sec. 56-107. - Curb and gutter. 
After the installation of all utility and stormwater drainage improvements, the subdivider shall construct concrete curbs and gutters in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the Village Board, on file with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Wherever possible, provision shall be made at the time of construction for driveway access curb cuts. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-54; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 171, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 18, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 56-108. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks are required for the rights-of-way of major and collector streets. The Village Board may also require sidewalks for platted areas which the Village Board determines will significantly increase traffic volume. The construction of all sidewalks shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the Village Engineer. 
(b)  In addition, wider-than-standard sidewalks may be required by the Village Board in the vicinity of schools, commercial areas and other places of public assemblage, and the Village Board may require the construction of sidewalks in locations other than required under the preceding provisions of this Code if such walks are necessary, in their opinion, for safe and adequate pedestrian circulation. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-55)  
Sec. 56-109. - Sanitary sewerage system. 
(a)  There shall be provided a sanitary sewerage system in conformity with the Village Comprehensive Plan of sewers as approved by the Village Board. 
(b)  The subdivider shall make adequate sewage disposal systems available to each lot within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map parcel. 
(c)  Subdivisions and Certified Survey Map parcels shall be served by public sewer facilities unless a variance allowing a private on-site waste disposal system is approved by the Village Board under Article VII of this Chapter. The size, type, and installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Village. No land shall be subdivided for residential use where individual lift stations are required for connection to public sewer or where on-site sewage disposal systems are required for the disposal of wastewater, except that on-site sewage disposal systems will be permitted in the extraterritorial area where land is being divided for the construction of housing for members of families of active farmers or for employees of active farmers. 
(d)  The Village Board shall require the installation of sewer laterals to the street lot line. 
(e)  The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all sanitary sewers, eight inches in diameter or less in size, including the bringing of the sanitary sewer from where it exists to the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map in question, as well as providing all sanitary sewer work within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map. If greater than eight inch diameter sewers are required to handle the contemplated sewage flows, the costs of such larger sewers shall be prorated in proportion to the ratio which the total area of the proposed Subdivision or Certified Survey Map is to the total drainage area to be served by such larger sewer and the excess cost either borne by the Village or assessed against the total tributary drainage area. 
(f)  The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers in accordance with this Code and specifications of the Village Engineer where it is determined that the proposed Subdivision or Certified Survey Map lies within a public sanitary sewer service area and sanitary sewer facilities are programmed to be extended to the proposed Subdivision or Certified Survey Map within six years. Until such time as the public sewers within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map can be connected to the community public sewer system, they shall be temporarily capped. No private or public use shall be connected to the sewers within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map until such sewers are connected to the larger community system. The subdivider shall indicate on the face of the plat or Certified Survey Map that the owner of private uses within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map shall connect such uses to the sewers in the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map at the time such sewers are connected to the community sewer system, and that the Village be held harmless for any damages or costs incurred to disconnect and abandon any on-side sanitary sewer disposal system then in place and any costs associated with connection to the public sewer mains. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-56; Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 19, 3-26-2018)  
Sec. 56-110. - Water supply facilities. 
(a)  The subdivider shall cause such water supply and distribution facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map. The subdivider shall make provision for adequate private water systems as required by the Village in accordance with the standards of the Wisconsin Department of Commerce. 
(b)  The Village Board may require the installation of water laterals to the street lot line. 
(c)  The size, type and installation of all public water mains proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the Village Board. 
(d)  The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all water mains, water laterals and water system appurtenances within the proposed Subdivision or Certified Survey Map, except for the added cost of installing water mains greater than eight inches in diameter. 
(e)  The subdivider shall install water mains in accordance with this Code and specifications of the Village Engineer when it is determined that the proposed Subdivision or Certified Survey Map lies within a public sanitary sewer service area and water main facilities are programmed to be extended to the proposed Subdivision within six years. Until such time as the public water mains within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map can be connected to the larger community water supply system, they shall be temporarily capped. No private or public use shall be connected to the water mains within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map until such water mains are connected to the larger community water supply system. The subdivider shall indicate on the face of the plat that the owner of private uses within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map shall connect such uses to the water mains within the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map, and that the Village is held harmless for any damages or costs incurred to disconnect and abandon any on-site water supply system then in place and any costs associated with connection to the public water mains. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-57)  
Sec. 56-111. - Stormwater drainage facilities. 
(a)  The subdivider shall provide stormwater drainage facilities adequate to serve the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map pursuant to and in compliance with Section 56-143 and Chapter 8, Article XVIII. 
(b)  Unpaved road ditches and street gutters may be permitted only within the Village's extraterritorial land division approval jurisdiction and shall be shaped and seeded and/or sodded as grassed waterways. Where the velocity of flow is in excess of four feet per second on soils having a severe or very severe erosion hazard and in excess of six feet per second on soils having moderate, slight or very slight erosion hazard, the subdivider shall install a paved invert or check dams, flumes or other energy-dissipating devices. 
(c)  Drainage facilities shall, if required, include water retention/detention structures and settling basins so as to prevent erosion and sedimentation where such facilities discharge into streams or lakes. The design criteria, the size, type, grades and installation of all stormwater drains and sewers and other cross section, invert and erosion control paving check dams, flumes or other energy-dissipating structures and seeding and/or sodding of open channels and unpaved road ditches proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with the plans and standard specifications approved by the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-58; Ord. No. 99-11, § 18, 8-23-1999)  
Sec. 56-112. - Other utilities. 
(a)  The subdivider shall cause gas, electrical power, cable television and telephone facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service available to each lot in the Subdivision. 
(b)  The subdivider shall cause gas, electric power and telephone facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service available to each lot in the Subdivision or Certified Survey Map. All new electrical distribution, cable television and telephone lines from which lots are individually served shall be underground unless the Village Board specifically allows overhead poles for the following reasons: 
(1)  Topography, soil, water table, solid rock, boulders, or other physical conditions would make underground installation unreasonable or impractical; or 
(2)  The lots to be served by said facilities can be served directly from existing overhead facilities. 
(c)  Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, cable television, electrical power and telephone distribution and transmission lines required to service the plat shall be approved by the Village Board and such map shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-59; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 172, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 19, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 56-113. - Street lamps. 
The subdivider shall install street lamps along all streets proposed to be dedicated of a design compatible with the neighborhood and type of development proposed as determined by the Village Engineer. Such lamps shall be placed at each street intersection and at such interior block spacing as may be required by the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-60)  
Sec. 56-114. - Street signs. 
The subdivider shall install at the intersections of all streets proposed to be dedicated a street name sign of a design and installation specified by the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-61)  
Sec. 56-115. - Erosion control. 
(a)  Pursuant to Chapter 8, Article XVII, the subdivider shall cause all gradings, excavations, open cuts, side slopes, and other land surface disturbances to be mulched, seeded, sodded or otherwise protected so that erosion, siltation, sedimentation and washing are prevented. The subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan that specifies measures that will be taken to assure the minimization of erosion problems. 
(b)  The Village Board may require the subdivider to provide or install certain protection and rehabilitation measures, such as fencing, sloping, seeding, riprap, revetments, jetties, clearing, dredging, snagging, drop structures, brush mats, willow poles and grade stabilization structures. 
(c)  Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing shall be minimized consistent with the stormwater management design for the parcel and shall be so conducted as to prevent erosion and sedimentation, preserve and improve scenic qualities and, during foliation, substantially screen any development from stream or lake users. 
(d)  Paths and trails in wooded and wetland areas shall not exceed ten feet in width unless otherwise approved by the Plan Commission and shall be so designed and constructed as to result in the least removal and disruption of trees and shrubs and the minimum impairment of natural beauty. 
(e)  Earth moving, such as grading, topsoil removal, mineral extraction, stream course changing, road cutting, waterway construction or enlargement, removal of stream or lake bed materials, excavation, channel, clearing, ditching, drain tile laying, dredging and lagooning, shall be so conducted as to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to least disturb the natural fauna, flora, watercourse, water regimen and topography. 
(f)  Review of the conduct of such cutting, clearing and moving may be requested of the Dane County Land and Water Resources Department, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources by the Village Engineer or Plan Commission as they deem appropriate. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-62)  
Sec. 56-116. - Partition fences. 
When the land included in a Subdivision Plat or Certified Survey Map abuts upon or is adjacent to land used for farming or grazing purposes, the subdivider shall erect, keep, and maintain partition fences, satisfying the requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes for a legal and sufficient fence, between such land and the adjacent land. A covenant binding the developer, its grantees, heirs, successors, and assigns to erect and maintain such fences, without cost to the adjoining property owners, so long as the land is used for farming or grazing purposes, shall be recorded at the Register of Deeds and a copy thereof furnished to the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-63)  
Sec. 56-117. - Easements. 
(a)  Utility easements. The Village Board, on the recommendation of appropriate departments and agencies serving the Village, shall require utility easements for poles, wire, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and head mains or other utility lines. It is the intent of this Chapter to protect all established easements so as to assure proper grade, assure maintenance of the established grade, prohibit construction of permanent fences or retaining walls over underground installation and prevent the planting of trees in the easement area. 
(b)  Drainage easements. Where a Subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream: 
(1)  There shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and as may be necessary to comply with this Section; or 
(2)  The watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream may be relocated in such a manner that the maintenance of adequate drainage will be assured and the same provided with a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming to the lines of the relocated watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and may be necessary to comply with this Section; 
(3)  Wherever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume flow. In all cases, such watercourse shall be of a minimum width established at the high-water mark or, in the absence of such specification, not less than 30 feet. If, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, the easement will be for a major drainage swale, the easement shall be of sufficient width to contain a 100-year frequency storm. If the drainage easement is located in an established Floodway or Flood Fringe District, the entire floodplain area shall be included within the drainage easement. 
(c)  Easement locations. Such easements shall be at least 12 feet wide, or wider where recommended by the Village Engineer, and may run across lots or alongside of rear lot lines. Such easements should preferably be located along rear lot lines. Evidence shall be furnished the Plan Commission and Village Board that easements and any easement provisions to be incorporated in the plat or in deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility companies or the organization responsible for furnishing the services involved. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-64)  
Sec. 56-118. - Bicycle paths and trails. 
When required by the Village Board, the subdivider shall install required bicycle paths and trails in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the Village. The subdivider shall assume the entire cost of such bicycle paths and trails, except in the case of dual bicycle paths and streets. The added cost for streets wider than those required in order to accommodate bicycle paths and trails shall be the responsibility of the municipality charged with the maintenance of the proposed facility. In the event the subdivider wishes to install dual-lane facilities, which may not be required by the Village, the total cost of such improvements shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-65)  
Sec. 56-119. - Street trees plan. 
(a)  Plan required. Prior to recording the Final Plat, the subdivider shall submit a tree and shrub planting plan for street terraces, parkways, boulevards, and cul-de-sac approved by the Village Forester in conformance with Chapter 59, Article II. Trees and shrubs shall be planted at the time and in the manner determined by the Village Board with the cost of such plantings to be borne by the subdivider. 
(b)  Deposit required. Following the approval of the Final Plat by the Village Board and prior to the signing of the plat by the Village President and Village Clerk-Treasurer, the subdivider shall deposit sufficient money in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office to cover the cost of completing the plantings in conformity with the tree and shrub planting plan. The Village Forester will then cause the completion of the plantings during the next season, either spring or fall, following acceptance of the plat's required improvements by the Village. The amount of such deposit shall be established by the Parks and Recreation Committee based on anticipated actual costs of furnishing and installing said plantings. All said money deposited in the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office shall be kept in a separate account to be used solely for the purposes set forth in this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-66; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 173, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 3, 3-31-2014; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 20, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 56-120. - Improvements extended to limit of parcel. 
Any and all improvements or utility services required by this Chapter for the Subdivision and/or minor land division of lands within the Village or within the Village's extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction shall be extended to the farthest limit of the parcel or lot upon which a building permit is requested unless the owner is excused by the Village Board, the Plan Commission or Village utilities officials. In the event the improvements are required to the end of the parcel, as defined herein, the owner shall be required to post bond with the Village if improvements are not made. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-67)  
Secs. 56-121—56-138. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 56-139. - General street design standards. 
(a)  Compliance with statutes. In laying out a Subdivision, the owner shall conform to the provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, and all applicable Village regulations. In all cases where the requirements of this Chapter are different from the requirements of Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(b)  Dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate land and improve streets as provided in this Chapter and Section 56-106. Streets shall be located with due regard for topographical conditions, natural features, existing and proposed streets, utilities and land uses and public convenience and safety. Streets shall conform to Official Maps adopted by the Village Board. The Subdivision, Certified Survey Parcel or land division shall be so designed as to provide each lot with satisfactory access to a public street or road. 
(c)  Compliance with comprehensive plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to any Village Comprehensive Plan and to this Chapter and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to run-off of stormwater, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The arrangement of streets in new Subdivisions shall make provision for the appropriate continuation at the same width of the existing streets in adjoining areas. 
(d)  Comprehensive Plan. In areas not covered by a Village Comprehensive Plan, the layout of streets shall conform to the plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas of the neighborhood. Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and officially planned streets, topography and natural terrain, streams and lakes and existing tree growth, public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
(e)  Street classifications. Streets shall be classified as indicated below. 
(1)  Arterial streets. Arterial streets shall be arranged to provide through traffic for a heavy volume of vehicles. 
(2)  Collector streets. Collector streets shall provide ready collection of traffic from commercial and residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the major street and highway system and shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as schools, houses of worship and shopping centers and other concentrations of population and to the major streets into which they feed. 
(3)  Local streets. Local streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage systems and to require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting property. 
(4)  Proposed streets. Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the Village Board, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the Subdivision or land division or for the advantageous development of the adjacent tracts. 
(f)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control access to streets or alleys, except where control of such strips is placed with the Village under conditions approved by the Village Board. 
(g)  Alleys. 
(1)  Commercial and industrial. Alleys shall be provided in all Commercial and Industrial Districts for off-street loading and service access, except that the Village Board may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(2)  Residential. Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas unless deemed appropriate or necessary by the Village Board. 
(3)  Width. The width of alleys shall not be less than 24 feet. 
(4)  Dead end. Dead-end alleys are prohibited, and crooked and "T" alleys shall be discouraged. 
(h)  Continuation. Streets shall be laid out to provide for possible continuation wherever topographic and other physical conditions permit. Provision shall be made so that all proposed streets shall have a direct connection with, or be continuous and in line with, existing, planned or platted streets with which they are to connect. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the Subdivision with existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
(i)  Local streets. Local streets shall be so laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic. 
(j)  Number of intersections. The number of intersections of local streets with major streets shall be reduced to the practical minimum consistent with circulation needs and safety requirements, preferably not more than two. 
(k)  Frontage roads. Where a Subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial highway, the Village Board may require a frontage road, nonaccess reservation along the rear of the property contiguous to such highway or such other treatment as may be necessary to ensure safe, efficient traffic flow and adequate protection of residential properties. 
(l)  Private streets. Private streets are prohibited, except as part of a condominium development; and the Village Board shall not permit installation of public improvements in any private street. 
(m)  Visibility. Streets shall afford maximum visibility and safety and shall intersect at right angles where practicable. As required by the Village Engineer, sufficient vision clearance triangles shall be provided at intersections. 
(n)  Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be required between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(o)  Street grades. 
(1)  Unless necessitated by exceptional topography subject to the approval of the Village Board, the maximum centerline grade of any street or public way shall not exceed the following: 
a.  Arterial streets: six percent. 
b.  Collector streets: seven percent. 
c.  Local streets, alleys and frontage streets: ten percent. 
d.  Pedestrian ways: 12 percent unless steps of acceptable design are provided. 
The grade of any street shall in no case exceed ten percent or be less than one-half of one percent. 
(2)  Street grades shall be established wherever practicable so as to avoid excessive grading, the promiscuous removal of ground cover and tree growth, and general leveling of the topography. 
(3)  All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent in feet to 15 times the algebraic difference in the rates of grade for major and collector streets and one-half this minimum for all other streets. 
(p)  Radii of curvature. When a continuous street centerline deflects at any one point by more than ten degrees, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of curvature on said centerline of not less than the following: 
(1)  Arterial streets and highways: 300 feet. 
(2)  Collector streets: 200 feet. 
(3)  Local streets: 100 feet. 
Curves should be provided when centerline deflections exceed one degree in rural areas and in urban areas when deflection exceeds three degrees. 
(q)  Half-streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half-street is adjacent to the Subdivision, the other half-street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. The platting of half-streets should be avoided where possible. 
(r)  Intersections. 
(1)  Property lines at street intersections of major thoroughfares shall be rounded with a radius of 15 feet or of a greater radius where the Village Engineer considers it necessary. 
(2)  Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit. 
(3)  Number of streets converging at one intersection shall be reduced to a minimum, preferably not more than two. 
(s)  Street names. New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, but streets that are continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names shall be subject to approval by the Plan Commission and Village Board. 
(t)  Cul-de-sacs. 
(1)  General. Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall not exceed 800 feet in length. Cul-de-sacs designed to have one end permanently closed shall not exceed 800 feet in length and shall terminate with a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter of right-of-way and a minimum outside curb radius of 50 feet. The use of cul-de-sacs should be avoided where possible. 
(2)  Temporary termination of streets. Temporary termination of streets intended to be extended at a later date shall be accomplished with a temporary cul-de-sac in accordance with the standards set forth above, or by the construction of a temporary "T" intersection 33 feet in width and 33 feet in length abutting the right-of-way lines of the access street on each side. 
(u)  Limited access highway and railroad right-of-way treatment. Whenever the proposed Subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway, arterial street or railroad right-of-way, the design shall provide the treatment provided in this Section. 
(v)  Subdivision lots. When lots within the proposed Subdivision back upon the right-of-way of an existing or proposed limited access highway or a railroad, a planting strip at least 30 feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to the highway or railroad in addition to the normal lot depth. This strip shall be part of the platted lots but shall have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat: "This strip reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs, the building of structures hereon prohibited." 
(1)  Commercial and Industrial Districts. Commercial and industrial properties shall have provided, on each side of the limited access highway, arterial street or railroad, streets approximately parallel to and at a suitable distance from such highway or railroad for the appropriate use of the land between such streets and highway or railroad, but not less than 150 feet. 
(2)  Streets parallel to a limited access highway. Streets parallel to a limited access highway or railroad right-of-way, when intersecting a major street and highway or collector street which crosses said railroad or highway, shall be located at a minimum distance of 250 feet from said highway or railroad right-of-way. Such distance, where desirable and practicable, shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for the future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
(3)  Local streets. Local streets immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided, and location of local streets immediately adjacent to arterial streets and highways and to railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided in residential areas. 
(w)  Street widths. The minimum right-of-way and roadway width of all proposed streets and alleys shall be as specified by the Village Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, or Neighborhood Development Plan; or if no width is specified therein, the minimum width shall be as follows: 
MINIMUM WIDTHS 
(Excepting Bremer Road and Erling Avenue, as included in the Plat of Larson Beach Heights, which shall be 50 feet in width) 
Type of Street 	ROW Width 
to be Dedicated 	Pavement Width 
(Face of Curb 
to Face of Curb) 
Arterial streets 	80 feet 	44 to 52 feet 1 
Collector streets 	70 feet 	44 feet 2 
Local streets 	60 feet 	32 feet 
Cul-de-sac and 
Frontage streets 	50 feet 	32 feet 
Cul-de-sac bulb radius 	50 feet 3 	36 feet 3 
Alleys 	24 feet 	24 feet 
Pedestrian ways 	10 feet 	5 feet 
 
1 The Plan Commission shall establish definite pavement widths. 
2 If the Plan Commission determines that a bicycle lane is needed, then a 40-foot pavement width will be required. 
3 The Plan Commission may allow cul-de-sac islands meeting the following standards: 
(a) A 65-foot ROW width to be dedicated; 
(b) A 28-foot pavement width; 
(c) A 27-foot island radius; 
(d) The island must be planted; 
(e) No parking shall be permitted within the cul-de-sac; 
(f) Minimum terrace depth of nine feet; 
(g) Whenever streets with minimum street widths are recommended by the Plan Commission in certified surveys or plats, it is subject to the approval of the Village Board. 
(x)  New and replacement bridges and culverts. All new and replacement bridges and culverts over perennial waterways, including pedestrian and other minor bridges, in addition to meeting other applicable requirements, shall be designed so as to accommodate the 100-year recurrence interval flood event without raising the peak stage, either upstream or downstream, more than 0.01 feet above the peak stage for the 100-year recurrence interval flood, as established in the applicable federal flood insurance study. Larger permissible flood stage increases may be acceptable for reaches having topographic land use conditions, which could accommodate the increased stage without creating additional flood damage potential upstream or downstream of the proposed structure. Such bridges and culverts shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate the passage of ice flows and other debris. All new and replacement bridges shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable Wisconsin Statutes and codes and shall be submitted to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to assure compliance therewith. 
(y)  Private roads. Private roads are prohibited, except as part of a condominium development; and the Village Board shall not permit installation of public improvements in any private road. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-70; Ord. No. 99-11, § 19, 8-23-1999)  
Sec. 56-140. - Specifications for preparation, construction and dedication of streets and roads. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Construction standards. All roadway construction and materials used shall be performed in accordance with the construction methods as listed in the appropriate Sections of the "State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" and its supplements, and this Chapter, whichever is more restrictive. The design requirements of this Section and Section 56-139 shall be applicable to all streets and roads that are to be dedicated to the Village, regardless of whether such streets or roads are part of a new Subdivision or land division. 
(2)  Project costs. All roadway surveys, dedications, plans and specifications and construction will be at the expense of the applicant. This includes any expense incurred by the Village in the preparation of plans and review and inspection of plans and construction. 
(3)  Preliminary consultation. Prior to the design, preparation and construction of any roadway to be dedicated to the Village, the applicant shall notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer. An on-site meeting will then be arranged to be attended by the Village Engineer and the applicant. Plans must be provided in order for the Village Engineer to check the design and drainage. 
(4)  Material slips. Copies of material slips for all materials furnished for the road construction projects shall be delivered to the Village before the Village approves the final construction. 
(5)  Required inspections. The Village Engineer shall be contacted for required inspections after the following phases of construction: 
a.  Subbase grading; 
b.  Crushed aggregate base course; and 
c.  Bituminous surface course. 
Any deficiencies found by the Village Engineer shall be corrected before proceeding to the next phase of construction. 
(6)  Tests of materials. The Village reserves the right to obtain a sample of the roadway base material prior to placement on the roadway for purposes of determining whether the material meets gradation and soundness requirements. 
(7)  Pavement samples. Samples of bituminous concrete will be taken by the Village during pavement construction operations for purposes of determining that the material meets specifications. 
(b)  Construction standards. All streets and highways constructed in the Village or to be dedicated to the Village shall fully comply with the Village Standard Specifications: 
(1)  Grading. 
a.  With the submittal of the Final Plat, the subdivider shall furnish drawings that indicate the existing and proposed grades of roads, streets and alleys shown on the plat. 
b.  Proposed grades will be reviewed by the Village Engineer for conformance with the Village Standard Specifications and good engineering practice. Street grades require the approval of the Village Board after receipt of the Village Engineer's recommendations. 
c.  After installation of temporary block corner monuments by the subdivider and the establishment of street grades by the Village Engineer, the subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of the streets and alleys proposed to be dedicated, including the vision clearance triangle on corner lots, followed by surfacing required by this Chapter. After installation of water and sewer facilities, the roadway shall be surfaced. 
d.  In cases where an existing street right-of-way is made a part of the plat or abuts the plat, the subdivider shall grade that portion of the right-of-way between the existing pavement and the property line. 
e.  The bed for the roadways in the street rights-of-way shall be graded to subgrade elevation. 
f.  The Village Engineer shall approve all grading within rights-of-way and said grading shall extend for a sufficient distance beyond the right-of-way to insure that the established grade will be preserved. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-71; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 174, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 21, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 56-141. - Block design standards. 
(a)  Length; arrangement. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be appropriate for the topography and the type of development contemplated, but block length in residential areas shall not exceed 1,500 feet nor have less than sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth between street lines. As a general rule, blocks shall not be less than 400 feet in length. 
(b)  Pedestrian pathways. Pedestrian pathways, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, through the center of a block more than 900 feet long, where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, parks, houses of worship, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(c)  Width. The width of blocks shall be wide enough to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth except where otherwise required to separate residential development from through traffic. Width of lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated and the area zoning restrictions for such use. 
(d)  Utility easements. Utility easements for electric power and telephone service shall, where practical, be placed on midblock easements along rear lot lines. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-72)  
Sec. 56-142. - Lot design standards. 
(a)  Size. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location or topography of the Subdivision, the type of sewerage to be utilized, and for the type of development contemplated, provided that no lot shall be smaller in area than the minimum lot size for the appropriate zone as established by the Zoning Code. 
(b)  Commercial lots. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated, as required by the Zoning Code. 
(c)  Lots where abutting major highway. Residential lots fronting on major streets and highways shall be platted with extra depth or design to alleviate the effect of arterial or collector street traffic on residential occupancy. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have a width sufficient to provide a building setback of at least 30 feet from each street. 
(e)  Access to public streets. Every lot shall front or abut for a minimum distance of at least 40 feet on a public street. Lots with an access only to private drives or streets shall be permitted only with Village Board approval. 
(f)  Side lots. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to abutting street lines. Lot lines shall follow Village boundary lines. 
(g)  Double and reversed frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(h)  Natural features. In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development. 
(i)  Land remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, or a plan shown as to future use rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
(j)  Large lots. Where lots are created of a size larger than normal for the area, the Plan Commission may require that the plat be so designed as to allow for the possible future resubdivision of such lots into normal sizes compatible with the area. 
(k)  Lot area and dimensions. Area and dimensions of all lots shall conform to the requirements of the Village Zoning Code for the Subdivisions within the Village and to the applicable county zoning ordinance within the Village's extraterritorial jurisdictional limits. 
(l)  Lot depth. Depth of lots shall be a minimum of 100 feet. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided and a proportion of two to one shall be considered a desirable ratio under normal conditions. Depth of lots or parcels reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated. 
(m)  Lot width. Width of lots shall conform to the requirements of the Village Zoning Code, refer to Sections 62-70 and 62-72. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-73)  
Sec. 56-143. - Stormwater management system. 
(a)  Stormwater management required. As required by Section 56-109, a stormwater management system shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider in accordance with the Village Stormwater Management Ordinance. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.29(4), any stormwater facility dedicated to the public shall not be accepted until at least 80 percent of the lots in the Subdivision have been sold and a professional engineer registered under Wis. Stats. ch. 443 has certified to the Village that the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  That the facility is functioning properly in accordance with the plans and specifications of the Village. 
(2)  All required plantings are adequate, well established, and reasonably free of invasive species. 
(3)  All necessary maintenance, including the removal of construction sediment, has been properly performed. 
In the sole discretion of the Village, an earlier date for the acceptance of the stormwater facility may be established. 
(b)  Drainage system plans. 
(1)  A grading plan for the streets, blocks and lots shall be submitted by the subdivider for the area within the Subdivision. 
(2)  The design criteria for storm drainage systems shall be based upon information provided by the Village Engineer. 
(3)  Material and construction specifications for all drainage projects (i.e., pipe, culverts, seed, sod, etc.) shall be in compliance with specifications provided by the Village Engineer. 
(c)  Grading. The subdivider shall grade each Subdivision in order to establish street, block and lot grades in proper relation to each other and to topography as follows: 
(1)  The subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all proposed streets in accordance with the approved plans. 
(2)  Block grading shall be completed by one or more of the following methods: 
a.  A ridge may be constructed along the rear lot lines, which provides for drainage onto the streets. 
b.  Parts of all lots may be graded to provide for drainage to the street or to a ditch along the rear lot line. 
c.  Draining across rear or side lot lines may be permitted, provided that drainage onto adjoining properties is skillfully controlled. 
(d)  Requirements. The subdivider shall install all the storm drainage facilities indicated on the plans required in Subsection (a) of this Section. 
(1)  Street drainage. All streets shall be provided with an adequate storm drainage system. The street storm system shall serve as the primary drainage system and shall be designed to carry street, adjacent land and building stormwater drainage. No stormwater shall be permitted to be run into the sanitary sewer system within the proposed Subdivision. 
(2)  Off-street drainage. The design of the off-street drainage system shall include the watershed affecting the Subdivision and shall be extended to a watercourse or ditch adequate to receive the storm drainage. When the drainage system is outside of the street right-of-way, the subdivider shall make provisions for dedicating an easement to the Village to provide for the future maintenance of said system. Easements shall be a minimum of 30 feet, but the Village may require larger easements if more area is needed due to topography, size of watercourse, etc. 
(e)  Protection. The subdivider shall adequately protect all ditches to the satisfaction of the Village Board and Village Engineer. Ditches and open channels shall be seeded, sodded or paved depending upon grades and soil types. (Generally ditches or channels with grades up to one percent shall be seeded; those with grades up to four percent shall be sodded and those with grades over four percent shall be paved.) 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-74; Ord. No. 99-11, § 20, 8-23-1999)  
Sec. 56-144. - Nonresidential Subdivisions. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  If a proposed Subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the Subdivision with respect to such land shall make such provisions as the Village may require. 
(2)  A nonresidential Subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in the Village Zoning and Building Codes. A nonresidential Subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of this Chapter, as well as such additional standards required by the Village and shall conform to the proposed land use standards established by any Village Comprehensive Plan or Official Map and the Village Zoning Code. 
(b)  Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in this Chapter, which are appropriate to the planning of all Subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Village Board that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
(2)  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
(3)  Special requirements may be imposed by the Village Board with respect to street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction. 
(4)  Special requirements may be imposed by the Village Board with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and stormwater drainage. 
(5)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial Subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently landscaped buffer strips when necessary. 
(6)  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-75)  
Secs. 56-145—56-171. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARK AND PUBLIC LAND DEDICATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-08 § 4, adopted Feb. 24, 2020, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 56-172—56-176, pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from Code 1998, §§ 14-1-80—14-1-84; Ord. No. 98-05, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 1998; Ord. No. 99-11, §§ 22, 23, adopted Aug. 23, 1999; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 8, adopted Jan. 14, 2002; Ord. No. 2002-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2002; Ord. No. 2003-22, § 1, adopted Dec. 22, 2003; Ord. No. 2005-20, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2005; and Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 22, adopted July 24, 2017. 
 
Sec. 56-172. - General requirements. 
(a)  Dedication requirement. In order that adequate open spaces and sites for public uses may be properly located and reserved and in order that the cost of providing public areas, such as, but not limited to, parks and recreation areas, may be equitably apportioned on the basis of additional need created by development, each subdivider shall be required to reserve land, dedicate parkland or pay impact fees, or some combination thereof, pursuant to Sections 56-173 through 56-176 of this Code, and Section 8-464 and Sections 23-117 through 23-119 of this Code, incorporated into this Chapter by reference. 
(b)  General design. In the design of a Subdivision, Certified Survey Map, planned unit development or condominium project, provisions shall be made for suitable sites of adequate area for schools, parks, playgrounds, open spaces, drainageways and other public purposes. Such sites are to be shown on the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat, or map, and shall comply with the Village Comprehensive Plan or component of said plan. Consideration shall be given to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of trees, marshes, lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, watersheds, ravines and woodlands, prairie and wetlands, and plant and animal communities, as recommended by the Village Engineer and Plan Commission, and approved by the Village Board. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 4, 2-24-2020)  
Sec. 56-173. - Land dedication. 
(a)  Required land dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate usable land to provide park, playground, recreational and open space to meet the needs to be created by the Subdivision, land division, or development project in accordance with the standards set forth in this Article, subject to approval by the Village Board. Whenever a proposed park, playground, or other public land, other than streets or drainageways, is designated in the Village Comprehensive Plan and Outdoor Recreation & Open Space Plan is included, all or in part, in a tract of land to be subdivided, these proposed public lands shall be dedicated to the public by the subdivider. The parkland dedication shall meet the service standard of 2,106 square feet per single family dwelling unit, 1,463 square feet per multi family dwelling unit, including apartments and duplexes, and 804 square feet per group quarters dwelling unit, determined by the number and types of dwelling units in the proposed development and the most current needs assessment. The dedication shall be made part of the Plat or Certified Survey Map. 
(b)  Park-land impact fee in lieu of parkland dedication. The Plan Commission may determine in any proposed Subdivision or other land division that, based on an evaluation of the proposed dedication against the Village's Comprehensive Plan and Outdoor Recreation & Open Space Plan, and any other policies adopted by the Village Board, the subdivider shall pay the park-land impact fee in lieu of dedicating parklands. If the Plan Commission determines that a proposed dedication meets some but not all the usable land criteria, the Plan Commission may recommend, and the Village Board may approve, acceptance of that land with partial credit to the land dedication requirement. 
(c)  Other land dedications. Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided embraces all or any part of an arterial street, collector street, drainageway or other public way that has been designated in the Village Comprehensive Plan, said public way shall be dedicated by the subdivider in the locations and dimensions indicated on said plan, and made part of the Plat or Certified Survey Map. 
(d)  Shoreland. 
(1)  Public access. All Subdivisions abutting on a navigable lake or stream shall provide public access at least 60 feet wide providing access to the low watermark so that there will be public access, which is connected to existing public roads, at not more than one-half-mile intervals as measured along the lake or stream shore except where greater intervals and wider access is agreed upon by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the Wisconsin Department of Administration, and excluding shore areas where public parks or open-space streets or roads on either side of a stream are provided. No public access established under this Chapter may be vacated except by Circuit Court action. This Subsection does not require the Village to improve land provided for public access. 
(2)  Lake and stream shore plats. The lands lying between the meander line, established in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.20(2)(g), and the water's edge, and any otherwise unplattable lands that lie between a proposed Subdivision and the water's edge shall be included as part of lots, outlots or public dedications in any plat abutting a lake or stream. This Subsection applies not only to lands proposed to be subdivided but also to all lands under option to the subdivider or in which the subdivider holds any interest and which are contiguous to the lands proposed to be subdivided and which abut a lake or stream. 
(e)  Unknown number of dwelling units. Where the plat, certified survey, or condominium does not specify the number of dwelling units to be constructed, the land dedication shall be based upon the maximum number of units permitted by the Village Zoning Chapter and this Chapter. 
(f)  Access to dedicated land. All dedicated land shall have frontage on a public street and shall have unrestricted public access. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 4, 2-24-2020)  
Sec. 56-174. - Reservation of additional land. 
When public parks and sites for other public areas as shown on the Comprehensive Plan lie within the proposed area for development and are greater in area than required by Section 56-173, the owner shall reserve for acquisition by the Village, through agreement, purchase or condemnation, the remaining greater public area for a period of three years of Final Plat approval unless extended by mutual agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 4, 2-24-2020)  
Sec. 56-175. - Development of park area. 
(a)  When parklands are dedicated, the subdivider is required to: 
(1)  Properly grade and contour for proper drainage; 
(2)  Provide surface contour suitable for anticipated use of area; 
(3)  Cover areas to be seeded with a minimum of four inches of quality topsoil, seed as specified by the Director of Public Works, fertilized with 16-6-6 at a rate of seven pounds per 1,000 square feet, and mulched. The topsoil furnished for the park site shall consist of the natural loam, sandy loam, silt loam, silty clay loam or clay loam humus-bearing soils adapted to the sustenance of plant life, and such topsoil shall be neither excessively acid nor excessively alkaline; and 
(4)  Install or provide for installation of water and sanitary sewer lines to the property line of all dedicated land. 
(b)  The Village Board may require certification of compliance by the Village Engineer. The cost of such report shall be paid by the subdivider. 
(c)  Grading and seeding of parklands is to be completed as soon as ten percent of the planned lots in the Subdivision are sold, as determined by the Village Board. 
(d)  If the subdivider fails to satisfy the requirements of this Section, the Village Board may contract said completion and bill such costs to the subdivider, following a public hearing and written notice to the subdivider of noncompliance. Failure to pay such costs may result in the immediate withholding of all building permits until such costs are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 4, 2-24-2020)  
Sec. 56-176. - Credit toward park-land impact fee. 
Parkland dedicated and accepted by the Village shall act as a credit toward any required Park-land impact fee, pursuant to Section 8-464, in an amount determined by the Community Development Director, consistent with the needs assessment and the amount of the park-land impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 4, 2-24-2020)  
Secs. 56-177—56-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - VARIANCES, PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 56-206. - Variances and exceptions. 
(a)  Where, in the judgment of the Village Board, it would be inappropriate to apply literally the provisions of this Chapter because of the proposed Subdivision being located outside of the corporate limits, or because exceptional or undue hardship would result, the Village Board may waive or modify any requirements to the extent deemed just and proper. Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the Preliminary Plat is filed for consideration, stating fully all facts relief upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data that may aid the Plan Commission and Village Board in the analysis of the proposed project. 
(b)  The Plan Commission shall not recommend and the Village Board shall not grant variances or exceptions to the regulations of this Chapter unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
(1)  The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
(3)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, financial hardship or self-imposed hardship, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out; 
(4)  That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same vicinity. 
(c)  Such relief shall be granted without detriment to the public good, without impairing the intent and purpose of this Chapter or the desirable general development of the Village in accordance with any Village Comprehensive Plan or component thereof, this Chapter, or the Village Zoning Code. A two-thirds majority vote of the entire membership of the Village Board shall be required to grant any modification of this Chapter, and the reasons shall be entered in the minutes of the Village Board. 
(d)  The Plan Commission may waive the placing of monuments pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.15(1)(h) for a reasonable time on condition that the subdivider execute a surety bond to insure the placing of such monuments within the time required by the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-90)  
Sec. 56-207. - Enforcement, penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record or monument any land in violation of this Chapter or the Wisconsin Statutes and no person, firm or corporation shall be issued a building permit by the Village authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any Subdivision, Certified Survey Map, Condominium or Replat with the jurisdiction of this Chapter not of record as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived until the provisions and requirements of this Chapter have been fully met. The Village may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this Chapter or the applicable Wisconsin Statutes. 
(b)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit no less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and the costs of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding six months. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Recordation improperly made has penalties provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.30. 
(3)  Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats has penalties provided for in Wis. Stats. § 236.31. 
(4)  Monuments disturbed or not placed have penalties as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 236.32. 
(5)  Village Assessor's plat made under Wis. Stats. § 70.27 may be ordered by the Village as a remedy at the expense of the subdivider when a Subdivision is created by successive divisions. 
(c)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat may appeal therefrom, as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.13(5) and 62.23(7)(e)10, 14 and 15, within 30 days of notification of the rejection of the plat. Where failure to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made a party to the action. The court shall direct that the plat be approved if it finds that the action of the approving or objecting agency is arbitrary, unreasonable or discriminatory. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-91)  
Secs. 56-208—56-237. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FEES 
 
Sec. 56-238. - Administrative and other fees. 
(a)  General. The subdivider shall pay the Village all fees as hereinafter required and at the times specified before being entitled to recording of a plat or Certified Survey Map. 
(b)  Engineering fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Village for all engineering work incurred by the Village in connection with the plat or Certified Survey Map, including inspections required by the Village. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Village for such engineering work and inspection as the Village Engineer deems necessary to assure that the construction of the required improvements is in compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the Village or any other governmental authority. Engineering work shall include the preparation of construction plans, standard specifications, inspections and administration of the engineering work. 
(c)  Administrative fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any legal, administrative or fiscal work that may be undertaken by the Village in connection with the plat or Certified Survey Map: 
(1)  Preliminary plat review fee. 
a.  The subdivider shall pay the review fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code plus the determined amount per lot within the Preliminary Plat to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of first application for approval of any Preliminary Plats to assist in defraying the cost of review. 
b.  The reapplication fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code shall be paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of reapplication for approval of any Preliminary Plat that has previously been reviewed. 
(2)  Final plat review fees. 
a.  The subdivider shall pay the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code plus the determined amount per lot within the Final Plat to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of first application for Final Plat approval of said plat to assist in defraying the cost of review. 
b.  The reapplication fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code shall be paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of a reapplication for approval of any Final Plat that has previously been reviewed. 
c.  The subdivider shall pay the Village a fee for the review of the development agreement for each phase of the plat as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(3)  Certified Survey Map review fee. The subdivider shall pay the review fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of first application for approval of any Certified Survey Map to assist in defraying the cost of review. 
(d)  Condominium development review fee. The developer shall pay a review fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for each unit shown on a condominium plat, less an additional determined amount for each lot shown on a Preliminary Plat or Certified Survey Map for the same project. 
(e)  Objecting agency review fees. The subdivider shall directly transmit all fees required for state agency review at the time of application. Said review fees shall be retransmitted to the proper state review agency by the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Said fees shall be applicable, where appropriate, to review fees required by the Wisconsin Department of Administration, Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Wisconsin Department of Commerce and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(f)  Computerized mapping fee. Upon approval of a land division, plat or a condominium, the developer shall pay a fee, as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code, equal to the cost to the Village for digitizing the mapping of the approved land division, plat or condominium and the public improvements connected therewith. This digitizing and mapping fee shall apply to: 
(1)  All additions and/or changes to parcel boundaries; 
(2)  Public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Access, stormwater and/or utility easements; 
(4)  The following utility systems: sanitary sewer, stormwater and public water supply. 
(g)  Escrow deposits. 
(1)  Applicants for land division or condominium review shall be responsible to pay the actual cost of staff and consultant review. Consultant costs shall be the actual costs, as billed to the Village, of the land division. Upon application, the applicant shall deposit the amount established by the Village Board from time to time and specified under Appendix A to this Code to be held in escrow upon which the Village shall draw to pay for said costs as they are incurred during the course of reviewing the application. Itemized statements reflecting the amounts drawn from the deposit shall be sent to the applicant every 30 days. In the event that the escrow deposit has been drawn down to 25 percent of the required amount, if requested by the Village, the applicant shall replenish the escrow deposit to its original amount within 15 days of the Village's request. If any funds remain in the escrow deposit following final determination of the application, such remaining funds shall be returned to the applicant within 15 days of the determination together with an accounting of the deposits and draws on the escrow. 
(Code 1998, § 14-1-100; Ord. No. 98-20, §§ 8—11, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 99-11, §§ 24—28, 8-23-1999; Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ 175—179, 1-27-2002; Ord. No. 2005-14, § 2, 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 2006-04, §§ 3—7, 2-13-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, §§ 3—5, 2-25-2008; Ord. No. 2017-13 , §§ 23—26, 7-24-2017)  
Chapter 59 - VEGETATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 59-1—59-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Forester, Wis. Stats. § 27.09; trees on highways, Wis. Stats. § 86.03. 
 
Sec. 59-19. - Statement of policy and applicability of Article. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. 
(1)  The Village acknowledges that trees are a valuable resource that provide economic, environmental and aesthetic benefits to the Village community. Specifically, trees enhance the aesthetics and increase property values of residential and commercial areas in the Village. Further, trees limit soil erosion, improve water quality, reduce traffic noise, filter airborne pollutants, reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide, and produce oxygen. The benefits provided by Village trees impact the environment both globally and locally. 
(2)  With these benefits in mind, it is the policy of the Village to: 
a.  Regulate and establish policy for the control of planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in or upon all public areas, terrace areas and all wooded and natural areas of the Village, to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions on public property that may result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public areas; 
b.  Promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the Village; 
c.  Educate the public about the importance of trees and shrubs in the urban environment; 
d.  Prohibit the undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance of trees and shrubs located in public areas; 
e.  Guard all trees and shrubs both public and private within the Village against the spread of disease, insects or pests. 
(b)  Application. The provisions of this Article shall apply to trees and shrubs growing or hereafter planted in or upon public areas and terrace areas and also to all trees and shrubs growing or to be planted in or upon any private premises which shall threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of the public or of any public areas. 
(c)  Jurisdiction of the Natural Resources Committee. 
(1)  The Natural Resources Committee shall, subject to the supervision and control of the Village Board and except as herein provided, have jurisdiction and direction over all public trees upon Village-owned property; that part of the street, the grade and all other trees on any property which may in any way have effect upon public property, and upon the public welfare of the Village; and for the planting, care, maintenance, protection, and removal thereof. The Natural Resources Committee shall have the authority to make such rules and regulations, as it may deem applicable for carrying out the purpose of this Article. 
(2)  The Village may appropriate money to pay the costs of implementing this Article. The Village Board may include in its annual budget such sum as it deems necessary to pay the costs necessary incidental to the Natural Resources Committee's powers and duties under this Article. 
(3)  The Natural Resources Committee shall consist of Village residents with an interest in urban forestry together with the Parks Manager and a member of the Plan Commission. Citizen members shall be appointed through nomination by the Village President subject to confirmation by the Village Board. 
(4)  The Natural Resources Committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
a.  To serve in an advisory capacity to the Village Board in matters relating to trees and shrubs located within street rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, and other public properties within the Village. The Committee may also advise on matters of trees and shrubs located on private property that constitute a hazard, threat or nuisance as described herein. 
b.  To prepare and maintain an inventory of trees located on public lands within the Village. 
c.  To complete and recommend a plan for the planting, care and maintenance of public trees to the Village Board. 
d.  To recommend that the Village Board apply for state and federal financial assistance grants to fund the preparation and implementation of the Village's urban forest management activities. 
e.  To assist in the preparation of applications for urban forestry grants after approval by the Village Board. 
f.  To make recommendations to the Village Board regarding the selection of the Village Forester and the hiring and retaining of urban forestry contractors to assist with Village tree management activities. 
g.  To cooperate, when possible, with neighboring communities in order to procure urban forestry supplies and services more cost-effectively. 
h.  To encourage and provide public education regarding tree care and urban forestry issues within the Village. 
i.  To conduct yearly Village Arbor Day observances and ceremonies. 
j.  To earn and maintain the Village's "Tree City USA" status with the National Arbor Day Foundation. 
k.  To advise the Plan Commission and Village Board on urban forestry issues related to new development. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-1; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-1), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Boulevard area. The land between two traveled portions of a street. 
(b)  Certified arborist. Any person trained in the practice of planting, maintaining and removing trees or shrubs and certified as such by the International Society of Arboriculture or similar endorsing agency. 
(c)  Evergreen tree. Any tree that retains its foliage for more than one growing season. 
(d)  Forester. A person trained in the practice of planting, maintaining and removing trees or shrubs and designated by the Village Board as authorized to carry out provisions of this Article. 
(e)  Genus. A group of closely related species. The taxonomic category ranking above a species and below a family. 
(f)  Hazard. Any tree or tree part with a potential to fall and to endanger persons or property. 
(g)  Heritage tree. A tree on Village property that is deemed significant by virtue of its species, size or its historical, ecological or horticultural attributes and, as such, is protected from removal without written permission from the Village Forester. 
(h)  Major pruning. Trimming a tree beyond that necessary to achieve clearance from overhead utilities or other obstacles in compliance with Section 59-24. 
(i)  Person. Person, firm, association or corporation. 
(j)  Public areas. Includes all public parks and other lands owned, controlled or leased by the Village. 
(k)  Public nuisance. Any tree or shrub or part thereof which, by reason of its condition, interferes with the use of any public area; infected with a plant disease; infested with injurious insects or pests; injurious to public improvements or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property. 
(l)  Public property. Property owned or controlled by the Village, including, without limitation because of enumeration, public building sites, parks, conservancies, playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks, and the terrace between the lot line and curb or improved portion of any public way. 
(m)  Public trees and shrubs. All trees and shrubs growing on or in that part of every street, the grade of which has been established lying between the lot line and the curb, or in the center or side plots in all boulevards and parkways, and in all public parks or grounds belonging to the Village. 
(n)  Shall. Denotes a practice or rule that must be adhered to in compliance to this Article. 
(o)  Shrubs. Any woody plant smaller in height than a tree, formed by multiple vertical or semi upright stems originating from or within close proximity to the ground. 
(p)  Species. A fundamental category of taxonomic classification that ranks below a genus. 
(q)  Terrace area. The land between the inside of the curb or the inside edge of the drainage ditch of and the street right-of-way line. 
(r)  Topping. A pruning technique to reduce tree height by the heading of large branches, which has been demonstrated to be detrimental to tree health and safety. 
(s)  Tree. Any woody, perennial plant normally having one dominant vertical trunk or stem and a height at maturity of 15 feet or greater. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-2; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-2), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-21. - Duties of Village Forester. 
(a)  In addition to other duties specified in this Article, the Village Forester shall inspect and maintain the inventory list of trees on Village property and inspect trees for health. The Village Forester shall notify landowners of trees hanging over the public right-of-way that require trimming and provide contact information at the UW Extension for residents requiring answers to tree and shrub questions. 
(b)  If the Village Forester becomes aware of a potential public nuisance through the normal conduct of Village business or receives a report of a potential public nuisance: 
(1)  The Village Forester may only enter private property in compliance with the following procedure and only if public safety requires intervention. The Village Forester shall first make visual inspection from off the property; second, the Village Forester will inform the property owner in writing of the need for an inspection of a tree or shrub; third, the Village Forester shall gain consent from the property owner; and fourth, the Village Forester shall make an inspection and report to both the property owner and the Parks Manager on the findings. If a property owner refuses entry on their property, the Village Forester may obtain a special inspection warrant pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119 from the municipal court prior to inspecting the property. 
(2)  In the event of an emergency requiring immediate access to the property, the Village Forester may enter the property after reasonable efforts to contact the property owner. 
(c)  The Village Forester or authorized representative may, after making a reasonable attempt to notify the homeowner, enter upon private premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining any tree or shrub located upon or over such premises and carrying out any of the provisions of this Article. 
(d)  The Village Forester is charged with making the determination of a heritage tree designation. Any tree, grove of trees, shrub or group of trees, growing on public property within the Village limits, which meets any of the following criteria may have the heritage designation. 
(1)  Any tree, grove of trees or shrubs that may have historical significance, including those that were/are: 
a.  Planted as a commemorative; 
b.  Planted during a particularly significant historical era; or 
c.  Marking the spot of an historical event. 
(2)  Any tree, grove of trees or shrubs having horticultural or ecological significance: 
a.  Long-lived species such as oak, hickory and white pine are especially desirable for this designation; 
b.  No species of tree or shrub listed in Section 59-36 may gain the heritage designation; 
c.  A distinctive specimen in size or structure for its species (determined by comparing the tree or shrub to average trees and shrubs of its species in the Village); 
d.  A rare or unusual species for the McFarland area (to be determined by the number of similar trees of the same species within the Village); 
e.  Trees or shrubs providing valuable habitat; or 
f.  Trees or shrubs identified by the Village Board via a Village-wide survey as having significant arboricultural value to the citizens of the Village. 
(3)  For a tree or shrub to meet the heritage tree designation, it must be of sound health and have been tagged by the Village Forester or designated representative as meeting the heritage tree criteria described in this Section, and cannot be a species listed in Section 59-36. 
No heritage tree may be removed without written permission from the Village Forester. If a removal permit is granted, the person responsible for its removal may be required to remediate the trees removed by replanting. No replacement is required for removal of dead, diseased, or potentially hazardous heritage trees or those that are listed as nuisance trees in Section 59-36. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-3; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-3), 10-22-2007; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 3-31-2014)  
Sec. 59-22. - Interference with the Village Forester prohibited. 
No person shall interfere with the Village Forester or the Village Forester's authorized representative while they are engaged in carrying out any work or activities authorized by this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-4; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-4), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-23. - Abatement of tree disease and insect nuisances. 
(a)  Insects and pathogens. The Village Board has determined that there are many trees growing on public and private premises within the Village, the loss of which would substantially depreciate the value of public and private property, impair the use and enjoyment of public and private premises and erode the tax base of the Village, and that the health and life of such trees is threatened by fatal insect infestation and diseases. The Village Board hereby declares its intention to control and prevent the spread of pests and specifically declares oak wilt and the insect vectors of this and other such diseases to be public nuisances. The Village Board also authorizes the Natural Resources Committee to investigate new diseases and nuisances as they come into existence and authorizes said Natural Resources Committee to take actions similar to those described herein for such future diseases and nuisances. 
(b)  Treatment. When made aware that any tree, shrub or part thereof growing on private property is a public nuisance, or which endangers life, health, safety or public property or which is infested with parasites, insect pests or disease that may spread or disperse to public trees and shrubs, the Village Forester shall notify the owner or agent (in accordance with Section 59-21(c)) that the nuisance must be sprayed, removed or otherwise abated as directed within a reasonable period of time as directed by the Village Forester. If the owner fails to comply with the terms of the notice, the Village Forester may perform the necessary remediation and charge the cost thereof to the owner. If the owner fails to pay the cost within 30 days thereof, the Village may place the unpaid amount on the tax roll as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(c)  Abatement of nuisances with public and private trees; duty of Village Forester. 
(1)  The Village Forester shall order, direct, supervise and control the abatement of public nuisances as defined in Section 59-20 by spraying, removing, burning, quarantining, trenching to sever root grafts or by other means the Village Forester determines to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of any deleterious or fatal tree disease or insect pest or the vectors known to carry such diseases. The Village Forester shall provide advance notification to adjacent property owners if trees are to be sprayed. 
(2)  Whenever the Village Forester, after inspection or examination shall determine that a public nuisance as herein defined exists on public property in the Village, the Village Forester shall immediately abate or cause the abatement of such nuisance in such manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread of any deleterious or fatal tree disease or insect pest or vectors known to carry such disease pathogens. 
(3)  Whenever the Village Forester shall find, on examination, or is otherwise made aware, that any tree or shrub or part thereof growing or located upon private property is a public nuisance as defined in Section 59-20, or which endangers the life, health, safety, or public property, or which is infested with parasites, insect pests or disease that may spread or disperse to public trees and shrubs, the Village Forester shall notify the owner or agent, by personal service or certified mail, that the nuisance must be sprayed, removed, or otherwise abated as directed in the notice within a reasonable period of time as determined by the Village Forester unless the Village Forester shall determine that immediate correction or removal is necessary for public safety. If the owner of such property or agent thereof shall refuse or neglect to comply with the notice, the Village Forester shall cause the nuisance to be abated and shall report the expense thereof to the Village Clerk who shall enter it as a special charge against the property under Wis. Stats. § 66.0627 upon which the tree or shrub is located. 
(d)  Oak wilt prevention. The Village Board has determined that the health of oak trees within the Village limits is threatened by the fatal disease known as oak wilt. The loss of oak trees growing on private and public property substantially depreciates the value of property within the Village and impairs the safety, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is in the public interest for protection of public and private property to control the spread of oak wilt fungus. The spread of oak wilt fungus is believed to be increased by the cutting and pruning of oak trees between April 1 and October 1 of each year. Accordingly, the Village Board hereby declares oak wilt as a public nuisance. 
(e)  Oak wilt management. 
(1)  Whereas the Village Board recognizes that oak wilt is spread more readily from tree to tree during the spring and summer months than during other times of the year, the Village Board hereby declares its intention to help control the spread of this disease by regulating work on these tree species during this sensitive period. 
(2)  No removal, pruning or maintenance of any oak tree shall be conducted annually between the dates of March 1 to November 1 without written permission from the Village Forester. 
a.  The Village Forester may grant an exemption in cases where pruning or removal is necessary to abate an imminent and immediate hazard or in cases of storm-damaged trees. 
b.  The Village Forester may grant an exemption for public utilities; however, such an exemption shall be stipulated within the work permit issued by the Village to the utility as described in Section 59-24. 
In the case of any exemption, all possible precautions shall be exercised in order to limit the infection of these trees, including the application of a sterile wound dressing/paint to pruning wounds created during this time. Such wound dressing should be applied at the time pruning occurs. 
(f)  Stump removal. After the removal of any public tree or shrub, the Village Forester may cause the removal of such public tree or shrub's stump at the Village's expense. If a private tree or shrub is removed for the purpose of abating a public nuisance and at the order of the Village Forester, the Village Forester may also cause the removal of such private tree or shrub's stump if its presence also poses a public nuisance as defined in Section 59-20 and the expense shall be charged to the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-5; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-5), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-24. - Permit for planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Permit required. No person, except upon order of the Village Forester, shall plant, transplant, move, spray, brace, trim, remove, or perform major pruning as determined by the Village Forester on a tree or shrub in the public right-of-way terrace area or cause such act to be done by others without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the Village Forester as herein provided. The applicant shall comply with the planting standards of Section 59-25. The fee for the permit shall be as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  Permit exemptions. No permit shall be required to cultivate, fertilize or water trees or shrubs or for work by Village personnel on park properties. No permit is necessary to plant trees inside the property line. 
(c)  Permit requirements and conditions. 
(1)  If the Village Forester determines that the proposed work or planting described in an application for a permit is necessary and in accord with the purposes of this Article, taking into account the safety, health and welfare of the public, location of utilities, public sidewalk, driveways and street lights, general character of the area in which the tree or shrub is located or proposed to be located, type of soil, characteristics and physiological need of the genus, species and variety of tree or shrub, the Village Forester shall issue a permit to the applicant. Trees may be planted in the terrace area, but any damage to streets and sidewalks caused by such trees shall be at the cost of the adjacent property owner. 
(2)  As a condition of granting any permit to remove a public tree or shrub, the Village Forester may require that the permittee replace the one removed; and no permittee under such a conditional permit shall fail, refuse, or neglect to plant trees or shrubs of the type, size, and in the location specified in the permit. 
(3)  As a condition of granting any permit to maintain a public tree or shrub, the Village Forester may require the work to be performed by a certified arborist according to the most current version of the American National Standards Institute's A300 Standards for Pruning and for Cabling and Bracing (see Public Works Department for more information). 
(d)  Permit form; expiration; inspection. Every permit shall be issued by the Village Forester on a standard form and shall include a description of the work to be done and shall specify the genus, species and variety, size, nursery grade and location of trees or shrubs to be planted, if any. Any work under such permit must be performed in strict accordance with the terms thereof and the provisions of this Article. Permits issued under this Section shall expire three months after date of issuance. There will be no charge for this permit. 
(e)  Permits to public utilities. 
(1)  Whenever a permit is issued under this Section to a public utility to remove, trim, prune, cut, disturb, alter or perform surgery on any public tree or shrub, the Village Forester shall limit the work to be done to the actual necessities of the utility and may assign an inspector to supervise the work done under the provisions of the permit. The expense of such inspection or supervision shall be charged to the utility at the usual Village rate. 
(2)  A public utility may secure an annual working agreement with the Village Forester's office that gives the Village Forester the authorization to supervise and direct work associated with trees and shrubs. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-6; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-6), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-25. - Planting of trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Purpose. The Village Board hereby states its determination that the planting, care and protection of the trees within the Village is desirable for the purposes of beauty, shade, comfort, noise abatement and economic betterment, and hereby encourages all persons to assist in a program of tree planting, care and protection. 
(b)  Tree planting program. The Village shall require a diversification of tree species. The Natural Resources Committee shall designate the types of trees to be planted in the planting of public trees. On newly opened streets, the Natural Resources Committee may designate the size, type, or types of trees or shrubs and the manner in which they shall be planted, using the Village of McFarland Landscaping Standards. Developers shall provide a copy of the planting plan to the Village Forester identifying the species to be planted. 
(c)  Planting standards. 
(1)  The size, genus, species, variety and nursery grade of trees and shrubs to be planted in public areas and boulevards and the manner of planting shall be submitted to the Village Forester for approval before commencement of such work. 
(2)  The following provisions shall apply: 
a.  All new street trees must be selected from a list of approved trees compiled by the Natural Resources Committee and described within Section 59-35. New trees must be single stemmed with a minimum trunk diameter of one and one-half inches measured at six inches above ground level. 
b.  The tree shall be planted in accordance with the planting specifications given in Section 59-34. 
c.  The tree shall be kept well watered and mulched in accordance with the young tree maintenance specification given in Section 59-34. 
d.  The good health of all trees planted hereunder shall be guaranteed for two years by the developer, after which time such trees shall become the property of the Village. 
(3)  On newly opened streets, curbs and sidewalks must be installed prior to street tree planting. Distance between the face of the curb and the outer edge of the sidewalk must be at least five feet. Trees must be planted half way between the sidewalk and curb unless underground utilities prevent such planting. No tree shall be planted closer than two feet from the curb. 
(4)  Due to the complexities of determining tree placement, exact planting locations shall be selected and staked by the Village Forester prior to planting. Trees may not be planted closer than: 
a.  Twenty-five feet to a utility or street lighting pole for large and medium growing species and 15 feet for small growing species (see Section 59-35 for species description). 
b.  Fifteen feet to a driveway or alley. 
c.  Six feet to a fire hydrant, water stop box or gas shut-off. If possible, allow more distance than six feet. 
d.  Twenty-five feet to the intersection of two streets from either corner measured on the property line. 
e.  Fifty feet between large and medium growing tree species and 25 feet between small growing tree species (see Section 59-35). 
f.  Trees and shrubs located within 15 feet of overhead utility wires shall be limited to those with a mature height that is at least five feet less than the height of the wires. 
(5)  New street trees shall not be planted over an existing tree stump within two years of removal unless the previous tree's stump has previously been removed to a depth of four feet. 
(6)  The property owner has the responsibility to locate underground utilities before digging. 
(7)  Only Village-approved, small-growing trees (see Section 59-35 for species description) may be planted where there are overhead utility wires. 
(8)  Evergreen trees shall not be planted in a terrace area. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain shrubbery, ground cover or other plants not considered to be a deciduous leaf tree within terrace areas whose growth is in excess of 18—24 inches in height above the top of the nearest curb. 
(d)  Improperly planted trees. Trees, plants or shrubs planted within any terrace or planting easement without the authorization and approval of the Village Forester may be removed. The Village Forester shall notify the abutting owner in writing, listing the improperly planted trees, plants or shrubs, ordering their removal, and establishing a reasonable time within which such removal shall be accomplished. In the event that removal is not to be accomplished within the time specified, the Village may remove such trees, plants or shrubs and charge the costs thereof to the owner pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(e)  Mulching or framing. Any person, adjacent to whose land any shade or ornamental tree or shrub is growing in any street, may, for the purpose of protecting such tree or shrub, cover the soil surface beneath a tree's crown with mulch and/or surround the same with a box or frame suitable for protection, but all such work shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the Village Forester. 
(f)  Approved street trees. A list of tree types that are approved for planting within Village terraces, including tree genus, species and variety, can be found in Section 59-35. 
(g)  Prohibited trees and shrubs. Various types of trees and shrubs are inappropriate for planting within Village terraces due to their poor structure and/or fruiting characteristics (see Section 59-36). The planting of these tree and shrub species within terrace areas is prohibited. 
(h)  Certification. Following the completion of all plantings of trees in accordance with a landscaping plan by a developer, the developer shall request that the building inspector certify that all plantings have been completed in accordance with the approved landscaping plan. In the event that the plantings are not in compliance with the approved landscaping plan, the building inspector shall specify the necessary additional plantings or revisions of the plan that are necessary in order to comply with the approved landscaping plan. Any security required for the landscaping plan shall not be released by the Village until the building inspector has certified compliance with the approved landscaping plan. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-7; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-7), 10-22-2007; Ord. No. 2010-14, §§ 1—3, 6-28-2010; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 5-23-2011)  
Sec. 59-26. - Trimming. 
(a)  Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any public right-of-way between the lot line and the curb or ledge of the improved street or upon any private premises adjacent to any public street, right-of-way, park, playground, or place shall be kept trimmed by the owner of the premises upon or in front of which such trees or shrubs are standing so that the lowest branches projecting over the public street or right-of-way provide a clearance of not less than 13½ feet and over all other public places of not less than ten feet. The Village Forester may waive the provisions of this Section for newly planted trees if the Village Forester determines that they do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any street light, or endanger public safety. Further exemptions may be granted for shade trees located in Village Parks. 
(b)  The Village Forester may determine the necessity of such pruning. 
(c)  Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than ten feet. All trees standing upon private property in the Village, the branches of which extend over the line of the street, shall be trimmed so that no branch shall grow or hang over the line of the sidewalk lower than ten feet above the level of the sidewalk. No tree shall be permitted to grow in such a manner as to obstruct the proper diffusion of light from any public street light. 
(d)  Trimming or pruning of more than one-quarter of the crown shall be considered to be major pruning and shall require a permit from the Village Forester. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-8; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-8), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-27. - Trees and shrubbery obstructing view at intersection or view of traffic signs. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, no person shall maintain, plant or permit to remain on any private or public premises situated at the intersection of two or more streets or alleys in the Village any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth that may obstruct the view of the operator of any motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching such intersection. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow, allow to grow or maintain any trees, bushes, shrubbery or vegetation of any kind that is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign or driveway approach to a street in the Village. It shall be the duty of every owner of such tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation to remove such obstruction. 
(c)  In the case of corner lots, no vegetation shall be grown or permitted to grow between the heights of three feet and ten feet above the curb level or its equivalent within the triangular space formed by two intersecting street lines or their projections and the line joining points on such street lines located a minimum of 25 feet from the street intersection in order to provide adequate vehicular vision clearance. 
(d)  Any shrub, tree or other plant that obstructs the view at an intersection or the view of a traffic sign shall be deemed to be dangerous to public travel and the Village Forester may order, by written notice, the owner or occupant of any private place or premises on which there stands a tree or shrub that unreasonably interferes with or encroaches upon the street or sidewalk, to take such steps as are necessary to remove such interference. If such owner or occupant fails, within ten days of receipt of notice, to take such necessary steps, the Village Forester and/or Director of Public Works shall order Village employees to remove the interference. The cost of removing the interference shall be levied and collected as a special charge upon the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627 upon which or in front of which such tree or shrub stands. 
(e)  Any person who is an owner, occupant, firm or corporation failing to obey the written notice of the Village Forester as specified in Subsection (d) of this Section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture as established in Section 1-16. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-9; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-9), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-28. - Topping. 
(a)  Injurious pruning. The Village has determined that there are many trees growing on public and private premises within the Village, the improper pruning of which would pose future hazard to the safety of public and the long-term health of the tree. The Village also recognizes that the practice of topping trees, formerly a popular method for reducing tree height, can lead to dangerous regrowth of weakly attached stems and development of crown decay that would pose a potential hazard by weakening the tree. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall utilize topping techniques on a tree located on Village property or in the public right-of-way terrace area or cause such act to be done by others. 
(2)  No person shall utilize topping techniques on a tree on private property or cause such act to be done by others where such a tree would pose a future danger to adjacent Village or private property or the life, health, safety or welfare of persons located thereon. 
(3)  The Village Forester may grant exemptions to these prohibitions for any tree that constitutes a hazard and may also grant possible exemptions, on a case by case basis, for pruning near overhead utilities. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-10; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-10), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-29. - Removal of trees and stumps. 
(a)  Dangerous, obstructive and infected trees. In the normal course of business, it is not the duty of the Village Forester to routinely inspect or be responsible for trees on private property. Any tree or part thereof, whether alive or dead, which the Village Forester shall find to be infected, hazardous or a nuisance so as to endanger the public or other trees, plants or shrubs growing within the Village, or to be injurious to sewers, sidewalks or other public improvements whether growing upon public or private premises, shall be removed, trimmed or treated by the owner of the property upon or adjacent to which such tree or part thereof is located. The Village Forester shall give written notice to said owner to remedy the situation, which shall be served personally or posted upon the affected tree. Such notice shall specify a reasonable period of time within which the action must be taken as determined by the Village Forester on the basis of the seriousness of the condition of the tree or danger to the public. If the owner shall fail to remove, treat or trim said tree within the time limit, the Village Forester shall cause the tree to be removed, treated or trimmed and shall thereupon enter such cost as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(b)  Removal standards. In cutting down trees located in public and terrace areas, the tree must be removed with the stump and emergent roots grubbed out, or ground out to a depth of at least nine inches below grade measured in a straight line with the normal grade of sidewalk to top of nine inches below grade measured as a straight line, normal grade of sidewalk to top of curb. All wood and debris must be removed from the street prior to the end of each working day and all holes shall be filled to normal grade level with topsoil. Backfilling should be done by the end of the workday in which the stump is removed. If it is not possible to fill in the hole by the end of the workday, the hole should be staked-off and marked with high visibility paint or flagging to avert accidents. 
(c)  Private removal. No person, firm, organization or corporation shall plant, injure, trim, remove or destroy any tree or shrub located in or upon any public place, until a permit shall have been issued by the Village Forester. Such permit shall be issued only when the removal, trimming or cutting of the tree or shrub is necessary, as determined by the Village Forester, because of a public nuisance and/or location, or its location is such that substantial detriment is done to the property upon which the tree or shrub stands, or property abutting the same. Such permit shall expressly state the premises upon which the tree or shrub stands and the location of the tree thereon. The Village Forester may require submission of professional credentials and evidence of adequate liability insurance coverage. 
(d)  Tree preservation. In the development of commercial property involving previously undeveloped land, the developer will, as part of its development plan identify which trees are to be removed to install the infrastructure for the development. The developer will also provide a plan specifying methods of protecting trees not approved for removal. The developer must ensure that protective structures shall remain in place until on-site construction is complete. The Village Forester, shall review and recommend a tree preservation plan to the Plan Commission. In the development of a new Subdivision involving previously undeveloped land, the developer, as part of the Preliminary Plat, will identify which trees are to be removed to install infrastructure for the development. The developer will also provide a plan specifying methods of protecting trees not approved for removal. The developer must ensure that protective structures shall remain in place until on-site construction is complete. The Natural Resources Committee, after consultation with the Village Forester, shall review and approve a Preliminary Plat tree preservation plan to the Plan Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-11; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-11), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-30. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Damage to municipal trees. No person shall, without written permits from Village Forester in the case of a terrace-area tree, public tree or shrub, perform or cause to be performed by others any of the following acts: 
(1)  Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire sign, electrical installation or other device or material to, around or through a tree or shrub. 
(2)  Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub. 
(3)  Damage tree roots, through compaction or excavation of the soil, so extensively so as destabilize, make hazardous, damage the health of or necessitate the removal of such a tree. 
(4)  Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or shrub. 
(5)  Deposit, place or store upon any public place of the Village any stone, brick, dirt, soil, concrete or other materials that may impede the free passage of water, air or nutrients to the roots of any tree on said property, except by written permit by the Village Forester. 
(6)  Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for the protection of a public tree or shrub, or close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to permit access of air, water and fertilizer. 
(7)  Attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, or fasten any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree; except that the Village may tie temporary "no parking" signs to trees when necessary in conjunction with street improvement work, tree maintenance work or parades. 
(8)  Erect, alter, repair or demolish any building or structure without placing suitable guards around all nearby public trees or shrubs that may be injured by such operations. 
(b)  Excavations and operation of heavy equipment near public trees. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, drive vehicles, or install pavement within a radius of 15 feet of the outer limit of the canopy of any public tree without a permit from the Village Forester. All trees on any parkway or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of any building structure or street work shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by those responsible for such work as to prevent any injury to said trees. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or install pavement within a radius of 15 feet from any public tree without a permit from the Village Forester. Any publicly owned trees near any excavation site or site of construction of any building, structure, or street work, shall be guarded with a substantial fence not less than four feet high and eight feet square with the protected tree sited in the center of said fence; or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches at breast height, whichever is greater. 
(1)  The Village Forester may grant an exemption to any public utility corporation to augur under a public tree or shrub and excavate within five feet of any public tree or shrub, but such public utility shall be liable for any injury or damage caused to any public tree or shrub, and if any public tree or shrub is permanently damaged due to the acts of a public utility corporation, it shall be removed, including the stump, and shall be replaced by a tree at least ten feet tall, or as otherwise approved by the Village Forester, all at the expense of the utility. 
(2)  The Village Forester may grant an exemption to municipal employees performing their assigned duties and using all due diligence. Utility companies may apply for a written exemption after the fact in the event of responding to an emergency. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-12; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-12), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-31. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or failing to comply with any order issued pursuant to the provisions of the Chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture pursuant to Section 1-16. 
(b)  Any person who damages or destroys any tree or shrub located in a public area or Village right-of-way shall be liable for the cost of repairing the damage or replacing the tree or shrub of comparable age and similar species and diameter at breast height up to ten inches in diameter. The parents or parent of any unemancipated minor child who damages or destroys any tree or shrub in a public area or Village right-of-way may also be held liable. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-13; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-13), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-32. - Appeal from determinations or orders. 
Any person who receives a determination or order under this Chapter from the Village Forester and objects to all or any part thereof shall have the right to appeal such determination or order, subject to the provisions of Chapter 2, Article XI, and Wis. Stats. Ch. 68, to the Village Board within seven days of receipt of the order and the Village Board shall hear such appeal within 30 days of receipt of written notice of the appeal. After such hearing, the Village Board may reverse, affirm or modify the order or determination appealed from and the grounds for its decision shall be stated in writing. The Village Board shall, by letter, notify the party appealing the order or determination of its decision within ten days after the hearing has been concluded. The Village Board shall file its written decision with the Village Clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-14; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-14), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-33. - Adoption of Wisconsin Statutes. 
Wis. Stats. §§ 27.09, 86.03, and 86.04, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1998, § 6-4-15; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(6-4-15), 10-22-2007) 
State Law reference— City forester, duties; tree planting, Wis. Stats. § 27.09; trees adjacent to highways, Wis. Stats. § 86.03.  
Sec. 59-34. - Tree planting and maintenance recommendations. 
(a)  Planting. 
(1)  It is important to plant trees at the correct depth to avoid potential tree health problems. Trees should be planted with the top of their root crown at or slightly above the surrounding soil grade. When planting bare-root trees, the root crown is normally visible as the point where the top-most root emerges from the trunk. However, the root crowns of trees grown in containers or balled in burlap may be buried by nursery soil. To determine where the top of the root crown occurs in these types of nursery stock, you may need to dig into the nursery soil to locate this point (the top-most root can normally be found within the top two inches of the container/root ball). Once the top of the root crown has been located, measure the vertical distance between the top-most root and the bottom of the container, root ball, or lowest root. Dig the hole about ten percent shallower than this depth and at least 1.5 times the diameter of the container, root ball or root system. The root ball should be positioned in the hole so the finished grade of the landscape soil is even with or slightly lower than the point where the top-most root emerges from the trunk. 
(2)  Place the tree in the planting hole so that the trunk is vertical. Before backfilling, be sure to remove all packaging materials from the root ball including containers, burlap, wire baskets, or any other material that would impede the growth of the tree's trunk or roots. 
(3)  Be sure that when finished planting, there is "NO LANDSCAPE SOIL" placed over the top of the root ball. Landscape soil (as well as thick mulch layers more than three inches deep spread over the root ball) can prevent water and air from entering the root ball. 
(b)  Mulching. Weed and turf suppression during establishment is essential. Apply a three-inch thick layer (after settling) of mulch around the tree or shrub to help discourage weeds. This area should be maintained during the establishment period at least two feet in diameter for each inch of tree trunk diameter. Avoid piling mulch directly against the tree's trunk in order to keep the trunk dry and allow rainwater, irrigation, and air to easily enter the root ball. 
(c)  Staking. In many instances, if root balls are heavy enough stakes are not necessary. If it is necessary to stabilize a weak tree, the tree should be staked in such a way as to allow for some trunk movement using a material that does not damage the tree's bark. All staking material should be removed within one year after planting. 
(d)  Fertilization. The application of fertilizer is not recommended during the establishment period (approximately one year after planting for a one-inch caliper tree). Afterward, a slow release (or controlled release) fertilizer can be applied on top of the root ball or mulch. All fertilizer should be applied according to the directions on the product to avoid tree damage. Soluble fertilizers should be avoided on newly installed plants as they can burn roots or kill the tree entirely if too much is applied. 
(e)  Irrigation. Recently transplanted trees and shrubs establish quickest with light, frequent irrigation. If rainfall is inadequate, trees should receive supplemental irrigation to provide a total of at least one-inch of irrigation per week during the establishment period. Irrigation is most effective when performed during the early morning or evening to minimize evaporation from the soil surface. Consequently, irrigating during this time also conserves water. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(app. A), 10-22-2007)  
Sec. 59-35. - Approved trees in the right-of-way. 
No species of tree or shrub shall be planted in Village rights-of-way that have not been approved for planting by the Village Forester. The Village Forester shall not approve any tree for planting that is listed in Section 59-36. The Village Forester, in exercising reasonable discretion under this section, shall consider the susceptibility of the species to disease, maintenance of healthy diversity to the Village tree population, cost of maintenance of the trees and surrounding rights-of-way and any other factor according to professionally accepted forestry practices that furthers the purpose of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(app. B), 10-22-2007; Ord. No. 2010-14, § 4, 6-28-2010; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 2, 3-31-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2014-01, adopted March 31, 2014, changed the title of § 59-35 from "List of approved trees in the right-of-way" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 59-36. - List of prohibited trees and shrubs in the right-of-way. 
The following list of prohibited trees and shrubs shall apply to this Article: 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
TREES 
Boxelder 	Acer negundo 
Maple, Silver 	Acer saccharinum 
Tree-of-Heaven 	Ailanthus altissima 
Russian Olive 	Elaeagnus angustifolia 
Autumn Olive 	Elaeagnus umbellata 
Mulberry, Red 	Morus rubra 
Mulberry, White 	Morus alba 
Poplar, White 	Populus alba 
Eastern Cottonwood 	Populus deltoides 
Buckthorn, Common 	Rhamnus cathartica 
Buckthorn, Glossy 	Rhamnus frangula 
Willow 	Salix spp. 
Mountain Ash, European 	Sorbus acuparia 
Elm, Chinese 	Ulmus parviflora 
Elm, Siberian 	Ulmus pumila 
	
SHRUBS 
Barberry, Japanese 	Berberis thunbergii 
Barberry, European 	Berberis vulgaris 
Siberian Pea Shrub 	Caragana arborescens 
Common Privet 	Ligustrum vulgare 
Honeysuckle, Amur 	Lonicera maacki 
Honeysuckle, Tartarian 	Lonicera morrowii 
Honeysuckle, Morrow's 	Lonicera tatarica 
Honeysuckle, Bella 	Lonicera x bella 
Black jet-bead 	Rhodotypos scandens 
Multiflora Rose 	Rosa multiflora 
Wayfaring Tree 	Viburnum lantana 
European Highbush Cranberry 	Virburnum opulus 
Oriental Bittersweet 	Celastrus orbiculatus 
 
(Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1(app. C), 10-22-2007; Ord. No. 2010-14, § 5, 6-28-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 2010-14, adopted June 28, 2010, changed the title of § 59-36 from "List of prohibited trees and shrubs" to "List of prohibited trees and shrubs in the right-of-way."  
Secs. 59-37—59-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NATURAL LANDSCAPING 
 
Sec. 59-59. - Natural landscape. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. This Section is not intended to permit unmanaged or rank growth that may pose a hazard to public health and safety, but instead, to promote managed, environmentally sound practices including: 
(1)  The use of native vegetation in managed landscapes, including native grasses and wild plants as an alternative to conventional modes of landscaping. Property owners are encouraged to consult with outside sources and experts to determine the best plants and layout; 
(2)  The use of such plants to preserve or restore diverse, biologically stable natural plant communities and promote the values of natural landscaping that is free from toxic chemicals; and 
(3)  Better infiltration of stormwater runoff in urban, suburban and rural areas; 
(4)  To preserve the freedom of residents of the Village of McFarland to choose their own landscaping, whether it be conventional, bluegrass turf, natural heritage, ornamental garden, native plant communities, or a combination thereof. The restrictions that have been placed on specific plant species, in Section 20-25 of the Municipal Code, are based upon the protection of public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Definitions. The terms set forth below, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings: 
Managed growth includes natural landscaping that is being cared for by including buffer zones to neighboring property, substantially free of rank growth or noxious weeds listed in Section 20-25 of the Municipal Code and improvements to the yard, including bird houses, bird feeders, fountains or bird baths. 
Natural landscape includes wild plants native to Wisconsin and similar ornamental plantings designed, purposely cultivated and managed to exceed eight inches in height, but shall not include woody plants such as trees and shrubs. Natural landscapes further shall not include lawn-grasses in excess of eight inches in height or noxious weeds or grasses identified in Section 20-25 of the Municipal Code. 
Rank growth means untended or unmanaged growth of herbaceous vegetation on any property within the Village of McFarland; except that rank growth shall not include herbaceous vegetation located in natural areas including riverbank, lake shore and agricultural areas. 
(c)  Regulation of natural landscapes. The growth of natural managed landscapes in excess of eight inches in height shall be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Natural landscaping is to be confined to owner's property and may not be maintained within any public right of way except within one foot of a lawfully erected mailbox. Plantings near mailboxes shall not exceed the height of the bottom of the mailbox. All natural landscaping shall be ordered and managed through labor and care. 
(2)  Natural landscaping three feet in height or higher is prohibited within the vision clearance area set forth in Section 62-169 of the Municipal Code. 
(3)  Natural landscapes shall not be permitted within three feet of the abutting property except in areas abutting and within ten feet from the bed of a navigable body of water where natural landscaping may extend to all property lines. Natural landscaping abutting sidewalks, if over six inches, may be no closer to the sidewalk than the height of the full grown plant. 
(4)  Property owners with a natural landscape who intend to maintain such landscape with fire must apply for and receive a burning permit in accordance with Section 26-80 of the Municipal Code, before such maintenance burns occur. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  This Section shall be enforced by the Weed Commissioner, Assistant Director of Public Works or Parks Manager. 
(2)  In addition to the penalties set forth violations of this Chapter, the Weed Commissioner, Assistant Director of Public Works or Parks Manager may seek to abate any violations pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 20-25 of the Municipal Code. 
(3)  Prior to the issuance of any citation or other enforcement action, notice shall be given in writing by regular mail or hand delivery to the owner. The notice shall explain the nature of the violation and give 30 days from the date of the notice to cure the violation. 
(4)  The owner may appeal the determination set forth in any notice by filing a written request for hearing before the Natural Resources Committee within ten days of the date of notice with the Village Clerk. Enforcement action shall be stayed and time for compliance toiled pending the decision of the Natural Resources Committee. The notice of violation shall describe these appeal rights. 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 11-8-2010; Ord. No. 2020-14 , § 4, 4-27-2020)  
Chapter 62 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Planning and zoning, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23; zoning of wetlands and shorelands, Wis. Stats. § 61.351; site erosion control and stormwater management zoning, Wis. Stats. § 61.354; zoning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7); zoning of wetlands in shorelands, Wis. Stats. § 62.231; special inspection warrants for zoning violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0119; temporary zoning of areas proposed for annexation, Wis. Stats. § 66.0219(6); floodplain zoning, Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Authority. 
This Chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23(7) and 87.30 and amendments thereto. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-1; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-1), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-2. - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as, referred to and cited as the "Zoning Code, Village of McFarland, Wisconsin" and is hereinafter referred to as "this Chapter." 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-2; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-2), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-3. - General purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the people of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-3; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-3), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Abutting. Having property or district lines in common (e.g., two lots are abutting if they have property lines in common). 
(2)  Accessory building or use. 
a.  An accessory building or use is one that: 
1.  Is customary and clearly incidental to the principal building or principal use; 
2.  Serves exclusively the principal building or principal use; 
3.  Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use; 
4.  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served; and 
5.  Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal use served, with exception of such accessory off-street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning lot as the building or use served. 
b.  An accessory building or use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  A children's playhouse, garden house or private greenhouse; 
2.  A garage, carport, shed or building for storage incidental to a permitted use; 
3.  Incinerators incidental to a permitted use; 
4.  Storage of goods used in or produced by permitted manufacturing activities on the same zoning lot with such activities, unless such storage is excluded by the district regulations; 
5.  The production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of merchandise normally incidental to a permitted retail service or business use if conducted by the same ownership as the principal use; 
6.  Off-street motor vehicle parking areas and loading facilities; 
7.  Signs, as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated in this Chapter; and 
8.  Earth station dish antennas, which are ground-mounted or building-mounted. 
(3)  Acre, net. The actual land devoted to the land use, excluding public streets, public lands or unusable lands, and school sites contained within 43,560 square feet. 
(4)  Adjacent. Neighboring or within visible proximity (e.g., includes property that is across the street or public right-of-way and includes all properties directly impacted by a proposed development whether abutting or not). 
(4a)  Agricultural use. Any of the following activities conducted for the purpose of producing an income or livelihood: crop or forage production, keeping livestock, beekeeping nursery, sod or Christmas tree production, floriculture, aquaculture, fur farming, forest management and enrolling land in a federal agricultural commodity payment program for a federal or state agricultural land conservation payment program. 
(5)  Alley. A public way not more than 24 feet wide that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
(5a)  Animal unit. One animal unit is the equivalent of one cow, or one horse, or one pony, or one mule, or two hogs or ten sheep, or ten goats or 50 poultry or equivalent combination of them. 
(6)  Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure that is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, must always be included for each apartment. 
(7)  Arterial street. A public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for large volume or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall include freeways and expressways as well as arterial streets, highways and parkways. 
(8)  Automobile laundry. A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing automobiles using production-line methods with a chain, conveyor, blower, steam-cleaning device or other mechanical devices or any premises with a capacity of washing 20 or more vehicles per eight-hour day. 
(9)  Awning. A retractable, rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building. 
(10)  Basement. That portion of any structure located partly below the average adjoining lot grade, which is not designed or used primarily for year-around living accommodations. 
(11)  Block. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, bulkhead lines or shorelines of waterways. A block may be located in part beyond the boundary lines of corporate limits of the Village. 
(12)  Boardinghouse. A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or lodging are regularly furnished by a rearrangement for compensation for three or more persons not members of a family, but not exceeding 12 persons and not open to transient customers. 
(13)  Bufferyard. A unit of land, together with a specified type and amount of planting thereon, and any structures that may be required between land uses to eliminate or minimize conflicts between them. 
(14)  Buildable lot area. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
(15)  Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the land. When any portion thereof is completely separated from every other portion by masonry or firewall without any window, which wall extends from the ground to the roof, then such portion shall be deemed to be a separate building. 
(16)  Building, completely enclosed. A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space or from other buildings or structures by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors. 
(17)  Building coverage. The proportion of the lot area, expressed as a percent, that is covered by the maximum horizontal cross section of a building or buildings. 
(18)  Building detached. A building surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
(19)  Building height. A vertical distance from the curb level or the approved ground level opposite the center of the front of a building to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean-height level between eaves and ridges of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
(20)  Building, principal. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
(21)  Building setback line. A line parallel to the lot line at a distance parallel to it, regulated by the yard requirements set up in this Code. 
(22)  Bulk. Used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and the location of such buildings or structures with respect to one another and includes the following: 
a.  Size and height of buildings; 
b.  Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets or to other buildings; 
c.  Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area ratio); 
d.  All open spaces allocated to buildings; and 
e.  Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit or lodging room. 
(23)  Business. An occupation, employment or enterprise that occupies time, labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered. 
(24)  Channel. Those floodlands normally occupied by a stream of water under average annual high-water flow conditions while confined within generally well-established banks. 
(25)  Clinic, medical and dental. A building in which a group of physicians, dentists or physicians and dentists and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of carrying on their professions. The clinic may include an accessory dental or medical laboratory. It shall not include in-patient care or operating rooms for major surgery. 
(26)  Club or lodge, private. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such private club or lodge are conducted by a Board of Directors, Executive Committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises, provided adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. Where properly licensed under existing Village ordinances, the consumption of intoxicating beverages by members of such club or lodge or their guests may be permitted. 
(27)  Community living arrangement. The following facilities licensed or operated or permitted under the authority of the child welfare agencies under Wis. Stats. § 48.60, foster homes for children under Wis. Stats. § 48.02(6), group homes for children under Wis. Stats. § 48.02(7), and community-based residential facilities under Wis. Stats. § 50.01(1g), but does not include day care centers, nursing homes, general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons and jails. The establishment of a community living arrangement shall be in conformance with applicable Sections of Wis. Stats. §§ 46.03(22), 59.69(15), 62.23(7)(i) and 62.23(7a), and amendments thereto, and also the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
(28)  Conditional uses. Uses of a special nature as to make impractical their predetermination as a principal use in a district. 
(29)  Conforming building or structure. Any building or structure that: 
a.  Complies with all the regulations of this Chapter or any amendment thereto governing bulk or the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or 
b.  Is designed or intended for a conforming use. 
(30)  Conservation standards. Guidelines and specifications for soil and water conservation practices and management enumerated in the Technical Guide, prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service for Dane County, adopted by the County Soil and Water Conservation District Supervisors, and containing suitable alternatives for the use and treatment of land based upon its capabilities from which the landowner selects that alternative which best meets the landowner's needs in developing soil and water conservation. 
(31)  Controlled access arterial street. The condition in which the right of owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons to access, light, air or view in connection with an arterial street is fully or partially controlled by public authority. 
(32)  Convalescent home and nursing home. A home for the aged, infirm, chronically ill or incurable persons in which five or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation but not including hospital clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases or mental illness. 
(33)  Curb level. The level of the established curb in front of such building measured at the center of such front. 
(34)  Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, construction of or additions or substantial improvements to buildings, other structures, or accessory uses, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or disposition of materials. 
(35)  District, basic. A part of the Village for which the regulations of this Chapter governing the use and location of land and building are uniform. 
(36)  District, overlay. Overlay districts, also referred to herein as regulatory areas, provide for the possibility of superimposing certain additional requirements upon a basic zoning district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district. In the instance of conflicting requirements, the more strict of the conflicting requirements shall apply. 
(37)  Dwelling. A building or part of a building containing one or more dwelling units and also containing other directly associated elements such as hallways, storage areas or common laundry facilities. For purposes of this Chapter, this term does not include "group lodging facilities." 
(38)  Dwelling, attached. A dwelling separated from another dwelling unit and having any portion of any roof, wall or floor in common with another dwelling unit. 
(39)  Dwelling, detached. A dwelling that is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
(40)  Dwelling, multiple-family. A building, or portion thereof, containing three or more dwelling units. 
(41)  Dwelling, single-family. A building containing one dwelling unit only. 
(42)  Dwelling, two-family. A building containing two dwelling units only. 
(43)  Dwelling unit. An area within a dwelling that is designed, occupied or intended to be occupied by a family (or by a nonfamily household) as permitted by this Chapter as separate living quarters with private kitchen, sanitary, sleeping and living quarters within the unit. 
(44)  Eating place. Establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale of prepared food and drinks for consumption on the premises. Caterers and institutional food service establishments are included. The term shall not apply to houses of worship, religious, fraternal, youths' or patriotic organizations, service clubs and civic or union organizations that occasionally prepare or serve or sell meals to transients or the general public, nor shall it include any public or private school lunchroom. 
(45)  Efficiency unit. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the principal room, providing that such dining alcove shall not exceed 90 square feet in area and shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(46)  Elderly dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, designed, designated and used exclusively by a person who is 55 years of age or older, or a family, the head of which or spouse is 55 years of age or older. 
(47)  Essential services. Services provided by public and private utilities, necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater drainage, and communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catchbasins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not including buildings. 
(48)  Establishment, business. A place of business carrying on operations that are physically separate and distinct from those of any other place of business located on the same zoning lot. 
(49)  Family. An individual or group of two or more individuals who are related by blood, marriage or adoption, together with not more than four additional persons not so related, living as a single household in a dwelling unit. For purposes of this Chapter, family includes nonfamily households. 
(50)  Family day care. The provision of day care for children for compensation within a dwelling whether or not licensed by the state, including educational services so long as the care and services are taking place within a dwelling. 
(51)  Farming, general. Includes floriculture, forest and game management, orchards, raising of grain, grass, mint and seedcrops, raising of fruits, nuts and berries, sod farming and vegetable farming. General farming includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities. 
(52)  Farmstead. A single-family residential structure located on a parcel of land, which primary land use is associated with agriculture. 
(53)  Floor area. The sum of the gross floor area for each of a building's stories measured from the exterior limits of the faces of the structure. The floor area of a building includes basement floor area. It does not include cellars and unenclosed porches or any floor space in an accessory building or in the principal building that is designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this Article. 
(54)  Floor area ratio. An intensity measured as a ratio derived by dividing the total floor area of a building by the gross area site. Where the lot is part of a larger development and has no bufferyard, that lot area may be used instead of the gross site area. 
(55)  Foster home. Any facility that is operated by a person required to be licensed by Wis. Stats. § 48.62(1)(a) and that provides care and maintenance for no more than four children or, if necessary to enable a sibling group to remain together, for no more than six children or, if the State Department of Children and Families promulgates rules permitting a different number of children, for the number of children permitted under those rules. 
(56)  Frontage. All the property abutting on one side of a street between two intersecting streets or all of the property abutting on one side of a street between an intersecting street and the dead end of a street. 
(57)  Garage, private. A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for storage of automobiles of the occupant of the premises. 
(58)  Garage, public. Any building or portion thereof, not accessory to a residential building or structure, used for equipping, servicing, repairing, leasing or public parking of motor vehicles. 
(59)  Gross floor area. The area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. The gross floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with no openings or interior courts. 
(60)  Gross site area. The area of land that is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. The gross site area shall be legally described and made part of the application for zoning approvals. 
(61)  Group foster home. Any facility operated by a person required to be licensed by Wis. Stats. § 48.62 for the care and maintenance of five to eight foster children. 
(62)  Group lodging facilities. Building or parts of buildings designed, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters on a basis other than as a dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel or motel. 
(63)  Group lodginghouse. A group lodging facilities containing general lodging rooms not having kitchen facilities, offered for rent or comparable compensation on a monthly or longer basis. Meals or access to common meal preparation facilities may be offered as part of the service to occupants. 
(64)  Guest, permanent. A person who occupies or has the right to occupy on a monthly or longer basis a hotel or apartment hotel accommodation as such person's domicile and place of permanent residence. 
(65)  Historic District. An area designated by the Village Board on the recommendation of the Landmarks Commission, pursuant to this Section, composed of two or more improvement parcels that together comprise a district of special character or special historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the Village, state or nation. 
(66)  Historic site. A parcel of land having historic significance due to a substantial value in tracing prehistory or history of aboriginal people, or upon which an historic event has occurred, and which has been designated as an historic site under this Chapter, or an improvement parcel, or part thereof, on which is situated an historic structure and any abutting improvement parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the historic structure is situated. 
(67)  Historic structure. An improvement that has a special character or historic interest or value in showing the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the Village, state or nation, which has been designated as an historic structure under this Chapter. 
(68)  Home occupation. Any activity carried out for gain by a resident conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit or in structures accessory thereto. 
(69)  Home professional office. A home occupation consisting of the office of a recognized profession. 
(70)  Hotel. A facility containing sleeping rooms with private or semi-private bathroom facilities offered overnight lodging to the public for compensation and catering primarily to the traveling public. A hotel shall offer services such as maid, telephone, desk and vending services. It may offer a restaurant, recreational facilities and meeting facilities. 
(71)  Hotel, apartment. A building in which at least 90 percent of the accommodations are dwelling units or are occupied by permanent guests. 
(72)  Household. A family or nonfamily group living in a nontransient manner in a single dwelling unit. 
(73)  Impervious surface. Those surfaces that do not absorb water. They consist of all buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas of concrete or asphalt. In the case of lumberyards, areas of stored lumber constitute impervious surfaces. 
(74)  Impervious surface ratio. A measure of the intensity of land use that is determined by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces on a site by the gross site area. 
(75)  Improvement. Any building, structure, place, work of art or other object that is all or part of any physical betterment of real property. 
(76)  Improvement parcel. A parcel of property containing an improvement that is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real estate taxes. The term shall also include any unimproved area of land which is treated as a single parcel for real estate tax purposes. 
(77)  Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. Junk includes, but is not limited to, vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, brush, wood and lumber. 
(78)  Junkyard. An open area where waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes an automobile wrecking or dismantling yard, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
(79)  Kennel, animal. Any premises, or portion thereof, were dogs, cats and other household pets are maintained, boarded, bred or cared for in return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale. 
(80)  Landmarks Commission. The Landmarks Commission under this Code. 
(81)  Landscape surface area ratio (LSR). The percentage of the gross site area that is preserved as permanently protected landscaped area. 
(82)  Landscaped area. The area of the site that is planted and continually maintained in vegetation, including grasses, ground cover, shrubs, bushes and trees. Landscaped area includes the area located within planted and continually maintained landscaped planters. 
(83)  Loading area. A completely off-street space or berth on the same lot for the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley. 
(84)  Lodging room. A room rented as sleeping and living quarters without kitchen facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. 
(85)  Lodging room (for determining lot area requirements and off-street parking requirements). For the purpose of determining the lot area requirements, any lodging room designed or intended to be occupied by more than two persons shall be determined as one lodging room for each two persons; provided, however, that in a lodginghouse or a fraternity and sorority house the number of lodging rooms shall be determined by dividing the total number of persons intended to occupy the lodging rooms by two. 
(86)  Lodginghouse. A building where lodging only is provided for compensation for not more than three persons not members of the family. 
(87)  Lot. A parcel of land having frontage on a public street, or other officially approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area and other open space provisions of this Code as pertaining to the district wherein located. 
(88)  Lot area. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines. 
(89)  Lot, corner. A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut for their full lengths upon a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at its points of beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
(90)  Lot coverage (residential). The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory building. 
(91)  Lot coverage (except residential). The area of a lot occupied by the principal buildings or buildings and accessory buildings including any driveways, parking areas, loading areas, storage areas and walkways. 
(92)  Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries. 
(93)  Lot, interior. A lot situated on a single street that is bounded by adjacent lots along each of its other lines and is not a corner lot. 
(94)  Lot line. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the abutting street or alley right-of-way line. 
(95)  Lot line, front. In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of any other lot, the owner shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, have the privilege of electing any street lot line the front lot line, providing that such choice, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, will not be injurious to the existing, or to the desirable future development of the adjacent properties. 
(96)  Lot line, rear. The lot line that is opposite the most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot parallel to and most distant from the front lot line shall be considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining depth of rear yard. 
(97)  Lot line, side. Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
(98)  Lot lines. The property lines bounding the lot. 
(99)  Lot lines and area. The peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land and the total area lying within such boundaries. 
(100)  Lot of record. A lot that is part of a Subdivision or a Certified Survey Map that has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Dane County or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the Office of said Register of Deeds prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived. Any lot or parcel of land created through a violation of any other applicable laws or ordinances of the state and the Village shall not, in this instance, be considered a lot of record. 
(101)  Lot, reversed corner. A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
(102)  Lot, substandard. A parcel of land held in separate ownership having frontage on a public street, or other approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or structure, together with accessory buildings and uses, having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street parking areas or other open space provisions of this Code as pertaining to the district wherein located. 
(103)  Lot, through. A lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines along two substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
(104)  Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at right angles to the lot depth, said measurement to be made at the rear line of the required front yard. 
(105)  Lot, zoning. A single tract of land located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. Therefore, a zoning lot or lots may or may not coincide with a lot of record. 
(106)  Minor structures. Any small, movable accessory erection or construction such as birdhouses, tool houses, pet houses, play equipment, arbors and walls and fences under four feet in height. 
(107)  Mobile home. A manufactured home that is HUD certified and labeled under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. A mobile home is a transportable structure, being eight feet or more in width (not including the overhang of the roof), built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
(108)  Mobile home lot. A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
(109)  Mobile home park. A parcel of land that has been developed for the placement of mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or private association, or corporation. Individual lots within a mobile home park are rented to individual mobile home users. 
(110)  Mobile home Subdivision. A land Subdivision, as defined by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 and any Village land division ordinance, with lots intended for the placement of individual mobile home units. Individual homesites are in separate ownership as opposed to the rental arrangements in mobile home parks. 
(111)  Modular unit. A factory fabricated transportable building unit designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure to be used for residential, commercial, educational or industrial purposes. 
(112)  Motel. A facility offering services of a hotel but where the sleeping rooms are physically arranged so that most have access to outside, adjacent parking areas without passing through the lobby. 
(113)  Motor freight terminal. A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck. 
(114)  Multifamily development. One lot having a total of three or more dwelling units, regardless of the number of principal residential structures. 
(115)  Nameplate. A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein. 
(116)  Nonconforming building or structure. A building or structure that does not comply with all of the regulations of this Chapter or of any amendment hereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located. 
(117)  Nonconforming use. A use of land that does not comply with all the regulations of this Chapter or of any amendment hereto governing use for the zoning district in which such use is located. 
(118)  Nonfamily households. A group of individuals not exceeding five in number who do not constitute a "family" as defined in this Section and who live as a single household in a dwelling unit. 
(119)  Nursery school. A facility licensed as a day care center by the state where persons provide for compensation and/or consideration for service, group care for four or more children under seven years of age, for less than 24 hours a day at a location other than the child's own home or the homes of relatives or guardians. 
(120)  Nursing home. An establishment used as a dwelling place by the aged, infirm, chronically ill or incurably afflicted, in which not less than three persons live or are kept or provided for on the premises for compensation, excluding clinics and hospitals and similar institutions devoted to the diagnosis, treatment or the care of the sick or injured. 
(121)  Office for a professional person. An office for a professional person is one in which services are performed by persons engaged in a profession requiring advanced training in a recognized professional specialty and including the fields of religion, architecture, engineering, law, medicine, personal health services and instruction in the liberal or fine arts. 
(122)  Off-street parking. A site not within the public right-of-way devoted to the parking of vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas, and providing vehicular access to a public street. 
(123)  Outdoor furnace. An apparatus designed to burn solid or liquid combustible material to produce heat and/or heat hot water for a building in which it is not located. 
(124)  Parking lot. A structure or premises containing five or more parking spaces open to the public. 
(125)  Parties in interest. Includes all abutting property owners, all property owners within 100 feet, and all property owners of opposite frontages. 
(126)  Planned residential development, dwelling. A parcel or tract of land having an area as required in the district regulations under common management, single ownership, and which is the site for two or more principal residential buildings and where regulations may be modified as regulated in this Chapter. 
(127)  Professional office in a home. The office or studio in a person's residence or a person engaged in a recognized professional specialty and including the fields of religion, architecture, engineering, law, medicine, personal health services and instruction in the liberal or fine arts, provided that such use shall comply with all of the conditions of a home occupation, except that mechanical equipment customarily appurtenant to said profession may be used, provided no external manifestations thereof are apparent at the property line. 
(128)  Public airport. Any airport that complies with the definition contained in Wis. Stats. § 114.013(3), or any airport that serves or offers to serve common carriers engaged in air transport. 
(129)  Public way. Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public thoroughfare. 
(130)  Railroad right-of-way. A strip of land containing railroad tracks and customary auxiliary facilities for only track operation. For the purpose of this Chapter, a railroad right-of-way does not include land used or intended to be used for switching, spur, lead, team or siding tracks, freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, car yards or classification yards. 
(131)  Reserved parking space. Those off-street parking spaces allocated for temporary standing of automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular establishment. 
(132)  Retail. The sale of goods or merchandise in small quantities to the consumer. 
(133)  Roadside stand. A temporary structure that is not permanently affixed to the ground and is readily removable in its entirety, which is used solely for the display or sale of farm products produced on the premises upon which such roadside stand is located. No roadside stand shall be more than 300 square feet in ground area and there shall not be more than one roadside stand on any one premises. 
(134)  Row house. A place of abode not more than two stories in height, arranged to accommodate three or more attached living units in which each living unit is separated from the adjoining unit by an unpierced vertical occupancy separation of not less than one hour fire-resistive construction, extending from the basement or lowest floor to the underside of the roof boards. Each living unit shall have separate entrances and exits leading directly to the outside. 
(135)  Screening. A hedge, wall or fence to provide a visual separator and physical carrier not less than four feet nor more than six feet in height, unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter. 
(136)  Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the foundation of that portion of the building to be enclosed. The overhang cornices shall not exceed 24 inches. Any overhang of the cornice in excess of 24 inches shall be compensated by increasing the setback by an amount equal to the excess of cornice over 24 inches. Uncovered steps shall not be included in measuring the setback. 
(137)  Reserved. 
(138)  Signs. Any medium, including its structure, words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or trademarks by which anything is made known and which are used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity or product and which is visible from any public street or highway. 
(139)  Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each 14 feet or fraction thereof. A basement having one-half or more of its height above grade shall be deemed a story for purposes of height regulation. 
(140)  Story, half. That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than 4½ feet above the finished floor of such story. In the case of single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings less than three stories in height, one-half story in a sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of this Code. 
(141)  Street. Property other than an alley or private thoroughfare or travelway that is subject to public easement or right-of-way for use as a thoroughfare and serves as a principal means of access to abutting property. 
(142)  Street yard. A yard facing a street and extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing street or highway right-of-way line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. Corner lots shall have two or more street yards. 
(143)  Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
(144)  Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
(145)  Temporary auxiliary apartment. A living arrangement that permits an elderly or handicapped person to live in a temporary separate living area within a single-family detached dwelling unit in the R-1 Residential District, or which permits a relative or personal attendant of an elderly or handicapped person to live in a temporary, separate living area within such a dwelling unit. Such living area may contain separate bath and kitchen facilities to permit a degree of independence. Ingress and egress for such a living area may be either from within the principal dwelling unit or from a side or rear entrance. 
(146)  Temporary structure. A movable structure not designed for human occupancy nor for the protection of goods or chattels and not forming an enclosure, such as billboards. 
(147)  Traditional neighborhood development. A development as defined by Wis. Stats. § 66.1027(1)(c) that exhibits several of the following characteristics: alleys, streets laid out in a grid system, buildings oriented to the street, pedestrian-orientation, compatible mixed land uses, village squares and greens. 
(148)  Trailer. Any structure that is or may be mounted upon wheels for moving about and is propelled by its own or drawn by other motive power and which is used as a dwelling or as an accessory building or structure in the conduct of a business, trade or occupation or issued for hauling purposes. 
(148a)  Urban residential district(s). The R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3, R-MH or R-E zoning districts and residences allowed at a conditional use C-G zoning district. 
(149)  Usable open space. That part of the ground level of a zoning lot, other than in a required front or corner side yard, which is unoccupied by driveways, drive aisles, service drives, off street parking spaces and/or loading berths and is unobstructed to the sky. This space of minimum prescribed dimension shall be available to all occupants of the building and shall be usable for greenery, drying yards, recreational space, gardening, and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. Where and to the extent prescribed in these regulations, balconies and roof areas, designed and improved for outdoor activities, may also be considered as usable open space. The usable open space shall be planned as an assemblage or singularly designed area that maximizes the size for open space usage. The only exception to this standard is where the required open space is designed to be part of the individual living units in the form of patios or decks. 
(150)  Use. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereof is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
(151)  Use, accessory. A subordinate building or use that is located on the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or main use, when permitted by district regulations. 
(152)  Use, conditional. A use that, because of its unique or varying characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district. After due consideration, as provided for in this Chapter, of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at a particular location, such conditional use may or may not be granted. 
(153)  Use, permitted. A use that may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts provided it conforms with all requirements and regulations of such district in which such use is located. 
(154)  Use, principal. The main use of land or building as distinguished from subordinate or accessory use. 
(155)  Utilities. Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations, static transformer stations, telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays and gas regulation stations, inclusive of associated transmission facilities, but not including sewage disposal plants, municipal incinerators, warehouses, shops, storage yards and power plants. 
(156)  Vision clearance. An unoccupied triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot that is bounded by the street lines and a setback line connecting points specified by measurement from the corner on each street line. 
(157)  Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except the vegetation. The street and rear yards extend the full width of the lot. 
(158)  Yard, front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building. The side where the address is shall be considered the front yard. 
(159)  Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the principal building. 
(160)  Yard, side. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, lying between the main building and a side lot line. The width of a side yard shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. A side yard does not include any yard that is a street yard. 
(161)  Zero lot line. The concept whereby two respective dwelling units within a building shall be on separate and abutting lots and shall meet on the common property line between them, thereby having zero space between said units. 
(162)  Zoning permit. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator to certify that the use of lands, structures, air and waters subject to this Chapter are or shall be used in accordance with the provisions of said Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-300; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-300), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2003-04, §§ 2, 3, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2009-08, § 2, 3-23-2009; Ord. No. 2009-11, §§ 1, 3, 4-27-2009; Ord. No. 2018-02 , §§ 1—3, 1-23-2018; Ord. No. 2019-15 , § 1, 8-26-2019)  
Sec. 62-5. - Intent and purposes in view. 
The general intent and purposes in view of this Chapter are to regulate and restrict the use of all structures, lands and waters and to: 
(a)  Promote and protect the comfort, public health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the people; 
(b)  Divide the Village into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business and manufacturing and other specified uses; 
(c)  Protect the character and the stability of the residential, business, manufacturing and other districts within the Village and to promote the orderly and beneficial development thereof; 
(d)  Regulate lot coverage, the intensity of use of lot areas and the size and location of all structures so as to prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation and drainage; 
(e)  Regulate population density and distribution so as to avoid sprawl or undue concentration and to facilitate the provision of adequate public services, utilities and other public requirements; 
(f)  Regulate parking, loading and access so as to lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of streets and highways; 
(g)  Secure safety from fire, panic, flooding, pollution, contamination and other dangers; 
(h)  Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Village; 
(i)  Preserve and protect the beauty of the Village; 
(j)  To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts; 
(k)  To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures that are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district; 
(l)  Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of the surface and subsurface waters; 
(m)  Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions; 
(n)  Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects; 
(o)  Provide for and protect a variety of suitable commercial and industrial sites; 
(p)  Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial streets and highways; 
(q)  Implement those municipal, county, watershed and regional comprehensive plans or components of such plans adopted by the Village; 
(r)  Provide for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter; and to provide penalties for the violation of this Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-4; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-4), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-6. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-5; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-5), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-7. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the Village. 
(b)  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Chapter upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this Chapter or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(c)  No building, structure or use that was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this Chapter shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this Chapter; and to the extent that, and in any manner that, said unlawful building, structure or use in conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, said building structure or use remains unlawful hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-6; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-6), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-8. - Severability and nonliability. 
(a)  If any Section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)  If any application of this Chapter to a particular structure, land or water is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other structure, land or water not specifically included in said judgment. 
(c)  The Village does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the Village, its agencies or employees for any flood damages, sanitation problems or structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon and conformance with this Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-7; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-7), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-9. - Jurisdiction and general provisions. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this Chapter shall apply to all structures, lands, water and air within the corporate limits of the Village. 
(b)  Compliance. 
(1)  No new structure, new use of land, water or air or change in the use of land, water or air shall hereafter be permitted and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a building permit and without full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable local, county and state regulations. 
(2)  All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural alteration or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of, or additions to, existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this Chapter that are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located. 
(3)  However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived, and provided construction is begun within 90 days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued and, further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy for the use for which originally designated, a subject thereafter to the provisions of Division 2, Subdivision III of this Article. 
(c)  District regulations to be complied with. Except as otherwise provided, the use and height of buildings hereafter erected, converted, moved, enlarged or structurally altered and the use of any land shall be in compliance with the regulations established herein for the district in which such building or land is located. 
(d)  Number of residential buildings on a zoning lot. Except in the case of planned development districts, condominiums and multifamily developments, not more than one principal detached residential building shall be located on a zoning lot nor shall a principal detached residential building be located on the same zoning lot with any other principal building. 
(e)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings and uses shall comply with the standards of Section 62-227. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-20; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-20), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-10. - Use regulations. 
Only the following uses and their essential services may be allowed in any district: 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses, being the principal uses, specified for a district. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures as specified are permitted in any district but not until their principal structure is present or under construction. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Conditional uses and their accessory uses are considered as special uses requiring, for their authorization, review, public hearing and approval by the Plan Commission in accordance with Division 2, Subdivision II of this Article excepting those existent at time of adoption of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived. 
(2)  Those existing uses that are classified as conditional uses for the districts in which they are located at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived require no action by the Plan Commission for them to continue as valid conditional uses, and the same shall be deemed to be regular conditional uses. 
(3)  A proposed change from permitted use in a district to a conditional use shall require review, public hearing and approval by the Plan Commission in accordance with Division 2, Subdivision II of this Article. 
(4)  Conditional uses, when replaced by permitted uses, shall terminate. In such case, the reestablishment of any previous conditional uses, or establishment of new conditional uses shall require review, public hearing and approval by the Plan Commission in accordance with Division 2, Subdivision II of this Article. 
(5)  Conditional uses authorized by Plan Commission resolution shall be established for a period of time to a time certain or until a future happening or event at which the same shall terminate. 
(d)  Uses not specified in Chapter. 
(1)  Uses not specified in this Chapter that are found by the Plan Commission to be sufficiently similar to specified permitted uses for a district shall be allowed by Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  Uses not specified in this Chapter and which are found sufficiently similar to specified conditional uses permitted for a district may be permitted by the Plan Commission after public hearing and approval in accordance with Division 2, Subdivision II of this Article. 
(e)  Validity of permits. Where the Building Inspector has issued a building permit pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, such permit shall become null and void unless work thereon is substantially underway within six months of the date of the issuance of such permit by the Building Inspector or the conditional use is abandoned for a period of 12 months. 
(f)  Yard requirements where buildings not present. Where a lot is to be occupied for a permitted use without buildings, the side yards and front yard required for such lot shall be provided and maintained unless otherwise stipulated in this Chapter, except that yards shall not be required on lots used for garden purposes without buildings or structures, nor on lots used for public recreation areas. 
(g)  Prohibited uses of residential property. No land that is located in a Residence District shall be used for driveway or access purposes to any land which is located in a Commercial or Manufacturing District or used for any purpose not permitted in a Residence District. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-21; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-21), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-11. - Site regulations. 
(a)  Lots abutting more restrictive districts. Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and rear yards not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting district. The street yard setbacks in the less restrictive district shall be modified for a distance of not less than 60 feet from the more restrictive district boundary line so such street yard setbacks shall be no less than the average of the street yards required in both districts. 
(b)  Preservation of topography. In order to protect the property owner from possible damage due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands and to aid in preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of the landscape, no change in the existing topography of any land shall be made which would result in increasing any portion of the slope to a ratio greater than 1½ horizontal to one vertical, within a distance of 20 feet from the property line, except with the written consent of the owner of the abutting property and with the approval of the Plan Commission, or which would alter the existing drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect the adjoining property. In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved, and all slopes shall be protected against erosion. Retaining walls may be permitted on a site-specific basis as allowed by the Village Engineer. 
(c)  Decks. For purposes of this Chapter, decks and porches shall be considered a part of a building or structure. 
(d)  Lots or parcels of land. 
(1)  Division of lot or parcel of land. No lot or parcel of land located in any district and held in one ownership shall be divided, separated in ownership or reduced in size in any manner so that any portion thereof shall have a lot area of less than five acres and a lot width of less than 300 feet in an Agriculture District, a lot area of less than 10,000 square feet and a lot width of less than 80 feet in an R-1 District, or a lot area of less than 5,000 square feet and a lot width of less than 40 feet in all other districts, nor shall any lot or parcel of land held in one ownership which does not comply to the above provisions be further divided in any manner except as allowed in Section 56-6(b). 
(2)  Contiguous lots or parcels of land. When two or more lots or parcels of land, either of which lacks adequate area or dimensions prescribed hereinafter for the zoning district in which they are located, or which does not comply with the access requirements of Section 56-142(e), are contiguous and are held in one ownership, they shall thereafter be used as one zoning lot and shall not be severed in ownership. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-22; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-22), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-12. - Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Continued conformity with bulk regulations. The maintenance of yards, courts, usable open spaces and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which it is located as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts, usable open spaces, other open spaces or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership, or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, usable open space, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building. 
(b)  Division of improved zoning lots. No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more zoning lots and no portion of any improved zoning lot shall be sold, unless all improved zoning lots resulting from each such division or sale shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the district in which the property is located and the provisions set forth in Subsection (e) of this Section. 
(c)  Location of required open space. All yards, courts, usable open spaces and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group. 
(d)  Required yards for existing building. No yards now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced, if already less than the minimum required by this Chapter for equivalent new construction. 
(e)  Permitted obstructions in required yards. The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified. 
(1)  In all yards. 
a.  Arbors and trellises. 
b.  Awnings. 
c.  Chimneys projecting 24 inches or less into the yard. 
d.  Fences, walls and hedges subject to the provisions of Chapter 8, Article VII. 
e.  Flagpoles and garden ornaments. 
f.  Open terraces not over three feet above the average level of the adjoining ground, but not including a permanently roofed-over terrace or porch. 
g.  Recreational equipment. 
h.  Steps not over three feet above the ground level, which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street or alley. 
(2)  In front yards. 
a.  One story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yards, provided that such windows do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third of the front wall of the building, and come entirely within planes drawn from either main corner of the front wall, making an interior angle of 21½ degrees in the horizontal plane with the front wall. 
b.  Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting 24 inches or less into the yard. 
(3)  In rear yards. 
a.  Accessory sheds, tool rooms and similar buildings or structures for storage. 
b.  Air conditioning equipment. 
c.  Balconies or decks, extending less than three feet above grade, open to the sky, but are no closer than ten feet to the rear lot line. 
d.  Balconies or decks extending more than three feet above grade, open to the sky, but are no closer than 20 feet to the rear lot line. 
e.  Detached private garages and open off-street parking spaces. 
f.  Fire escapes projecting six feet or less into the yard. 
g.  Laundry drying equipment. 
h.  One story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard, provided that such windows do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-half of the rear wall of the building, and come entirely within planes drawn from either main corner of the rear wall, making an interior angle of 22½ degrees in the horizontal plane with the rear wall. 
i.  Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting 24 inches or less into the yard. 
j.  Swimming pools. 
(4)  In side yards. 
a.  Fire escapes and emergency escape wells projecting not more than four feet into the required yard and not closer than three feet to the side lot line. 
b.  Laundry drying equipment. 
c.  Open off-street parking spaces. 
d.  Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting 24 inches or less into the yard. 
(5)  In waterfront yards. 
a.  Air conditioning equipment. 
b.  Balconies or decks, open to the sky, projecting ten feet or less into the yard, but are no closer than 30 feet to the ordinary high-water mark. 
c.  Fire escapes projecting six feet or less into the yard. 
d.  Laundry drying equipment. 
e.  One story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard, provided that such windows do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-half of the rear wall of the building, and come entirely within planes drawn from either main corner of the rear wall, making an interior angle of 22½ degrees in the horizontal plane with the rear wall. 
f.  Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting 24 inches or less into the yard. 
g.  Swimming pools. 
h.  Piers and boat shelters as approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-23; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-23), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-13. - Reduction or joint use. 
No lot, yard, parking area, building area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimensions so as not to meet the provisions of this Chapter. No part of any lot, yard, parking area or other space required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-24; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-24), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-14. - Special provisions applicable to miscellaneous uses. 
The following provisions set forth hereinafter for certain uses are applicable to all such uses regardless of the zoning district wherein they may be located except as provided under conditional use permit: The following provisions shall apply to car washes: 
(a)  A buffer area, at least six feet in width and initially landscaped with four foot tall evergreen shrubs to ultimately form a continuous hedge, not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height, shall be established and maintained at any rear or side lot line abutting a Residence District. A solid wall or fence providing a visual screen and of decorative design may be substituted for the evergreen hedge. 
(b)  Any exterior lighting to illuminate the premises shall be arranged so as not to reflect rays of light into adjacent lots nor shine rays of light directly into the streets. 
(c)  Any exit door for a car wash shall be at least four feet beyond any automatic drying and 20 feet from any street or alley lot line. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-25; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-25), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-15. - Activities which may be potential hazards or nuisances. 
(a)  Prohibited uses. No land use or aspect of land use, whether newly established or preexisting, whether permanent or temporary, shall be conducted in a manner that results in pollution or contamination of waters (groundwater or surface water) or emission or release of radioactivity, or electrical disturbances, or noise, or glare or heat, or fire or explosive hazards or in conditions of crowding or congestion or in assemblies of persons or livestock without adequate provision for safety, health and sanitation, to the extent of constituting either a violation of applicable laws or regulations, or a condition of public or private nuisance, or a condition which threatens or is detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare or the right of users of other properties to reasonable enjoyment of their property. Any violations of this standard may be enforced as a zoning violation either prospectively or after the violation occurs, regardless of the legality of basic land use. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The following public utility uses, which are essential in most districts, shall be permitted in any zoning district: poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, sewage lift station pipelines, laterals or any other similar distributing equipment for a public utility. However, where such public utility uses are proposed to be located across unplatted lands, such uses may be allowed subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the provisions of Division 2, Subdivision II of this Article. 
(2)  The regulations herein governing lot size shall not apply to any lot designed or intended for a public utility or public service use when such lot size shall be deemed appropriate for such use by the Plan Commission. 
(3)  The regulations herein limiting the height of buildings or structures shall not apply to flagpoles, communication towers, houses of worship, spires and chimneys. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-26; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-26), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-16. - General requirements regarding Special, Residence, Commercial and Manufacturing Districts. 
(a)  Special Districts. 
(1)  Definition of Special Districts. The A1, C-G and PD Districts are classified as Special Districts for purposes of this Chapter. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses of land or buildings, as herein listed, shall be restricted to the Special Districts indicated and under the conditions specified. No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which such building, structure or tract of land shall be located with the following exceptions: 
a.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived; and 
b.  Conditional uses allowed in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (a)(3) of this Section. Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to those regulations of Division 2, Subdivision III of this Article governing nonconforming uses. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses, as listed in each Specific District, may be allowed in the districts indicated, subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the provision of Division 2, Subdivision II of this Article. 
(4)  Lot area and lot width requirements. 
a.  Lot areas and lot widths shall be provided in accordance with the Specific District regulations herein indicated. 
b.  No use shall be established or hereafter maintained on a lot recorded after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is derived, which is of less area or less width than prescribed herein for such use in the zoning district in which it is to be located. 
(5)  Height regulations. Maximum height regulations as set forth for each district shall apply to all buildings or structures in such districts, except houses of worship, flagpoles, communications towers, chimneys, schools and other public buildings. 
(6)  Yard requirements. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations herein indicated for each district. All additions to a principal building, such as attached garages, shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building. 
(7)  Off-street parking and loading. In the Special Districts, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with applicable regulations herein set forth in Division 2, Subdivision IV of this Article. 
(b)  Residence Districts. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses of land or buildings in Residence Districts, as herein listed, shall be restricted to the districts indicated and under the conditions specified. No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted herein in the zoning district in which such building, structure or tract of land shall be located, with the following exceptions: 
a.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived; and 
b.  Conditional uses allowed in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (b)(2) of this Section. Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to those regulations of Division 2, Subdivision III of this Article governing nonconforming uses. 
(2)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses, as herein listed in each specific district, may be allowed in the district indicated, subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the provisions of Division 2, Subdivision II of this Article. 
(3)  Lot area and lot width requirements. 
a.  No use shall be established or hereafter maintained on a lot recorded after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived, which is of less area or less width than prescribed herein for such use in the zoning district in which it is to be located. 
b.  In any resident district on a lot of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived, a single-family dwelling may be established regardless of the size of the lot, provided that all other requirements of this Chapter are met. 
c.  No existing residential building shall be converted so as to conflict with or further conflict with the lot area requirements of the district in which such dwelling is located. 
(4)  Yard requirements. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations herein indicated for each specific Residence District and shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky, except as allowed in Section 62-12(e). All additions to a principal building, such as attached garages, shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building. However, yard requirements may be modified as set forth herein: 
a.  The front yard of any building in a Residence District proposed to be erected or altered on a lot that adjoins another lot fronting on the same street whereon the front yard is less than that prescribed for the district in which it is located shall not be required to exceed the average of the front yards of the adjoining existing building, but no front yard shall be less than ten feet in any case. 
b.  In the R-1A and R-2 Districts, where a landowner, developer or subdivider provides qualifying permanent open spaces as part of a recorded Subdivision containing lots for single-family detached dwellings, the lots within such Subdivision may have minimum front, side and rear yards 20 percent less than herein otherwise required for the district in which the Subdivision is located. 
(5)  Usable open space requirements. Usable open space shall be provided on each lot, devoted in whole or in part to any residential use, as set forth in each zoning district. Such usable open space provided on the ground level shall be in a compact area of no less than 200 square feet and having no dimension less than ten feet and having no slope grade greater than ten percent. 
(6)  Signs. Signs shall be classified and permitted in accordance with the sign regulations specified under Chapter 8, Article XI. 
(7)  Off-street parking and loading. In all Residence Districts, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with applicable regulations herein set forth in Division 2, Subdivision IV of this Article. 
(8)  Community living arrangements. 
a.  The total capacity of community living arrangements within the Village shall not exceed 25 or one percent of the Village population as determined by the most recent decennial census, whichever is greater. All community living arrangements shall comply with all applicable requirements of Wis. Admin. Code Ch. HFS 83. 
b.  Dwelling structures housing community living arrangements shall be separated from each other by at least 2,500 feet. 
c.  The use of a residential dwelling unit as a community living arrangement with a capacity of eight or fewer persons is a permitted use in any Residential District, provided that the premises otherwise satisfies ordinance requirements. 
d.  Use of a residential dwelling unit as a community living arrangement with capacity of nine to 15 persons is a permitted use in the R-3 District and a conditional use in the R-1, R-1A, R-1B and R-2 Districts, provided that the premises otherwise satisfy ordinance requirements. 
e.  Use of a residential unit as a community living arrangement with capacity of 16 or more persons is a conditional use in any Residential District, provided that the premises otherwise satisfy ordinance requirements. 
f.  Capacities in excess of 25 for the Village or separation distances of less than 2,500 feet are conditional uses. 
g.  Not less than 11 months nor more than 13 months after the first licensure of a community living arrangement and every year thereafter, the Village Board may make a determination as to the effect of the community living arrangement on the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the Village. The determination shall be made according to the procedures provided under Subsection (b)(8)h. of this Section. If the Village Board determines that a community living arrangement poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the Village, the Village Board may order the community living arrangement to cease operation unless special zoning permission is obtained. The order is subject to judicial review under Wis. Stats. § 68.13, except that a free copy of the transcript may not be provided to the community living arrangement. The community living arrangement must cease operation within 90 days after the date of the order, or the date of the final judicial review of the order, or the date of the denial of special zoning permission, whichever is later. 
h.  A determination made under Subsection (b)(8)g. of this Section shall be made after a hearing before the Village Board. The Village shall provide at least 30 days notice to the community living arrangement that such a hearing will be held. At the hearing, the community living arrangement may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and call and examine witnesses and cross-examine other witnesses called. The Village Board may call witnesses and may issue subpoenas. All witnesses shall be sworn by the Village Board. The Village Board shall take notes of the testimony and shall mark and preserve all exhibits. The Village Board may, and upon request of the community living arrangement shall, cause the proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a recording device, the expense thereof to be paid by the Village. Within 20 days after the hearing, the Village Board shall mail or deliver to the community living arrangement its written determination stating the reasons therefor. The determination shall be a final determination. 
(c)  Commercial Districts. 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
a.  Permitted uses of land or buildings, as herein listed, shall be restricted as to the Commercial Districts indicated and under the conditions specified. No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted herein in the zoning district in which such building, structure or tract of land shall be located with the following exceptions: 
1.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived; and 
2.  Conditional uses allowed in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (c)(2) of this Section. 
b.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to those regulations of Division 2, Subdivision III of this Article governing nonconforming uses. 
(2)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses, as herein listed in each specific district, may be allowed in the districts indicated, subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the provisions of Division 2, Subdivision II of this Article. 
(3)  Lot area requirements. Lot areas shall be provided in accordance with the specific district regulations herein indicated. In addition, the following regulations shall be complied with: 
a.  No residential use shall be established or hereafter maintained on a lot recorded after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived, which is of less area than prescribed herein for such use in the zoning district in which it is to be located. 
b.  For any lot of record that is less than 50 feet in width or less than 6,000 square feet in area on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived and located in any Commercial District, the lot area requirements as established in the R-3 District shall apply. 
c.  No existing residential building shall be converted so as to conflict with or further conflict with the lot area per dwelling unit requirements of the district in which such building is located. 
(4)  Height regulations. Maximum height regulations as set forth for Commercial Districts shall apply to all buildings or structures in such district. 
(5)  Yard requirements. Yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations herein indicated and shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky, except as allowed in Section 62-12(e). All additions to the principal building, such as attached garages, shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building. 
(6)  Usable open space requirements. Usable open space shall be provided on each lot devoted in whole or in part to any residential use as set forth in each zoning district. Such usable open space provided on the ground level shall be in a compact area of no less than 200 square feet and having no dimension less than ten feet and having no slope grade greater than ten percent. In calculating the usable open space requirements in the C-G and C-H Districts, there may be credited up to a maximum of 50 percent of the required open space area the area of balconies having a minimum dimension of four feet six inches and on the roof any open space area having a minimum dimension of 15 feet and being free of any obstructions and improved and available for safe and convenience use to all occupants of the building. 
(d)  Manufacturing Districts. 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
a.  Permitted uses of land or buildings, as herein listed, shall be restricted to the Manufacturing Districts indicated and under the conditions specified. No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted herein in the zoning district in which such building, structure or tract of land shall be located, with the following exceptions: 
1.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived; and 
2.  Conditional uses allowed in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (d)(2) of this Section. 
b.  Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to those regulations of Division 2, Subdivision III of this Article governing nonconforming uses. 
(2)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses, as herein listed in each specific district, may be allowed in the districts indicated, subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the provisions of Division 2, Subdivision II of this Article. 
(3)  Yard requirements. Yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations herein indicated and shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky, except as allowed in Section 62-12(e). All additions to a principal building, such as attached garages, shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building. 
(4)  Regulations along Residence District boundaries. In the Manufacturing Districts, if any point on the exterior surface of any building or structure located adjacent to a side or rear property line in a Residence District or directly across a street from a Residence District is at greater height than 35 feet above curb level, such point projected vertically upon the ground shall in no case be nearer to the lot line of the property on which said building or structure is located than a horizontal distance equal to the height of such point above curb level. However, stacks, tanks, bulkheads or ventilating equipment, including towers enclosing the same, shall be exempt from such limitations if not exceeding in the aggregate 25 in lineal dimension parallel to the street for each 100 feet of street frontage. Parapets not exceed three feet in height shall also be exempt from such limitation. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-27; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-27), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-17. - Escrow deposits. 
(a)  Applicants for rezoning to R-3 General Residence District under Section 62-61(i), PD Planned Development District, under Section 62-67, PD-I Planned Development Infill District under Section 62-66, for substantial modification of detailed plans for approved PD Districts or applications for site plan or design review under Section 62-310(e), shall be responsible to pay the actual cost of staff and consultant review of the application. Upon application, the applicant shall deposit the amount specified under Subsection (b) of this Section to be held in escrow upon which the Village shall draw to pay for said costs as they are incurred during the course of reviewing the application. Itemized statements reflecting the amounts drawn from the deposit shall be sent to the applicant every 30 days. In the event that the escrow deposit has been drawn down to 25 percent of the required amount, if requested by the Village, the applicant shall replenish the escrow deposit to its original amount within 15 days of the Village's request. If any funds remain in the escrow deposit following final determination of the application, such remaining funds shall be returned to the applicant within 15 days of the determination together with an accounting of the deposits and draws on the escrow. 
(b)  Escrow deposits shall be made in the amounts established by the Village Board from time to time and listed in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-14, § 1(13-1-28(a)), 8-22-2005; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 2-25-2008)  
Secs. 62-18—62-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS GENERALLY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Planning and zoning, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 62-37—62-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 62-61. - Establishment of districts. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, present and future, provision is hereby made for the division of the Village into the following 17 basic zoning districts: 
(a) 	A1 	Agriculture-Transition District 
(b) 	CO 	Conservancy District 
(c) 	PD 	Planned Development District 
(d) 	PD-I 	Planned Development Infill District 
(e) 	R-1 	Single-Family Residence District 
(f) 	R-1A 	Single-Family Residence District 
(g) 	R-1B 	Single-Family Residence District 
(h) 	R-2 	Single- and Two-Family Residence District 
(i) 	R-3 	General Residence District 
(j) 	R-MH 	Manufactured Home Residence District 
(k) 	R-E 	Elderly Residence District 
(l) 	C-G 	General Commercial District 
(m) 	C-P 	Commercial Park District 
(n) 	C-H 	Highway Commercial District 
(o) 	C-L 	Limited Commercial District 
(p) 	C-C 	Central Commercial District 
(q) 	M-IC 	Manufactured-Intensive Commercial District 
 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-40; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-40), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-62. - Zoning Map. 
(a)  The Village is hereby divided into zoning districts as shown upon a map designated as the Official Zoning Map of the Village of McFarland and made a part of this Chapter. This Official Zoning Map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this Chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if the matters and information set forth by said map were fully described herein. The Official Zoning Map shall be properly attested and kept on file along with the text of the Official Zoning Regulations in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer. 
(b)  The district boundaries shall be determined by measurement from and as shown on the Official Zoning Map; and in case of any question as to the interpretation of such boundary lines, the Plan Commission shall interpret the map according to the reasonable intent of this Chapter. Unless otherwise specifically indicated or dimensioned on the map, the district boundaries are normally lot lines; section, quarter-section or 16th-section lines; or the centerlines of streets, highways, railways or alleys. 
(c)  The Official Zoning Map dated April 3, 2003, is hereby adopted as the Official Zoning Map. All further zoning changes made shall be by reference to this map. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-41; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-41), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 27, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 62-63. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(b)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(c)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following Village boundaries shall be construed as following municipal boundaries. 
(d)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(e)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in the preceding shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-42; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-42), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 5, adopted Feb. 24, 2020, repealed § 62-64, which pertained to parkland dedication for lots existing prior to 1966 or new dwelling units not involving a land division and derived from Code 1998, § 13-1-43; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-43), adopted March 24, 2003; Ord. No. 2003-22, § 2, adopted Dec. 22, 2003; Ord. No. 2005-20, § 2, adopted Nov. 28, 2005; and Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 28, adopted July 24, 2017.  
Sec. 62-65. - A1 Agriculture-Transition District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the A1 Agriculture-Transition District is to preserve, for an unspecified time period in agricultural and related open-space land uses, those lands generally located in proximity to developed areas within the Village where urban expansion in inevitable and broadly in keeping with long time plans for development. It is intended that urban development be deferred in such areas until the appropriate authorities concerned determine that it is economically and financially feasible to provide public services and facilities for uses other than those permitted in the district. It is also intended that the status of all areas in this district be reviewed by the appropriate authorities periodically in order to determine whether, in light of current land development trends, there should be a transfer of all or any part of those areas to some other appropriate use district. Any such review will consider developments in keeping with the Village's Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Standards applicable to conditional uses in the Agricultural District. The Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection shall be notified of the approval of any conditional use permit. In passing upon applications for conditional use permits, the Plan Commission shall consider the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The statement of purposes of the zoning district. 
(2)  The potential for conflict with agricultural use. 
(3)  The need of the proposed use for a location in an agricultural area. 
(4)  The availability of alternative locations. 
(5)  Compatibility with existing or permitted use on adjacent lands. 
(6)  The productivity of the lands involved. 
(7)  The location of the proposed use so as to reduce to a minimum the amount of productive agricultural land converted. 
(8)  The need for public services created by the proposed use. 
(9)  The availability of adequate public services and the ability of affected local units of government to provide them without an unreasonable burden. 
(10)  The effect of the proposed use on water or air pollution, soil erosion and rare or irreplaceable natural resources. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Rezoning. 
(1)  Rezonings of lands from the Agriculture-Transition District shall be based upon consideration of: 
a.  The availability of adequate public facilities to accommodate proposed development. 
b.  The likelihood that the proposed development will not place unreasonable burdens on budgets of the Village, the school system or the county. 
c.  The assurance that the proposed development will not result in water or air pollution, unreasonable soil erosion or unreasonable impact on rare or irreplaceable natural features. 
d.  The suitability of the proposed development. This criterion shall be deemed satisfied if the Village rezones the site to a Planned Development District. 
(2)  Planning principles for Agriculture-Transition District lands upon consideration of rezoning to the Planned Development District. 
a.  Individual sites should be placed within a framework of planning, at least at the general level, for neighborhoods; and 
b.  Where land uses are to be mixed, attention must be given to buffering and transitioning between differing uses. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-44; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-44), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 4, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 62-66. - PD-I Planned Development Infill District. 
(a)  Intent. The PD-I District is referred to as an "infill" zoning regulation because it is intended to be used in situations where new development or redevelopment is proposed within an already developed area or neighborhood. Mixed use may be allowed to the extent that no land use conflicts will result. It is a basic public expectation that landowners requesting the use of the PD-I District will develop design, building architecture, landscape design and construction materials. The extent of variation or exception that will be recommended by the Village Plan Commission with final approval by the Village Board in accordance with the standards specified in Subsection (d)(1) of this Section will be dependent on how well the above stated expectations are expressed in the proposed development plan. 
(b)  Application procedures. The procedures and requirements for applying for a PD-I zoning change are the same as those for the basic PD rezoning request. The procedures call for a two-step submittal with approval of a General Implementation Plan (GIP) and the subsequent submittal of a Detailed Implementation Plan (DIP). The application procedure is stated in Section 62-67. 
(c)  PD-I zoning lot. The minimum zoning lot, for purpose of a PD-I submittal, shall include all abutting or adjacent parcels owned or otherwise controlled by the applicant for the PD-I zoning. The zoning lot may include more than one parcel and more than one owner. For purposes of applying the criteria and standards for PD-I zoning, the total area of the zoning lot shall be considered as one parcel regardless of the number of parcel Subdivisions that may exist. 
(d)  Standards and criteria for approval of a PD-I. In addition to the general requirements for approval listed in Section 62-67, the following standards and criteria shall be used by the Village Plan Commission and Village Board when acting on a rezoning application in PD-I: 
(1)  Maximum impervious surface ratio: 
a.  Five-tenths residential. 
b.  Seven-tenths nonresidential and mixed use. 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.70. 
(3)  Minimum required usable open space per dwelling unit: 100 SF/DU. 
(e)  Additional standards. 
(1)  Screening and requirements for buffer yards shall be included as part of plan reviews. Such screening shall shield neighboring properties from any adverse external effects of the proposed developments. Screening and buffer yards shall also be used to shield the proposed development from the negative impacts of adjacent uses, such as streets, industrial uses, etc. Special emphasis shall be placed on screening the intrusion of automobile headlights on neighboring properties from parking areas and driveways. 
(2)  Pedestrian circulation should be carefully planned so as to prevent pedestrian use of vehicular ways and parking spaces. In all cases, pedestrian access shall be provided to public walkways. 
(3)  The usable open space required for residential development projects and mixed use residential projects shall be designed for use of each individual dwelling unit or shall be located and designed to be of utility to every dwelling unit proposed. This required usable open space shall be designed to maximum privacy and usability to the residence. 
(4)  Special emphasis shall be placed on trash collection points. Trash containers shall be screened and so designed so as to be conveniently accessible to their users and collectors. 
(5)  Within the PD-I District, mixed land uses may be proposed. However, they must be found to be compatible based on the site and building design proposed. Compatibility will also be judged on the basis of how well the proposed project fits within the context of the neighborhood and abutting properties. The basic intent of this Chapter and Village Comprehensive Plan must be adhered to. 
(6)  Snow removal areas and procedures must be described in the plans. 
(7)  All site lighting shall be controlled so as not to extend a direct light source onto abutting properties. Cutoff type luminaries shall be used and all lighting sheds shall be indicated in the plans. 
(8)  The physical attributes of the site shall be respected with particular concern for preservation of natural features, tree growth and open space. 
(f)  Exceptions to standards. Exceptions to these standards may be recommended by the Village Plan Commission, subject to final approval given by the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-45; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-45), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-67. - PD Planned Development District. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Use regulations. The uses allowable in this district are the uses approved as part of the general or detailed plan for particular sites that are placed in the Planned Development District. 
(2)  Density and dimensional regulations. This Section sets no prescribed density or dimensional regulations in the Planned Development District. 
(3)  Off-street parking and loading. There shall be no prescribed requirements for off-street parking and loading in the Planned Development District. However, in the review and approval of any general or detailed plan in a Planned Development District, due consideration shall be given to Subdivision IV of this Division of regulations and requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities for uses similar to those proposed in such plan. 
(4)  Standards. The following standards shall apply in the review of all general or detailed plans proposed for the Planned Development District: 
a.  The uses proposed in the planned development shall be in general conformance with the Village Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  The establishment, maintenance or operation of the uses proposed in the planned development shall not substantially impair or diminish the use, value and enjoyment of other properties within the neighborhood. 
c.  Traffic circulation into and within the development shall be designed to minimize traffic congestion and traffic hazards, provide for the accessibility of all uses and buildings and also provide for the safe and convenient movement of both vehicles and pedestrians. 
d.  The planned development shall incorporate environmental design considerations, including the preservation of topography, trees and ground cover, streams and natural bodies of waters, and other significant natural features and control of erosion and runoff in accord with the Village Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Ordinances. 
e.  The planned development shall provide for convenient and harmonious groups of buildings, structures and uses; and buildings shall be spaced and sited to ensure adequate safety, light, ventilation and privacy. 
f.  The following provisions shall apply: 
1.  In a planned development for residential use, adequate open space and recreational areas shall be provided in appropriate locations, and all public and common open spaces shall be designed and located to provide safe and convenient access to residents. 
2.  Planned Development District housing impacts on community resources in the same manner as other new developments, which are characterized by division of land into lots. In particular, the additional population density places demands upon Village parks and recreation areas. Accordingly, each dwelling unit newly established shall be required to dedicate land or provide fees in lieu of land, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 62-64. 
g.  The planned development will not adversely affect the ability of public agencies to provide school or other municipal services. 
h.  The width of street rights-of-way, width of paving, width and location of street or other paving, outdoor lighting, location of sewer and water lines, provision for stormwater drainage or other similar environmental engineering considerations shall be based on a determination of the appropriate standards necessary to implement the specific function in the specific situation; provided, however, that in no case shall standards be less than those necessary to ensure the public safety and welfare as determined by the Village. 
i.  The proponents of a Planned Development District application shall provide evidence satisfactory to the Village Board of its economic feasibility of available adequate financing and that it would not adversely affect the economic prosperity of the Village or the values of surrounding properties. 
j.  The proponents of a Planned Development District shall submit a reasonable schedule for the implementation of the development to the satisfaction of the Village Board, including suitable provisions for assurance that each phase could be brought to completion in a manner that would not result in an adverse effect upon the community as a result of termination at that point. 
(5)  Minimum area. A Planned Development District shall not be less than three acres of contiguous land under the same ownership. This Subsection shall not be interpreted to prohibit the post-development sale of all or part of an approved PD subject to the provision of this Section and all applicable statutes and Subdivision regulations. 
(6)  Subdivision review. The applicable Subdivision review under Chapter 56 shall be carried out as an integral part of the review of a Planned Development District. The plan required must be submitted in a form that substantially satisfies requirements of the Subdivision regulations for the Preliminary and Final Plat approvals. Subdivision application may be submitted for the whole, a part, or parts of the overall planned development as indicated by phases in the detailed plan for staged development. 
(b)  Procedure for establishment of Planned Development Districts. The provisions set forth in Division 4 of this Article shall apply for the establishment of any Planned Development District, provided the amendatory ordinance shall be considered only in conjunction with a general or detailed plan. 
(c)  Preapplication procedures. Applicants are encouraged to seek preapplication, conceptual review of proposed plans by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission is under no obligation to give a response to such submittals at the same meeting as they are presented. The Plan Commission is entitled to seek outside assistance and sources of critique. No responses by the Plan Commission or by individual Plan Commissioners shall bind the Plan Commission or the Village unless the response is on behalf of the Plan Commission, is in writing and is expressed as a binding response. 
(d)  Approval of general or detailed plan and adoption of zoning ordinance amendment. In the event that the Village Board approves a general (or detailed) plan and adopts a zoning amendment creating a Planned Development District in connection with such general (or detailed) plan, the requirements of the plan shall constitute the zoning regulations for the district and the zoning district maps shall be amended to show all lands included in such general (or detailed) plan as within the Planned Development District. In the approval of any general (or detailed) plan, the Village Board may stipulate any conditions or restrictions in the establishment, maintenance and operation of any uses proposed in such plan and may also require any guarantees, including the filing of a contract together with a surety, satisfactory in form to the Village Attorney and satisfactory in amount to the Village Engineer, with the Village to ensure that improvements will be installed and completed as proposed in the plan. 
(e)  Recording of approved general or detailed plans and zoning ordinance amendments. Whenever the Village Board designates land as being within a Planned Development District, the Village Attorney shall record in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Dane County a facsimile copy of the approved general (or detailed) plan, together with a certified copy of the related zoning ordinance amendment and any other action taken thereon by the Village Board. The cost for preparing a facsimile copy of the general (or detailed) plan in recordable form and the recording fee shall be paid by the owners of the lands included in the general (or detailed) plan. 
(f)  Changes or modifications to general or detailed plans and zoning ordinance amendments. Any approved general or detailed plan, together with the related zoning ordinance amendment, may be amended in whole or in part pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations by which general or detailed plans were approved and the zoning ordinance amended. However, minor modifications may be made by any general or detailed plan upon approval of the Village Plan Commission provided that such modifications shall be in general conformity with the approved general or detailed plan and shall not substantially change the concept of such approved plan. All approved minor modifications shall become a part of the approved general or detailed plan and shall be recorded as provided in Subsection (e) of this Section. The Plan Commission shall decide whether a proposed amendment is minor or major, with appeals made to the Village Board. 
(g)  Construction of building and establishment of uses. No zoning or building permit shall be issued until the detailed plan and the related zoning ordinance amendment have been recorded as required above. Within one year of the date of recording of any detailed plan and the zoning ordinance, construction thereon must begin; and construction must be substantially completed throughout the project within three years of such date of recording, unless extensions are granted by the Village Board. If initial construction has not begun within one year of the date of recording or within the prescribed time period granted as an extension by the Village Board, the approval of the detailed plan and the related zoning ordinance amendment shall become null and void, and the zoning shall revert to the classification that applied prior to the approval of the PDD zoning. No occupancy of dwelling units shall occur until all public works that have been scheduled to be completed before occupancy are completed to the satisfaction of the Village. 
(h)  Procedure for establishment of the Planned Development District—General plan for staged development. 
(1)  Submittal of general plan. The general plan shall contain any information and representations deemed necessary by the Plan Commission and shall consist of a statement entitled "Planned Development District—General Plan, Statement of Owner's Intent and Description of Development," which shall include, without limitation, the following: 
a.  A legal description describing all of the tract of land included in the proposed development. 
b.  A statement indicating the nature of the applicant's interest in the land included in the proposed development. 
c.  A statement describing the proposed development, including the character, method and operation of the development and a development schedule or timetable for construction. 
d.  A statement as to the following data or graphic information referenced to a map or plan of the proposed development: 
1.  The location and size of the site including dimensioned exterior boundaries, topography and other salient features, and existing buildings and structures, and also adjacent properties and streets, including all public utilities and public easements. 
2.  The use and approximate location and bulk of buildings and structures, including number of stories and dimensions of buildings. 
3.  The approximate location of vehicular and pedestrian facilities, such as streets, sidewalks and off-street parking areas, including approximate number of parking spaces. 
4.  The approximate location of areas for public or common open spaces and for other public or semipublic uses. 
5.  A tabulation of land areas for the different types of uses in relation to the total area. 
6.  A tabulation of the gross floor areas of buildings by types of uses. 
7.  A tabulation of the number of types of dwelling units. 
(2)  Review of general plan. The Plan Commission shall review the general plan and determine whether it complies with the standards set forth in Subsection (h)(1) of this Section. Following the review of the general plan, the Plan Commission shall forward the petition to the Village Board, together with a recommendation that the general plan be either approved as submitted, or approved with modifications or disapproved. 
(3)  Approval of general plan. 
a.  In the event that the Village Board approves the general plan and adopts the related zoning ordinance amendment, the zoning district maps shall be amended to include all of the lands within the general plan as within the Planned Development District (general plan approved). However, no building construction shall be permitted in any portion of the approved general plan until a detailed plan prepared in accordance with the requirements hereunder has been approved by the Village as provided below. 
b.  In the event the Village Board fails to approve the general plan and ordinance, the Village Board shall communicate its objections back to the Plan Commission for reconsideration and further discussions. 
(i)  Procedure for establishment of the Planned Development District—Detailed plan for staged development. 
(1)  Submittal of plan. Within one year after the recording of the general plan and the copy of the related zoning ordinance amendment, a detailed plan for at least one stage of the general plan shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, unless an extension is granted by such Village Board. The detailed plan shall contain any information and representation deemed necessary by the Plan Commission and shall consist of a statement entitled, "Planned Development District—Detailed Plan, Statement of Owner's Intent and Description of Development," which shall include without limitations, the following: 
a.  A legal description describing all of the tract of land included in the proposed development, referenced to a locational map indicating the relationship of the tract to the total general plan. 
b.  A statement indicating the nature of the applicant's interest in the land included in the proposed development. 
c.  A statement describing the proposed development, including the character, method and operation of the development, and a development schedule or timetable for construction. Where the formation of organizations such as a homeowners' association is proposed, such statement shall include any agreements, bylaws or covenants which govern the organizational structure, use, maintenance and protection of the development and any of its common services, common open spaces or other common facilities. 
d.  A statement as to the following date or graphic information referenced to a map of the proposed development: 
1.  The location and size of the site, including dimensioned exterior boundaries, topography and other salient features, and existing buildings and structures, and also adjacent properties and streets. 
2.  The use and location of all buildings or structures, including the architectural character and design of each building, the number of stories and dimensions of each building, and the dimensioned yards between buildings or structures and lot lines. 
3.  The location of vehicular and pedestrian facilities, including dimensioned streets, walkways, access driveways, off-street parking spaces and loading berths, and refuse receptacle areas. 
4.  The location and size of areas for public or common open spaces and for other public and semi-public uses. 
5.  A grading plan, including any storm sewer system, a landscaping plan, and an erosion control plan. 
6.  A sanitary sewer and water distribution system plan. 
7.  A tabulation of land areas for the different uses in relation to the total tract area. 
8.  A tabulation indicating the number of buildings and the use and the total gross floor area for each building. 
9.  A tabulation indicating the number and types of dwelling units in each building. 
(2)  Review of the detailed plan. 
a.  The Plan Commission shall review the detailed plan as a conditional use review and shall determine whether the plan complies with the standards set forth in Subsection (h)(1) of this Section and is in general conformance with the approved general plan. Following Plan Commission approval of a detailed plan, the Village Attorney shall record in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Dane County a facsimile copy of the approved detailed plan and a certified copy of the Plan Commission action approving the same. The costs for copies and recording shall be paid by the owners of land within the plan areas. 
b.  The action of the Plan Commission on the proposed detailed plan shall be appealable to the Village Board. The Village Board shall consult with the Plan Commission before making its appeal decision, but in no case shall a detailed plan be approved that is out of conformity with a general plan approved. 
(3)  Approval of detailed plan. Once the detailed plan is approved, the zoning district maps shall be amended to include all of the lands within the detailed plan as Planned Development District—detailed plan approved. 
(j)  Planned Development District—Single-stage procedure. Upon request by applicants and subject to Village Board concurrence, the general and detailed stages of plan review and approval can be combined. Under this option, the plan is submitted in detailed form and is processed as is a general plan. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-46; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-46), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 29, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 62-68. - Statement of purpose. 
The district regulations are intended to govern the location intensity and method of development. The regulations of each district are designed to provide protection to the character of existing development while allowing new growth in accordance with specific development standards and objectives. Public utility services are required as a prerequisite to development in all districts within the Village. 
(a)  A1 Agriculture-Transition District. The purpose of the Agriculture-Transition District is to preserve in agricultural and related open space uses those lands generally located in proximity to developed areas within the Village where urban expansion is likely and in keeping with long-term plans for development. It is intended that urban development be deferred in such areas until the appropriate authorities determine that it is economically and financially feasible to provide public services and facilities. It is also intended that the status of all areas in this district be reviewed by the appropriate authorities periodically in order to determine whether, in light of current land development trends, there should be a transfer of all or any part of those areas to some other appropriate use district. Any such review will consider local and regional land use plans. Existing homes are grandfathered as are existing house lots. No new house lots can be created without rezoning. 
(b)  CO Conservancy District. The Conservancy District is established to preserve and perpetuate in an open and natural state certain areas such as lakeshores and waterways, wetlands and marshes, floodplains and stream beds, woods, slopes, Indian antiquity areas and other areas of aesthetic or historic value which, because of their unique physical and topographical features, are deemed desirable and functional as natural drainageways and water retention areas, natural habitat for plant and animal life, green belts and other multi-purpose uses beneficial to the community. 
(c)  PD Planned Development District. The Planned Development District is established to provide a voluntary regulatory framework designed to encourage greater variety and flexibility in land development while achieving substantial compliance with the Village Land Use Plan and basic intent of the zoning ordinance and land uses beneficial to the Village. Such district is also established to promote the maximum benefit from coordinated area site planning, including diversified location of structures and mixed compatible uses, and to provide for safe and efficient systems for pedestrian and vehicular traffic, attractive recreation and landscaped open spaces, and economic design and location of public and private utilities and community facilities. Within this district are allowed the diversification and variation in the bulk and relationship of uses, structures and spaces in developments planned as comprehensive and cohesive unified plans and projects. 
(d)  PD-I Planned Development Infill District. The Planned Development Infill District (PD-I) standards and regulations have been created for the purpose of allowing flexibility to accommodate infill and redevelopment on parcels less than three acres. Parcels of more than three acres should comply with the normal PD regulations. The application procedures and review criteria for the PD-I are the same as those outlined for the basic PD District in addition to the following provisions. 
(e)  R-1 Single-Family Residence District. The R-1 Single-Family Residence District is established to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of certain low density residential areas of the Village and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where children are members of most families. Development in the R-1 Single-Family Residence District is limited primarily to single-family dwellings and certain community and recreational facilities to serve residents of the district 
(f)  R-1A Single-Family Residence District. The R-1A Single-Family Residence District is established to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of existing low density residential areas normally located in the outlying as well as some inlaying urban parts of the Village, and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where children are members of most families. Development in the R-1A Single-Family Residence District is limited primarily to single-family dwellings and certain community recreational facilities to serve residents of the district. 
(g)  R-1B Single-Family Residence District. The purpose of the R-1B Single-Family Residence District is to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of existing low density residential areas normally located near or in close proximity to the Lake Waubesa or Yahara River areas, and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where children are members of most families. Development in the R-1B Single-Family Residence District is limited primarily to single-family dwellings and certain community recreational facilities to serve residents of the district. 
(h)  R-2 Single- and Two-Family Residence District. The R-2 Single- and Two-Family Residence District is established to protect the essential characteristics of certain low-density residential areas of the Village and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where children are members of most families. Development in the R-2 Single- and Two-Family Residence District is limited primarily to single-family and two-family detached dwellings and certain community and recreational facilities to serve residents of the district. 
(i)  R-3 General Residence District. The R-3 General Residence District is established to stabilize and protect certain medium density residential areas in the Village and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where children are members of most families. Development in the R-3 District is limited primarily to smaller multiple-family dwellings, boarding homes, convalescent homes and recreational facilities to serve residents of the district. 
(j)  R-MH Manufactured Home Residence District. The R-MH Manufactured Home Residence District is established to provide for the permanent placement of manufactured homes in a low- to medium-density residential area of the Village and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where children are members of many families. Development in the R-MH Manufactured Home Residence District is limited primarily to manufactured houses and single-family residences on smaller lots and certain community and recreational facilities to serve residents of the district. 
(k)  R-E Elderly Residence District. The R-E Elderly Residence District is established to stabilize and protect certain medium density residential areas in the Village and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for elderly persons in duplex and multiple-family dwellings, pursuant to state and federal regulations. 
(l)  C-G General Commercial District. The C-G District is intended to provide an area for the business and commercial needs of the community, especially those which can be most suitably located in a compact and conveniently located business district. Residences that are compatible with surrounding uses are allowed as conditional uses. 
(m)  C-P Commercial Park District. The C-P District is established to provide an esthetically attractive working environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of offices, non-nuisance type manufacturing operations, research and development institutions and limited retail businesses. The essential purpose of this district is to achieve development, which is an asset to the owners, neighbors and the Village, and to promote and maintain desirable economic development in a park-like setting. 
(n)  C-H Highway Commercial District. The C-H District is intended to provide an area for those business and commercial activities which especially have to do with motor vehicles or highway transportation, or which provide goods or services primarily to travelers on a highway, or for which location adjacent to a major thoroughfare or highway is a compelling practical consideration, or for which it is especially appropriate for some other reason to be located adjacent to a major thoroughfare or highway. 
(o)  C-L Limited Commercial District. The C-L Limited Commercial District is established to accommodate business and neighborhood consumer needs for services and storage space located in proximity to residential areas without creating a nuisance to the neighborhood. 
(p)  C-C Central Commercial District. The C-C District is designed to accommodate those retail, service and office uses characteristic of the original downtown area of McFarland. 
(q)  M-IC Manufactured-Intensive Commercial District. The M-IC District is intended to provide an area for manufacturing and industrial activities. It is also intended to provide an area for a variety of uses which require relatively large installation, facilities or land area, or which would create or tend to create conditions of public or private nuisance, hazard or other undesirable conditions, or which for these or other reasons may require special safeguards, equipment, processes, screening, barriers, or other forms of protection, including spatial distance, in order to reduce, eliminate, or shield the public from such conditions. 
(r)  RH-1 Rural Home District. The RH-1 Rural Home District is established for annexed properties previously developed with low-density single family residential areas that are characterized by larger lot sizes and having some agricultural accessory uses. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-47; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-47), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2015-03A, § 1, 4-27-2015; Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 5, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 62-69. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Generally. The permitted and allowable conditional uses in each district of the residential and noncommercial zoning districts shall be set forth in the following tab 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT PERMITTED USES 
Description 	A-1 	CO 	R-1 	R-1A 	R-1B 	R-2 	R-3 	R-MH 	R-E 	RH-1 
Residential uses 
Single-family detached dwellings 	P 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 	P 	P 	P 
Conversion of a single-family to a two-family 	N 	N 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Temporary auxiliary apartment 2 	N 	N 	C 	C 	C 	N 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Manufactured home, built after 10/74 	C 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 	P 1 	P 	P 
Two-family dwellings 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	P 	P 	N 	P 	N 
Zero lot line dwellings 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	P 	P 	N 	P 	N 
Multifamily dwellings, up to eight units/acre 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	P 	N 	N 	N 
Multifamily dwellings, up to 15 units/acre 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Elderly occupied dwellings, up to ten units/acre 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	P 	N 
Elderly occupied dwellings, up to 21 units/acre 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	C 	N 
Community based residential facilities 	N 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Business uses 
Community living arrangements, up to eight people 	N 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Home day care (4—8, licensed) 3 	N 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 	P 	C 	P 
Home day care (3 or fewer, unlicensed) 	N 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 
Home occupations 3 	P 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Day care center (9 or more, licensed) 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	C 	N 	C 	N 
Community living arrangements, over eight people 	N 	N 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Landscaping businesses on parcels 2 acres or larger 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	C 
Public uses 
Greenways, open space, parks and pools 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Off-street parking facilities 	N 	C 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Nursing homes, hospitals 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	P 	N 	N 	N 
Clubs, lodges 	C 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	P 	N 	N 	C 
Elementary and secondary schools 	C 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public libraries 	N 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Fire stations 	C 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Cemeteries and mausoleums 	C 	N 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Athletic facilities 	N 	N 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Houses of worship and their affiliated uses 	C 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Industrial and higher uses 
Sewage treatment plants 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Utility lines and pumping stations 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Accessory uses 
Private garage space 	P 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Gardening/storage sheds 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 	N 	P 	P 
Off-street parking facilities 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Normal household pets, not exceeding 3 mature pets 	P 	N 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Agriculture and forestry 4 	P 	C 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	P 
 
P = Permitted, C = Conditional, N = Not Allowed 
1 Manufactured homes placement shall comply with all of the following requirements and limitations: 
a. The home shall be doublewide of at least 24 feet in width and 36 feet in length. 
b. The home shall be installed on an approved foundation system in conformity with the uniform building code. The wheels and axles must be removed. 
c. The home shall be equipped with foundation siding which in design, color and texture appears to be an integral part of the adjacent exterior wall of the manufactured home. 
d. The home shall be covered by a roof pitched at a minimum slope of two inches in 12 inches, which is permanently covered with nonreflective material. 
2 There must be a minimum of 800 square feet of floor area for each dwelling unit, exclusive of halls and entries, cellar and basements. 
3 Refer to Section 62-230. 
4 Keeping of chickens permitted in residential areas pursuant to subsections (d) and (e). 
(b)  Overlay districts. Permitted and conditional uses in Overlay Districts shall include the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district subject to additional compliance with the provisions of any requirements of this Section or any other applicable ordinance. 
(c)  Review of building plans. Within any Overlay District, all plans for new construction or exterior remodeling shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Plan Commission and the Fire/EMS Chief prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(d)  Keeping of chickens. The keeping of no more than four chickens shall be allowed in the R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3 and RH-1 districts provided that: 
(1)  The principal use is a single-family or two-family dwelling. 
(2)  No person shall keep any roosters. 
(3)  No person shall slaughter chickens outdoors. 
(4)  Chickens shall be provided with a structure and area exclusively devoted for use as a hen house and fenced outdoor enclosure. 
a.  Chickens must be kept in the hen house or fenced outdoor enclosure at all times and shall not be allowed to run free. 
b.  The hen house shall be a covered, predator-resistant, well-ventilated structure, providing a minimum of two square feet per chicken. 
c.  The outdoor enclosure shall be adequately fenced to contain chickens and protect them from predators. 
d.  The hen house must be kept in a clean, dry, and sanitary condition at all times. 
e.  The outdoor enclosure shall be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent the accumulation of animal waste and offensive odors. 
f.  Chicken feed, if stored outdoors, must be kept in rat-proof containers. 
(5)  The hen house or outdoor enclosure shall be located in the rear yard and no closer than 25 feet to any residential dwelling on an adjacent lot, nor closer than ten feet to the property line. 
(6)  The hen house and outdoor enclosure shall comply with the maximum lot coverage and height requirements for accessory buildings. Refer to Section 62-227 of the Village of McFarland Municipal Code. 
(7)  The permittee shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 17.02 relating to livestock premises registration. 
(8)  Annual permit. 
a.  Any person who keeps chickens in the Village of McFarland under Section 62-69(d) shall obtain an annual permit prior to June 1 of each year, or within 30 days of acquiring the chickens. The permit year commences on June 1 and ends the following May 31. 
b.  As part of the initial permit approval process, the Village Building Inspector shall inspect the applicant's property for compliance with this Section. The annual permit renewal process shall not require reinspection. 
c.  The Zoning Administrator may revoke a permit if there are two or more violations of this Section, or Chapter 20 of the Village of McFarland Municipal Code, within any six-month period. 
d.  Applications shall be made to the Community Development Department on such forms as deemed appropriate, and a fee shall be established from time to time by the Village Board and provided in Appendix A to this Code. Failure to obtain the required permit and pay the required fee will result in forfeiture, including doubling the permit fee. 
(e)  The number of livestock kept in the A-1 or RH-1 zoned district shall not exceed one animal unit for each full acre and the lot must be at least two acres in size. For lots zoned A-1 or RH-1 less than two acres but over 20,000 sq. ft. no more than ten chickens shall be allowed. Any structure housing livestock shall be at least 100 feet from an urban residentially zoned district. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-48; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-48), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 2, 5-23-2011; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 69, 11-11-2013; Ord. No. 2018-02 , §§ 6—8, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 62-70. - Bulk standard—Residential Districts. 
No structure or lot shall be developed, used or occupied unless it meets the minimum lot frontage, lot area, yard requirements, height limits and other dimensional standards set forth in the following table: 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT BULK STANDARDS 
Bulk Standards 	A-1 	R-1 	R-1A (9) 	R-1B (9) 	R-2 (3) 	R-3 (3) 	R-MH 	R-E 	RH-1 
Minimum lot area 
(sq. ft.) 	35 acres 	10,000 	6,000 	6,000 	10,000 	None 	6,000 	None 	1 acre 
Minimum lot width (ft.) 	- 	80 	50 	50 	80 	80 	50 	80 	150 
Building height (ft.) 	35 (1) 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 
Yards (7)(10) 
 Front yard (ft.) (11) 	- 	25 	25 	20/7 (6) 	25 	25 
or 35 (4) 	25 	25 	40 
 Front yard 
 with snout garage (2) 	- 	30 	30 	20 	30 	25 
or 35 (4) 	30 	30 	40 
 Side yard (ft.) 
  One story building 	6 	6 	7 	7 	8 	8 	6 	8 	10 
   Both sides combined 	14 	14 	14 	14 	18 	20 	14 	20 	20 
  Two story building 	7 	7 	7 	7 	8 	10 	7 	10 	10 
   Both sides combined 	18 	18 	14 	14 	18 	20 	18 	25 	20 
 Reversed corner 	25 	25 	25 	7 	25 	25 
or 30 (8) 	15 	25 	40 
 Rear yard (ft.) 	30 	30 	30 	30 
or 40 (7) 	30 	35 	25 	30 	50 
Usable open space per dwelling unit (sq. ft.) 	- 	1,300 	1,000 	1,000 	750 	500 	1,000 	500 	4,000 
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit (sq. ft.) 	- 	10,000 	6,000 	6,000 	5,000 	5,445 	6,000 	4,356 	1 acre 
 As conditional use 	- 	10,000 	6,000 	6,000 	5,000 	2,904 	6,000 	2,178 	1 acre 
Parking spaces required per dwelling unit (sq. ft.) 
 Efficiency 		1.0 	1.0 	1.0 	1.0 	1.0 	1.0 	1.0 	1.0 
 One bedroom 	- 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 	1.0 	2.0 
 Two bedrooms 	- 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 	2.0 
 Three bedrooms 	- 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 
 Four+ bedrooms 	- 	3.0 	3.0 	3.0 	3.0 	3.0 	3.0 	3.0 	3.0 
Minimum landscaping points (5) 
 Per 100 ft. of bldg. 
foundation 						50 		45 	
 Per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area 						20 		20 	
 Per 100 ft./street frontage 						50 		45 	
 Per 10,000 sq. ft. of paved area 						100 		90 	
 
(1) Barns, sheds, silos and other farm buildings shall not exceed in height twice their distance from the nearest lot line; however, these buildings have to be setback at least 60 feet from the street and no closer than 100 feet from the property line of adjacent properties, if those properties are located in a Residence District. 
(2) Attached garages that are closer to a street than any other portion of structure are snout garages. 
(3) R-2 and R-3 Districts allow zero lot line duplexes of 5,000 square feet minimum lot area and a 40 feet minimum lot width, with side yard setback requirements of eight feet for a one-story structure and ten feet for a two-story structure. 
(4) Twenty-five feet applies to lots if no motor vehicle garage door opening faces street side; 35 feet applies if motor vehicle garage door opening faces street side. 
(5) See Appendix B, Village of McFarland Landscaping Standards. 
(6) Corner lots have at least two street yards, one of which is the front yard. In the R-1B District, the front yard is subject to the 20-foot yard requirement, and additional street yards are subject to the 7-foot yard requirement. 
(7) All yards abutting upon navigable waterways set back at least 40 feet unless superseded by Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or Dane County regulations. 
(8) Twenty-five feet applies to street side with no motor vehicle garage door opening; 30 feet applies to street side with a motor vehicle garage door opening. 
(9) The side yard setback amendments enacted by Ordinance No. 2014-13 shall apply only to property for which a new home construction permit is issued after December 11, 2014. 
(10) All yards in the RH-1 District abutting a collector or arterial street shall be set back 60 feet from the property line. 
(11) All street yards are subject to the requirements for front yards, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-49; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-49), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 3, 5-23-2011; Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1, 10-27-2014; Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 9, 1-22-2018; Ord. No. 2019-15 , § 2, 8-26-2019)  
Sec. 62-71. - Permitted or conditional uses—Commercial Districts. 
The permitted and allowable conditional uses in each district of the commercial zoning districts shall be set forth in the following table: 
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT PERMITTED USES (4, 5, 6, 7) 
Land Uses (1) 	NAICS 	C-G (2) 	C-H 	C-P 	C-L 	M-IC 
Agricultural services and support 	115000 	C 	C 	C 	N 	N 
Mining 	212000 	N 	N 	N 	N 	C 
Utilities 	221000 	N 	C 	C 	N 	C 
Construction contractors 	236000 	N 	P 	P 	N 	P 
Wood product manufacturing 	321000 	N 	P (7) 	P (7) 	N 	P 
Drugs manufacturing 	325410 	N 	P (7) 	P (7) 	N 	P 
Plastics manufacturing 	326100 	N 	P (7) 	P (7) 	N 	P 
Printing 	323000 	C 	C 	P (7) 	N 	P 
Fabricated metal manufacturing 	332000 	N 	P (7) 	P (7) 	N 	C 
Machinery & equipment 	333000 	N 	P (7) 	P (7) 	N 	P 
Computer manufacturing 	334000 	N 	P (7) 	P (7) 	N 	P 
Electrical manufacturing 	335000 	N 	P (7) 	P (7) 	N 	P 
Manufacturing not listed above 		N 	P (7) 	P (7) 	N 	P 
Retail buildings 						
20,000 sq. ft. or greater 	44000—450000 	C 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Auto dealers (new and used) 	441100 	C 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Motorcycle, boat, and other vehicle dealers 	441220 & 441229 	C 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Furniture store 	442110 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Electronics/appliance store 	443100 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Building materials (fully enclosed only) 	444100 	N 	C 	C 	N 	P 
Hardware store 	444130 	P 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Landscape/nursery 	444220 	N 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Food store (except convenience) 	445110 	P 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Liquor store 	445310 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Pharmacies and drug stores 	446110 	P 	P 	N 	N 	N 
Cosmetic and beauty supplies 	446120 	P 	P 	N 	N 	N 
Gasoline stations and convenience stores 	447110 	C 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Clothing store 	448100 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Jewelry store 	448310 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Sporting goods, hobby, book and music 	451100 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Department store 	452110 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Miscellaneous shopping 	453000 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Mail-order houses 	454113 	C 	C 	C 	N 	P 
Fuel dealers 	454310 	N 	N 	N 	N 	C 
Rail transportation 	482110 	N 	N 	N 	N 	C 
Trucking 	484000 	N 	C 	N 	N 	P 
Transit and ground passenger transportation 	485000 	C 	C 	C 	N 	C 
Wholesale, trade (except for petro terminals) 	423000 & 424000 	N 	C 	C 	N 	P 
Petro terminal 	424710 	N 	N 	N 	N 	C 
Post office 	491110 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Warehousing & storage (fully enclosed only) 	493110 	C 	C 	P 	N 	P 
Custodial services 	561720 	N 	P 	P 	C 	C 
Vehicle repair and body shops 	811111 & 811121 	C 	C 	N 	C 	C 
Car wash/oil change 	811190 	C 	P 	N 	N 	N 
Consumer electronics repair 	811211 	C 	C 	N 	C 	C 
Mini-warehouses 	531130 	N 	C 	N 	C 	N 
Commercial banking 	522110 	P 	P 	N 	P 	N 
Financial services 	522291 	P 	P 	N 	P 	N 
Insurance 	524113 	P 	P 	N 	P 	N 
Real estate offices 	531210 	P 	P 	N 	P 	N 
Auto leasing 	532110 	C 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Movies/videos 	532230 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Commercial and industrial equipment rental (3) 	532400 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Legal services 	541110 & 541190 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 
Accounting and tax preparation 	541210 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 
Architectural engineering and related services 	541310 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 
Computer services 	541510 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 
Management consulting services 	541610 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 
Research/testing services 	541710 	N 	P 	C 	P 	N 
Advertising service agencies 	541810 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 
Photo studios 	541921 	P 	C 	N 	P 	N 
Employment services 	561300 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 
Business support services 	561400 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 
Travel services 	561510 	P 	N 	N 	C 	N 
Veterinary clinics 	541940 	C 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Elementary and secondary schools 	611110 	C 	C 	N 	P 	N 
Library 	519120 	C 	C 	N 	P 	N 
Medical services and offices 	621100 	P 	C 	P 	P 	N 
Medical labs 	621500 	N 	C 	P 	N 	N 
Hospitals and clinics 	622110 	C 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Nursing homes 	623110 	P 	P 	N 	N 	N 
Individual and family services, and commercial day care 	624100 	P 	C 	N 	P 	N 
Museum/gallery/historical sites 	712100 	P 	C 	N 	P 	N 
Bowling center 	713950 	P 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Sports and recreation instruction 	611620 	P 	C 	N 	C 	N 
Fitness centers 	713940 	P 	C 	N 	C 	N 
Amusement arcades (except billiards) 	713120 	C 	C 	N 	C 	N 
Lodging 	721110 	C 	P 	C 	N 	N 
Restaurants 	722100 	P 	P 	N 	C 	N 
Limited-service restaurants, including fast food 	722211 	C 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Taverns 	722410 	P 	N 	N 	C 	N 
Furniture repair and re-upholstery 	811420 	C 	C 	N 	C 	N 
Computer and office machine repair 	811212 	P 	P 	N 	N 	N 
Other household repair 	811490 	P 	P 	N 	C 	N 
Personal care services 	812100 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Funeral home and services 	812210 	P 	C 	N 	P 	N 
Kennels and pet boarding 	812910 	C 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Laundry, coin-operated 	812310 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Dry cleaning and laundry (except coin-operated) 	812320 	C 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Parking lots 	812930 	C 	C 	N 	N 	N 
Religious/civic/business/professional organizations 	813000 	P 	C 	N 	P 	N 
Executive, legislative and other general government 	921100 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Residences permitted R-2 and R-3 		C 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Adult businesses (see Section 11-261(d)) 		N 	P 	N 	N 	P 
Adult bookstore (see Section 11-261(c)) 		P 	P 	N 	N 	P 
Commercial laundry (no direct customer pickups and drop-offs, no dry cleaning) 	812331 	N 	N 	N 	N 	C 
 
P = Permitted, C = Conditional, N = Not Allowed 
(1) The meaning of the terms shall be the same as that used in the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), 2007 Edition or revised edition thereof, published by the U.S. Printing Office, with the number of the intended NAICS number following the land use name. 
(2) All uses that are permitted or conditional in C-G are permitted or conditional in the C-C Central Commercial District. 
(3) Indoor storage only. Outdoor storage allowed upon issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(4) All businesses, servicing, processing or display of materials for rent or sale, except for off-street parking of motor vehicles in operable condition and open storage of materials accessory to a principal use shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. Open storage accessory to principal uses in the C-G, C-H, C-P, C-L, and C-C zoning districts may be allowed upon issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(5) All nonenclosed areas of the site that are used for off-street parking, loading or driveways for motor vehicles shall be paved or effectively dust-proofed and measures shall exist on-site to prevent tracking of mud from the site on to public streets. 
(6) All commercial business in the C-C, C-G, C-L or M-1C Districts that are open to the public between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. shall require a conditional use permit. 
(7) Light manufacturing, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, provided all manufacturing activities are contained entirely within an enclosed building, and noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare, and vibration resulting from manufacturing activity, are confined entirely within the building. Does not include industrial processing from raw materials. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-50; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-50), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-29-2004; Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 8-24-2009; Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 1, 6-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-03A, § 2, 4-27-2015; Ord. No. 2018-06 , § 1, 5-29-2018)  
Sec. 62-72. - Bulk standard—Commercial Districts. 
No structure or lot shall be developed, used or occupied unless it meets the minimum lot frontage, lot area, yard requirements, height limits and other dimensional standards set forth in the following table: 
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT BULK STANDARDS 
Bulk Standards 	C-O 	C-C 	C-G (1) 	C-L 	C-H 	C-P 	M-IC 
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) 	None 	None 	6,000 	10,000 	12,000 	34,000 	20,000 
Minimum lot width (ft.) 	None 	None 	50 	80 	80 	100 	100 
Building height (ft.) 	None 	None 	40 	35 	35 	35 	35 
 With conditional use permit 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Yards (2) 
Front yard (ft.) 	None 	None 	25 	25 	35 	25 	35 
 Side yard (ft.) 	None 	None 	10 	8 	10 	15 	20 
 Both sides comb. 	None 	None 	20 	15 	20 	30 	40 
 Rear yard (ft.) 	None 	None 	20 	20 	30 	30 	30 
Percentage of lot coverage 	None 	None 	90% 	50% 	70% 	70% 	90% 
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit (sq. ft.) 			2,900 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 
Minimum landscaping points (3) 
 Points per 100 ft. of bldg. foundation 	None 	None 	40 	0 	20 	40 	20 
 Points per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area 	None 	None 	10 	0 	5 	10 	5 
 Points per 100 ft./street frontage 	None 	None 	40 	0 	20 	40 	20 
 Points per 10,000 sq. ft. of paved area 	None 	None 	80 	20 	40 	80 	40 
 
(1) The front yard setback can be reduced to zero, if parking is provided in the rear of the building. 
(2) All yards abutting upon navigable waterways set back at least 40 feet unless superseded by Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or Dane County regulations. 
(3) See Appendix B, Village of McFarland Landscaping Standards. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-51; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-51), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4, 5-23-2011)  
Sec. 62-73. - Terminal and Triangle Design Overlay (TTDO) Zoning District. 
(a)  Designation of TTDO boundaries. All properties within the mapped planning area boundaries of the Terminal and Triangle District Neighborhood Plan, as may be from time to time amended, shall be subject to the requirements of this Section. 
(b)  Scope of design review. 
(1)  The provisions of this Section shall supplement the regulations applicable in the base zoning district covering lands also mapped within the TTDO District and those regulations generally applicable within all zoning districts, including, but not limited to, the design review provisions in Section 62-310. 
(2)  The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new construction, any total redevelopment of an existing developed site, and any additions that result in a total expansion of at least 50 percent in building floor area, or 25 percent in outdoor storage area or parking lot area, over that existing as of October 24, 2005. When such an addition is proposed, the entire site and all improvements thereon shall comply with the provisions of this Section, to the extent determined practical by the Plan Commission, given existing site and building conditions. 
(3)  The provisions of this Section shall apply only to development projects requiring site/design review under Section 62-310(c)(1), as well as any project within a Planned Unit Development District. This Section shall not apply to single-family and two-family residences; however, additions and alterations to such a residence may first require a variance if the residence is a nonconforming use or structure under the base zoning district in which the residence is located. 
(c)  Design standards. 
(1)  In the preparation of site and related plans required for design review under Section 62-310, all projects to which this Section is made applicable under Subsection (b) of this Section shall be required to meet the design guidelines within the Terminal and Triangle District Neighborhood Plan, as from time to time amended, unless the Plan Commission waives compliance under the provisions of Subsection (c)(3) of this Section. 
(2)  To the extent that the design guidelines included within the Terminal and Triangle District Neighborhood Plan shall control. This provision does not apply to land use types, which shall be controlled by the permitted and conditional use lists in this Chapter. 
(3)  The Plan Commission may waive or alter any of the design guidelines in the Terminal and Triangle District Neighborhood Plan as they apply to a particular development project, but only if all of the following criteria are met: 
a.  Such a waiver or alteration is approved by at least a three-quarters vote of Commissioners in attendance. 
b.  The waiver or alteration may be attributed to unique characteristics of the project or site rather than general characteristics applicable across various projects or the district. 
c.  Supplemental design elements or improvements are incorporated into the project that compensate for the waiver or alteration of the particular guideline. 
d.  The design guideline is not also an ordinance requirement included in this Chapter, in which case a variance would also be required under Section 62-366. 
(d)  Design review process. The design review process for projects within the TTDO District shall be generally similar to that required for design review throughout the Village, as described in Section 62-310(e). Prior to Plan Commission design review, the Zoning Administrator may require that the petitioner submit a concept plan for review and advice from the Community Development Authority, Village Board, or both, particularly when the project may involve public financial participation. Any such concept plan submittal shall, at a minimum, include conceptual architectural elevations and a conceptual site/landscape plan, drawn to sufficient detail to determine the general character and quality of the project. 
(e)  Appeals. Any action of the Plan Commission in granting or denying approval of site/design review within the Terminal and Triangle Design Overlay Zoning District may be appealed to the Village Board, if a written request for an appeal is filed within ten working days after the date of the Plan Commission action. 
(Ord. No. 2005-17, § 1(13-1-52), 10-24-2005)  
Secs. 62-74—62-104. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Conditional Uses 
 
Sec. 62-105. - Statement of purpose; conditional uses; definitions. 
(a)  The development and execution of this Article is based upon the division of the Village into districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings, and bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land, are mutually compatible and substantially uniform. However, there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as unrestricted permitted uses in any particular district, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land or public facilities, and of the public need for the particular use of a particular location. Such uses, nevertheless, may be necessary or desirable to be allowed in a particular district, provided that due consideration is given to location, development and operation of such uses. Such uses are classified as conditional uses. 
(b)  As used in this Subdivision, the term "substantial evidence" means facts and information, other than merely personal preferences or speculation, directly pertaining to the requirements and conditions an applicant must meet to obtain a conditional use permit and that reasonable persons would accept in support of a conclusion. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-60; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-60), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-106. - Authority of the plan commission; requirements. 
(a)  The Plan Commission may authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue a conditional use permit for either regular or limited conditional use after review and public hearing, provided that such conditional use and involved structures are found to be in accordance with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Code and are further found to be not hazardous, harmful, offensive or otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of the neighborhood or the community. In the instance of the granting of a limited conditional use, the Plan Commission in its findings shall further specify the delimiting reasons or factors which resulted in issuing limited rather than regular conditional use. Such Plan Commission resolution, and the resulting conditional use permit, when, for limited conditional use, shall specify the period of time for which effective, if specified, the name of the permittee, the location and legal description of the affected premises. Prior to the granting of a conditional use, the Plan Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented that the standards herein prescribed are being complied with. The Plan Commission's findings and decision to approve or deny a conditional use permit must be supported by substantial evidence. 
(b)  Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operation control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access restrictions, increased yards or parking requirements may be required by the Plan Commission upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this Chapter. 
(c)  Compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic, highway access and performance standards shall be required of all conditional uses. No conditional use permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a detailed written description and proof that all of the standards set forth in Sec. 62-111 shall be met, to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-61; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-61), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-107. - Initiation of conditional use; burden. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or organization having a freehold interest or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest that may become a freehold interest, or an exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable in the land for which a conditional use is sought may file an application to use such land for one or more of the conditional uses in the zoning district in which such land is located. 
(b)  An applicant for a conditional use permit must demonstrate and prove, by substantial evidence, that the application and all requirements and conditions established by the Village relating to the conditional use are or shall be satisfied. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-62; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-62), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-108. - Application for conditional use. 
(a)  Required application materials. An application for a conditional use shall be filed in duplicate on a form prescribed by the Village. Such applications shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission on receipt by the Zoning Administrator. Such applications shall include where applicable: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer, contractor and all property owners of record within 100 feet. 
(2)  Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded Subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees and the zoning district within which the subject site lies. 
(3)  Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing all of the information required for a building permit and existing and proposed landscaping. 
(4)  Additional information as may be required by the Plan Commission or other authorities, boards, commissions or officers of the Village. The Plan Commission may require such other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for an enforcement of this Chapter, including a plan showing contours and soil types; high-water mark and groundwater conditions; bedrock, vegetative cover, specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading, and lagooning; location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, open spaces and landscaping; plans of buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems and arrangements of operations. 
(5)  A detailed written description and proof meeting the substantial evidence standard showing each of the standards set forth in Section 62-111 (a) through (h) will be satisfied, including a detailed description of how each said standard is met, and how the proposed use will comply with any applicable regulations regarding light, noise, traffic, nuisance, health, safety, welfare and environment. When any applicable law, ordinance or other regulation prohibits a certain measurable level of any activity or substance, including, but not limited to, noise, light, dust, particulate emissions, odor, visibility, pollution, and vibration and frequency levels, the applicant shall also demonstrate and prove how the proposed use will comply with such regulations. 
(6)  Upon request by the Village Board, Plan Commission or Zoning Administrator, the applicant shall provide reports and studies, prepared by a qualified professional, addressing any applicable standard. The applicant is solely responsible for the cost of such reports and studies. A qualified professional is one with appropriate education, experience, license and/or certification pertinent to the applicable standard, and the professional's qualifications should be provided with the report or study (e.g. a curriculum vitae or resume). 
(7)  The fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code for application for a conditional use. The applicant shall also pay all costs incurred by the Village in notifying the public and property owners pursuant to Section 62-110. 
(b)  Plans. In order to secure information upon which to base its determination, the Plan Commission may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a building permit, the following information: 
(1)  A plan of the area showing contours, soil types, high-water mark, groundwater conditions, bedrock, slope and vegetation cover; 
(2)  Location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, open spaces, landscaping, lighting; 
(3)  Plans for buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems and arrangements of operations; 
(4)  Specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading, lagooning or dredging; 
(5)  Other pertinent information necessary to determine if the proposed use meets the requirements of this Chapter. 
(c)  Third party consultants. If necessary expertise is not available from staff or other appropriate governmental agency, the Village Board, Plan Commission or Zoning Administrator may consult with a third-party consultant to effectively evaluate the application. The Zoning Administrator will select the consultant. The applicant is solely responsible for all reasonable costs and expenses associated with such consultation. Applicants retain the right to withdraw an application if they choose not to pay consultant fees. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-63; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-63), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-13-2006; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-109. - Hearing on application. 
All requests for conditional uses shall be to the Plan Commission or the Plan Commission can, on its own motion, apply conditional uses when applications for rezoning come before it. Upon receipt of the complete application and statement referred to in Section 62-108, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a conditional use at such time and place as shall be established by the Plan Commission. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of the proceedings shall be preserved in such a manner and according to such procedures as the Plan Commission shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time. The Plan Commission may inform the applicant and members of the public attending the hearing of the substantial evidence standard and that statements and information will be considered subject to that standard. This may include examples that speculative opinions not based on reliable evidence or knowledge do not meet the evidentiary standard (such as a potential loss in value of a neighboring property based on pure speculation and not an appraisal, market analysis or other reliable information). 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-64; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-64), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-110. - Notice of hearing on application. 
Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication of a class 2 notice under the Wisconsin Statutes in the official Village newspaper. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such public hearing shall also be sent to the applicant, the Zoning Administrator, members of the Village Board and Plan Commission, and the owners of record as listed in the office of the Village Assessor who are owners of property in whole or in part situated within 100 feet of the boundaries of the properties affected, said notice to be sent at least five days prior to the date of such public hearing. Failure to comply with this provision shall not, however, invalidate any previous or subsequent action on the application. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-65; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-65), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-111. - Standards; conditional uses. 
No application for a conditional use shall be approved by the Plan Commission or appeal granted by the Village Board unless the Plan Commission and Village Board shall find that the following conditions are present: 
(a)  That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare. 
(b)  That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use and the proposed use is compatible with the use of adjacent land. 
(c)  That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district. 
(d)  That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been or are being provided. 
(e)  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. 
(f)  That the conditional use shall, except for yard requirements, conform to all applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(g)  That the proposed use does not violate floodplain regulations governing the site. 
(h)  That the proposed use will not violate any applicable regulation in the McFarland Municipal Code or any other applicable law or regulation. 
(i)  That, when applying the standards to any new construction of a building or an addition to an existing building, the Plan Commission and Board shall bear in mind the statement of purpose for the zoning district such that the proposed building or addition at its location does not defeat the purposes and objective of the zoning district. 
(j)  That, in addition to passing upon a conditional use permit, the Plan Commission and Village Board shall also evaluate the effect of the proposed use upon: 
(1)  The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions. 
(2)  The prevention and control of water pollution including sedimentation. 
(3)  Existing topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover on the site. 
(4)  The location of the site with respect to floodplains and floodways of rivers and streams. 
(5)  The erosion potential of the site based upon degree and direction of slope, soil type and vegetative cover. 
(6)  The location of the site with respect to existing or future access roads. 
(7)  The need of the proposed use for a shoreland location. 
(8)  Its compatibility with uses on adjacent land. 
(9)  The amount of liquid wastes to be generated and the adequacy of the proposed disposal systems. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-66; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-66), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-112. - Denial of application for conditional use permit. 
When a decision of denial of a conditional use application is made, the Plan Commission shall furnish the applicant, in writing when so requested, those standards that are not met and enumerate reasons the Plan Commission has used in determining that each standard was not met. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-67; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-67), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-113. - Appeals. 
Any action of the Plan Commission in granting or denying a conditional use permit may be appealed to the Village Board, if a written request for an appeal is filed within ten days after the date of the Plan Commission's action in granting or denying the permit. Such request for appeal shall be signed by the applicant or by the owners of at least 20 percent of the land area immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land. The request shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator who shall submit it to the Village Board at its next meeting, together with any documents and other data used by the Plan Commission in reaching its decision. The Village Board may consider the matter forthwith, refer the matter to a subsequent meeting or set a date for a public hearing thereon. In the event the Village Board elects to hold a public hearing, notice thereof shall be given by mail to the known owners of the lands immediately adjacent thereto and directly opposite any street frontage of the lot or parcel in question and by publication of a class 1 notice in the official newspaper at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The Village Board may either affirm or reverse in whole or in part the action of the Plan Commission and may finally grant or deny the application for a conditional use permit. The Village Board's decision to approve or deny the conditional use permit must be supported by substantial evidence. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-68; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-68), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-114. - Conditions and guarantees. 
The following provisions shall apply to all conditional uses: 
(a)  Conditions. Prior to the granting of any conditional use, the Plan Commission, or the Village Board on appeal, may stipulate or impose such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as deemed necessary to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Section 62-111. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the Plan Commission or Village Board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated or imposed in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration: 
(1)  Landscaping; 
(2)  Type of construction; 
(3)  Construction commencement and completion dates; 
(4)  Sureties; 
(5)  Lighting; 
(6)  Fencing; 
(7)  Operational control; 
(8)  Hours of operation; 
(9)  Traffic circulation; 
(10)  Deed restrictions; 
(11)  Access restrictions; 
(12)  Setbacks and yards; 
(13)  Type of shore cover; 
(14)  Specified sewage disposal and water supply systems; 
(15)  Planting screens; 
(16)  Piers and docks; 
(17)  Increased parking; or 
(18)  Any other requirements necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this Chapter. 
(b)  Site review. In making its decision, the Plan Commission shall evaluate each application and may request assistance from any source which can provide technical assistance. The Plan Commission may review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems and the proposed operation/use. 
(c)  Alteration of conditional use. No alteration of a conditional use shall be permitted unless approved by the Plan Commission. 
(d)  Architectural treatment. Proposed architectural treatment will be in general harmony with surrounding uses and the landscape. To this end, the Plan Commission may require the use of certain general types of exterior construction materials and/or architectural treatment. 
(e)  Sloped sites; unsuitable soils. Where slopes exceed six percent and/or where a use is proposed to be located on areas indicated as having soils that are unsuitable or marginal for development, on-site soil tests and/or construction plans shall be provided which clearly indicate that the soil conditions are adequate to accommodate the development contemplated and/or that any inherent soil condition or slope problems will be overcome by special construction techniques. Such special construction might include, among other techniques, terracing, retaining walls, oversized foundations and footings, drain tile, etc. 
(f)  Conditional uses to comply with other requirements. Conditional uses shall comply with all other provisions of the McFarland Municipal Code such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking and loading. No conditional use permit shall be granted where the proposed use is deemed to be inconsistent or conflicting with neighboring uses for reasons of smoke, dust, odors, noise, vibration, lighting, health hazards or possibly of accident. 
(g)  Provisions applicable to all conditional uses. In addition to any conditions imposed under sub. (a), supra., the following conditions apply to all conditional use permits: 
(1)  No building or use may violate any other provision set forth in the McFarland Municipal Code, or any other applicable law or regulation. 
(2)  No building or use is permitted unless all necessary permits, licenses and approvals are obtained from the applicable regulatory authority, including, but not limited to, approvals by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation for ingress and egress to the property, and permits issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources related to air, water, and other environmental regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-69; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-69), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-115. - Validity of conditional use permit. 
Where the Plan Commission has approved or conditionally approved an application for a conditional use, such approval shall become null and void within 12 months of the date of the Plan Commission's action unless the use is commenced, construction is underway or the current owner possesses a valid building permit under which construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance and which shall not be renewed unless construction has commenced and is being diligently prosecuted. Approximately 45 days prior to the automatic revocation of such permit, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the holder by certified mail of such revocation. Extensions of up to one year each may be granted by the Plan Commission for just cause, if application is made to the Village at least 30 days before the expiration of said permit. Conditional use permits shall also expire if the use is abandoned or terminated for a period of 12 months. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-70; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-70), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-116. - Complaints regarding conditional uses. 
The Plan Commission shall retain continuing jurisdiction over all conditional uses for the purpose of resolving complaints against all previously approved conditional uses. Such authority shall be in addition to the enforcement authority of the Zoning Administrator to order the removal or discontinuance of any unauthorized alterations of an approved conditional use, and the elimination, removal or discontinuance of any violation of a condition imposed prior to or after approval or violation of any other provision of this Code. Upon written complaint by any citizen or official, the Plan Commission shall initially determine whether said complaint indicates a reasonable probability that the subject conditional use is in violation of either one or more of the standards set forth in Section 62-111, a condition of approval or other requirement imposed hereunder. Upon reaching a positive initial determination, a hearing shall be held upon notice as provided in Section 62-110. Any person may appear at such hearing and testify in person or represented by an agent or attorney. The Plan Commission may, in order to bring the subject conditional use into compliance with the standards set forth in Section 62-111 or conditions previously imposed by the Plan Commission, modifying existing conditions upon such use and impose additional reasonable conditions upon the subject conditional use. Additionally, the offending party may be subjected to a forfeiture as set forth in this Chapter and Section 1-16. In the event that no reasonable modification of such conditional use can be made in order to assure that Section 62-111 will be met, the Plan Commission may revoke the subject conditional approval and direct the Zoning Administrator and the Village Attorney to seek elimination of the subject use. Following any such hearing, the decision of the Plan Commission shall be furnished to the current owner of the conditional use in writing stating the reasons therefor. An appeal from a decision of the Plan Commission under this Section may be taken to the Village Board. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-71; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-71), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2019-08 , § 1, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 62-117. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Agent. The person designated by the owner as the person in charge of such establishment and whose identity shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator upon issuance of the permit and updated five days prior to a designated agent taking charge. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast establishment. Has the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. § 254.61(1). 
(b)  As conditional use. Bed and breakfast establishments shall be considered conditional uses and may be permitted pursuant to the requirements of this Article. 
(c)  Regulations. 
(1)  Compliance with state standards. All bed and breakfast establishments and licensees shall be subject to and comply with Wis. Admin. Code Ch. HFS 197, relating to bed and breakfast establishments or Wis. Admin. Code HFS Ch. 195 relating to hotels, motels and tourist roominghouses. 
(2)  Registry. Each bed and breakfast establishment shall provide a register and require all guests to register their true names and addresses before assigned quarters. The register shall be kept intact and available for inspection by a Village representative for a period of not less than one year. 
(d)  Permit required. 
(1)  Village permit required. In addition to the permit required by Wis. Admin. Code Chs. HFS 195 or HFS 197, before opening for business every bed and breakfast establishment shall obtain a permit from the Building Inspector by application made upon a form furnished by said officer and shall obtain a conditional use permit. 
(2)  Application requirements. The following is required to be furnished at the time an application is filed for a conditional use permit in addition to the other application requirements of this Article: 
a.  Site plan showing location and size of buildings, parking areas and signs. 
b.  Number, surfacing and size of parking stalls. 
c.  Number, size and lighting of signs. 
d.  The application fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(3)  Display of permit. The permit issued by the Building Inspector shall be conspicuously displayed in the bed and breakfast establishment. 
(e)  Off-street parking required. See Section 62-172(j) for number of improved required off-street parking spaces. Establishments otherwise qualifying under this Section regulating bed and breakfast establishments shall not be subject to the other requirements of the Zoning Code with respect to traffic and access. 
(f)  On-site signs. Total signage shall be limited to a total of 12 square feet and may be lighted in such manner and nature as to not alter or deteriorate the nature of the surrounding neighborhood. Establishments otherwise qualifying under this Section regulating bed and breakfast establishments shall not be subject to the requirements of this Zoning Code with respect to signs. 
(g)  Termination of permit. A bed and breakfast use permit shall be void upon the sale or transfer of the property ownership. The Plan Commission shall review and conditionally approve or disapprove an application submitted by a person anticipating the purchase of premises for such use. A permit issued in accordance with Subsection (c) of this Section shall be valid until terminated by action of the Building Inspector for violation of the provisions of this Section, or of state regulations as set forth in Wis. Admin. Code Chs. HFS 195 or 197, or as provided in this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-72; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-72), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-118—62-147. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses 
 
Sec. 62-148. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of this Subdivision is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses which adversely affect the maintenance, development, use or taxable value of other property in the district in which they are located shall be permitted to continue or shall be discontinued. This Zoning Code establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of those districts and those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses which substantially and adversely affect the orderly development and taxable value of other property in the district be discontinued or reduced to conformity as soon as the fair interests of the parties will permit or be permitted to continue with certain restrictions. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-80; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-80), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-149. - Authority to continue nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. 
Any nonconforming building, structure or use that existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived and which remains nonconforming and any such building, structure or use which shall become nonconforming upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived, or of any subsequent amendments thereto, may be continued, some for specified periods of time, subject to the regulations which follow. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-81; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-81), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-150. - Continuing existing nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. 
Any lawfully existing building, structure or use which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located may be continued subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Relocation of building or structure. A building or structure may be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the same or any other lot only after approval therefor shall have been granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals and further provided the following: 
(1)  That such building or structure is designated or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is to be located. 
(2)  That such relocated building or structure and its use shall be made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is to be located. 
(3)  That such relocated building or structure shall be in harmony with the general character of existing buildings or structures within the immediate neighborhood. 
(b)  Repairs and alterations. 
(1)  Building or structure designed or intended for a nonconforming use. Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, provided that no structural alterations shall be made in or to such building or structure except those required by law or except to make the building or structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. For the purpose of this Subsection (b), ordinary repairs shall include normal maintenance of a building or structure, and the replacement of storage tanks where safety of operation of the installation requires such replacement, and other replacements of, or substitutions for, machinery or equipment not involving structural alterations to the buildings or structure, except as provided in this Subsection. 
(2)  Building or structure designed or intended for a permitted use. Ordinary repairs and alterations, as well as structural alterations, may be made to a nonconforming building or structure that is nonconforming as to bulk, provided said ordinary repairs, alterations and structural alterations do not increase the nonconformity to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(c)  Additions and enlargements. A building whether designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, or nonconforming as to bulk, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such additions and enlargements thereto are made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located, and unless such building or structure, including all additions and enlargements thereto, shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Applicable regulations concerning the amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit and lodging room, as provided in the applicable district regulations. 
(2)  Applicable regulations concerning the amount of usable open space provided per lot, as provided in the applicable district regulations. 
(d)  Restoration of damaged building or structure. 
(1)  Building or structure designed or intended for a nonconforming use. A building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use that is not permitted in the district in which it is located, or otherwise fails to comply with any provision of this Code and which is deteriorated, destroyed or damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration to a usable and habitable condition shall exceed 50 percent of the property's full market value (inclusive of real estate and improvements value), shall not be restored unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event the cost of restoration to a usable and habitable condition is equal to or less than 50 percent of the property's full market value (inclusive of real estate and improvements value), repairs or reconstruction may be made only if such restoration is started within one year from the date of the occurrence and is diligently prosecuted to completion. 
(2)  Building or structure designed or intended for a permitted use. A building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use that is permitted in the district in which it is located, and which is deteriorated, destroyed or damaged may be restored, except as hereinafter provided. A nonconforming use shall not be restored or reestablished in such building or structure that is deteriorated, destroyed or damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration to a usable and habitable condition in which it was before the occurrence shall exceed 50 percent of the property's full market value (inclusive of real estate and improvements value). 
(3)  Restoration. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any structure nonconforming as to use, size, or location, may be restored to the size, location and use it had immediately prior to damage or destruction, or to a larger size if necessary to comply with applicable state or federal requirements, regardless of cost if all of the following apply: 
a.  The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or after March 1, 2006. 
b.  The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold or infestation. 
(e)  Expansion of nonconforming use. The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure, whether designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located or nonconforming as to bulk, shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building or structure. 
(f)  Nonconforming use of land. If any nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a continuous period of 90 days, it shall not thereafter be renewed; and any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the land is located. 
(g)  Elimination of nonconforming use. Any use of land that becomes a nonconforming use at the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived or which becomes a nonconforming use at any future date shall be discontinued and shall cease not more than three years after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived or after the date such use becomes a nonconforming use in each of the following instances: 
(1)  Where no buildings or structures are employed in connection with such nonconforming use. 
(2)  Where the only buildings or structures or other physical improvements employed are accessory or incidental to such nonconforming use. 
(3)  Where the improvements that comprise all or substantially all of the improvements employed with such nonconforming use are underground or substantially at ground level. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-82; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-82), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 8-14-2006)  
Secs. 62-151—62-168. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Vision Clearance, Parking and Loading Facilities, Screening 
 
Sec. 62-169. - Vision clearance. 
On a corner lot, no structure, screening or embankment of any kind shall be erected, placed, maintained or grown between the heights of three feet and ten feet above the curb level or its equivalent within the triangular space formed by two intersecting street lines or their projections and the line joining points on such street lines located a minimum of 25 feet from the street intersection in order to provide adequate vehicular vision clearance. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-100; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-100), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-170. - Off-street parking and loading facilities; statement of purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations on off-street parking is to provide for the regulation of accessory off-street parking and loading facilities and to specify the requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities for different uses. The regulations and requirements that follow are established to promote the safety and general welfare of the community by: 
(a)  Increasing the safety and capacity of public streets by requiring off-street parking or off-street loading facilities to be provided; 
(b)  Minimizing adverse effects of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities on adjacent properties through the requirement of design and maintenance standards; and 
(c)  Lessening congestion and preventing the overtaxing of public streets by regulating the location and capacity of accessory off-street parking or off-street loading facilities. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-101; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-101), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-171. - General regulation of off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(a)  Scope of off-street parking and loading regulations. The off-street parking and loading provisions of this Article shall apply as follows: 
(1)  For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Zoning Code is derived, accessory parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of the districts in which such building or uses are located. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived and provided that construction is begun within 90 days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading facilities in the amounts required for the issuance of said building permit may be provided in lieu of any different amounts required by this Chapter. 
(2)  When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein, parking or loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. 
(3)  Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereinafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Existing parking and loading facilities. Accessory off-street parking or loading facilities in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below or, if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(c)  Permissive parking and loading facilities. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of accessory off-street parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, provided that there is adherence to all regulations herein governing the location, capacity, design and operation of such facilities. 
(d)  Damage or destruction. For any conforming or legally nonconforming building or use which is in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived, which subsequently thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off-street parking or loading facilities need not be provided, except that off-street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation and shall comply with the provisions set forth in Section 62-172(h) and Section 62-173(e) hereinafter. However, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this Chapter for equivalent new uses or construction. 
(e)  Control of off-street parking facilities. In cases where parking facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served is located, such facilities shall be in the same possession as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking facilities are accessory. Such possession shall be by deed whereby the owner of the land on which the parking facilities are to be located shall be bound by a covenant filed and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Dane County, requiring such owner, heirs or assigns to maintain the required number of parking facilities for the duration of the use served. 
(f)  Submission of plot plan. Any application for a building permit or for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this Article and any additional information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-102; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-102), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-172. - Required off-street parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities accessory to uses allowed by this Chapter shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth below as well as in Section 62-171: 
(a)  Utilization. 
(1)  In the residence districts, required accessory off-street parking facilities provided for uses listed herein shall be solely for the parking of passenger automobiles of patrons, occupants or employees and not more than one truck limited to three-quarter ton capacity. 
(2)  In the special districts, required accessory off-street parking facilities provided for uses listed herein shall be solely for the parking of passenger automobiles or trucks not over 1½ ton capacity of patrons, occupants or employees of such uses. 
(b)  Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this Article results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space. 
(c)  Mixed uses. Where two or more uses are located on the same zoning lot or within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of the separate requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking spaces or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise authorized by the Plan Commission. 
(d)  Collective provision. Accessory off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively if the number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use and provided that all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to. 
(e)  Access. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space. 
(f)  Design standards. Each required off-street parking space shall have a stall width of at least eight feet and a stall length of at least 19 feet. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet. Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for one-way traffic shall be as follows: Aisles shall not be less than 24 feet wide for 90 degree parking, 18 feet wide for 60 degree parking, 15 feet wide for 45 degree parking (angle shall be measured between centerline of parking space and centerline of aisle), and 12 feet wide for parallel parking. For parallel parking the minimum length of the parking space shall be increased to 23 feet. No parking area of more than two spaces shall be designed as to require any vehicle to back into a public street. Those parking areas for three or more vehicles, if adjoining a residential use, shall be screened from such use by a solid wall, fence, evergreen planting of equivalent visual density, or other effective means, built and maintained at a minimum height of six to eight feet. Large expanses of unchanneled parking areas shall be avoided by interior landscaping and safety islands. 
(g)  Location. 
(1)  Location to be on the same lot as the principal use or not over 500 feet from the principal use. 
(2)  Off-street parking is permitted in all yards of all districts except in the front yards of single-family and multifamily residence districts, but shall not be closer than five feet to a side lot line or rear lot line. 
(h)  Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas, except a parking space accessory to a single-family dwelling, shall be improved with a bituminous or Portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with the Village of McFarland Standards and Specifications. Such parking areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water, and in no case shall drainage be allowed across sidewalks. Such parking areas shall also be so arranged and marked to provide for orderly and safe parking and storage of vehicles and shall be so improved with wheel stops or bumper guards to prevent encroachment into adjacent areas, lots or public ways. (See also Section 62-173(e) for additional requirements.) 
(i)  Landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Landscaping. All public and private off-street parking, off-street parking areas that serve five vehicles or more and are created or reconstructed subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived shall be provided with accessory landscape areas totaling not less than ten percent of the surfaced area. (See also "Village of McFarland Landscaping Standards.) 
(2)  Location. Location of landscape areas, plant materials, protection afforded the plantings, including curbing and provision for maintenance by the property owner, shall be subject to approval by the Plan Commission. 
(3)  Plans. All plans for such proposed parking areas shall include a grading plan which shows existing and proposed grades and location of improvements. The preservation of existing trees, shrubs, and other natural vegetation in the parking area may be included in the calculation of the required minimum landscape area. 
(4)  Screening. Where applicable, screening shall be provided as set forth in Section 62-174. 
(5)  Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in association with parking facilities provided in residence districts. 
(6)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties and public streets in such a way as not to create a nuisance. In no instance shall exterior lighting be oriented so that the lighting is visible from a property located within a residential zoning district, and in no case shall such lighting exceed 0.50 footcandles measured at the lot line. All lighting for business uses shall be extinguished or reduced in intensity not later than 30 minutes after the close of business of the use being served. 
(j)  Parking spaces required. (Advisory only for C-C District). 
(1)  Where seats are not fixed, each seven square feet of gross floor area usable for seating shall be regarded as one seat. 
(2)  Outdoor recreation and athletic fields preserves. Parking spaces shall be provided in adequate number as determined by the Zoning Administrator to serve visiting public and employees and persons residing on premises based on standard in this Chapter for similar uses. 
Bed-and-breakfast 	1 space/guest room 
Boardinghouses and dormitories 	1 space/3 rooming units plus 
	1 space/manager 
Bowling alleys 	5 spaces/alley plus 
	1 space per 300 sq. ft. used for bars, restaurants, etc. 
Cinemas 	1 space/6 seats up to 400 seats plus 
	1 space/4 seats over 400 seats 
Houses of worship and places of public assembly 	1 space/10 seats 
Clubs (service) 	30% of capacity 
Community centers 	30% of capacity 
Funeral homes 	8 spaces/chapel or parlor plus 
	1 space/funeral vehicle 
Hospitals 	1 space/2 beds plus 
	1 space/2 employees plus 
	1 space/doctor on staff 
Industrial 	1 space/1.3 employees 
Lodge (resort) 	1 space/1 rooms 
Laboratories 	1 space/2 employees plus 
	Spaces for 20% of capacity or 1 space/rental unit 
Medical and dental clinics 	1 space/300 sq. ft. per gross floor area 
Motels and hotels 	1 space/unit plus 
	1 space for manager 
(1) Nonschool auditoriums, gyms, stadiums 	1 space/8 seats 
Nursing homes and similar institutions 	1 space/4 beds plus 
	1 space/2 employees plus 
	1 space/doctor on staff 
Office, financial institutions, business, governmental and professional 	1 space/300 sq. ft. per gross floor area 
Residential: 	
  Elderly or efficiency 	1 space/dwelling unit 
  One bedroom 	2 spaces/dwelling unit 
  Two or more bedrooms 	2 spaces/dwelling unit 
  Three bedrooms 	2½ spaces/dwelling unit 
  Four bedrooms 	3 spaces/dwelling unit 
Retail and service stores: 	
  Animal hospitals and kennels 	1 space/300 sq. ft. per gross floor area 
  Auto sales 	1 space/300 sq. ft. per gross floor area 
Philanthropic and charitable uses 	1 space/2 employees plus 
	Adequate number to serve public 
	(as determined by Zoning Administrator) 
Car wash 	1 space/3 employees plus 
	1 space for manager plus 
	space equaling 5 times the capacity of the wash 
Cartage and express facilities 	1 space/vehicle operated plus 
	1 space/2 employees 
Laundries 	1 space/3 employees 
Library, museum 	1 space/800 gross sq. ft. 
(2) Pool hall, dance hall, pools, skating rinks, etc. 	Spaces equal to 30% of capacity in persons 
Printing and publishing 	1 space/3 employees 
Radio and TV stations 	1 space/300 sq. ft. per gross floor area 
Service stations 	1 space/each service by plus 
	1 space/2 employees plus 
	1 space for manager 
Taverns and restaurants 	Space equal to 30% of capacity in persons 
	Leasable area (gross floor area) plus 
	4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area 
	5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. in excess of 2,000 sq. ft. 
Not listed above: 	4 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area for centers 25,000 to 400,000 sq. ft. 
	4.5 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area for centers 400,000 to 600,000 sq. ft. 
	5 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area for shopping centers over 600,000 sq. ft. 
	3 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area for convenience grocery stores without gas pumps 
Schools: 	
  Elementary and middle 	1 space/2 employees 
  High school/college 	1 space/2 employees plus 
	30% of maximum enrollment capacity 
	1 space/5 students based on max. students attended during 24 hr. period 
Warehouses 	1 space/2 employees 
 
(1) Where seats are not fixed, each seven square feet of gross floor area usable for seating shall be regarded as one seat. 
(2) Athletic fields and outdoor recreation preserves. Parking spaces shall be provided in adequate number as determined by the Zoning Administrator to serve visiting public and employees and persons residing on premises based on standards in this Chapter for similar uses. 
For uses not listed in this schedule of parking requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required for the most similar listed use as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-103; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-103), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 5, 5-23-2011)  
Sec. 62-173. - Loading requirements. 
(a)  Loading space requirements. Unless exempted by the Plan Commission, on every lot on which a business, trade or industrial use is hereafter established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way: 
Use 	Floor Area 
(Square Feet) 	Loading Space 
Retail, wholesale, warehouse, service, 
manufacturing, and industrial 
establishments 	2,000—10,000 	1 
	10,000—20,000 	1 
	20,000—40,000 	2 
	40,000—60,000 	3 
	Each additional 50,000 	1 
Hotels, offices, hospitals, 
places of public assembly 	5,000—10,000 	1 
	10,000—50,000 	2 
	50,000—100,000 	2 
	Each additional 25,000 	1 
Funeral homes 	2,500—4,000 	1 
	4,000—6,000 	1 
	Each additional 10,000 	1 
 
(b)  Multiple or mixed uses. Where a building is devoted to more than one use or for different uses, and where the floor area for each use is below the minimum required for a loading space but the aggregate floor area of such uses is above such a minimum, then off-street loading space shall be provided as if the entire building were devoted to that use in the building for which the most loading spaces are required. 
(c)  Location. Required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot with the principal use requiring each space. No loading space shall be located within 25 feet of the nearest point of intersection of two streets or require any vehicle to back into a public street. 
(d)  Design standards. Each off-street loading space shall have a width of at least ten feet, a length of at least 50 feet, and a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. Dimensions for loading spaces in connection with funeral homes shall be reduced to ten feet in width, 25 feet in length, and eight feet in vertical clearance. All loading berths shall be completely screened from residential properties by building walls or a uniformly painted solid fence, wall, or door, or any combination thereof, not less than eight feet in height. 
(e)  Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths, access drives, aisles and maneuvering spaces shall be improved with a bituminous pavement or Portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with the Village Standard Specifications. 
(f)  Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any residence district. 
(g)  Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof. 
(h)  Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for loading berths on the individual zoning lots provided the following conditions are fulfilled: 
(1)  Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the central loading area without crossing streets or alleys at grade. 
(2)  Total berths provided shall meet the requirements based on the sum of the several types of uses served. (Areas of types of uses may be totaled before computing number of loading berths.) 
(3)  No zoning lot served shall be more than 300 feet removed from the central loading area. 
(4)  The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area with the zoning lot served shall not be less than seven feet in width and have a clearance of not less than seven feet. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-104; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-104), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-174. - Screening requirements. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. This Section is established to recognize the public and private benefits accrued from functional and aesthetic screening between areas of incompatible land uses, the increasing demand for active and passive recreational areas, the desirability of providing visual screening of certain parking lot, commercial and manufacturing areas and the necessity of providing adequate vehicular vision clearance. Refer to the Village Landscaping Guidelines. 
(b)  Off-street parking and loading areas. All open off-street parking areas containing more than five spaces and all open off-street loading areas shall have effective screening on each side adjoining or fronting on any residence district or any public or private street. 
(c)  District boundary lines. Any property located in a commercial or manufacturing district shall have effective screening along lot lines adjoining any residential district, and such screening shall be not less than six feet in height. All screening shall also comply with the Village Landscaping Guidelines. 
(d)  Minimum and maximum height of screening. Refer to Sections 59-25(c) and 62-169. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-106; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-106), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-175. - Storage of semitractors, semitrailers, dump trucks and road machinery. 
(a)  In residential districts, refer to Section 62-70. 
(b)  In commercial districts, refer to Section 62-71. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-107; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-107), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-176. - Permitted parking or storage of recreational vehicles, including boats and boat trailers. 
Refer to Section 8-555. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-108; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-108), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-177—62-205. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Signal Receiving Antennas, Wind Energy Systems[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Regulations regarding wind energy systems, Wis. Stats. § 66.0401. 
 
Sec. 62-206. - Telecommunications facilities and antennas. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Section shall be to: 
(1)  Provide uniform regulation of all signal receiving antenna devices; 
(2)  Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to residents and businesses within the corporate boundaries of the Village of McFarland; 
(3)  To protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, public and private property, community aesthetics and to minimize the impact on the natural environment including hazards to migratory birds; 
(4)  To minimize the visual impacts of towers, antennas and associated buildings through design and siting requirements; 
(5)  Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the number of visible towers needed to serve the community; and 
(6)  Avoid damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural standards and setback requirements. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Antenna. Any transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building, or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, radar signals, wireless telecommunications signals, including but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas. 
(2)  Available site. Any existing telecommunications facility which has fewer current users than it was designed or intended to accommodate. 
(3)  Co-location. The mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing tower, building or structure for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes and, if mounted or installed on a tower, does not result in a substantial increase in the size of the tower. 
(4)  Commercial. Relating to or for the purpose of engaging in commerce or business activity. 
(5)  Concealed site. Any site in which a tower and antenna are completely hidden from view, such as a church steeple, a building cupola, or other structure. 
(6)  Equipment building, shelter, or cabinet. A cabinet or building used by telecommunication providers to house equipment at a facility. 
(7)  Guyed tower. A tower that is supported in whole or in part by wires or cables and ground anchors. 
(8)  Height of an antenna or tower. The height of a communication antenna or tower is determined as the distance from ground level to the highest point on the tower, including the antenna and lightning rod. 
(9)  Monopole. A tower consisting of a single pole constructed without guy wires and anchors. 
(10)  Substantial increase in size of the tower. In the context of co-location means: 
a.  The mounting of the proposed antenna on a tower, would increase the existing height of the tower by more than ten percent, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater, except this limit may be exceeded and not be considered a substantial increase in the size of the tower if the exceedence is necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or 
b.  The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four, or more than one new equipment shelter; or 
c.  The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, except that the mounting or installation may be exceeded and not be considered a substantial increase in the size of the tower if necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable; or 
d.  The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve excavation outside the current tower site, defined as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site. 
(11)  Telecommunication facility. Any plant or equipment used to carry wireless telecommunications services by radio signal or other electromagnetic waves or optical signals, including towers, antennas, equipment buildings, parking areas, and other accessory development. 
(12)  Telecommunication site. A parcel of land or any building which contains, houses, or supports an antenna, tower, or facility used for telecommunications. 
(13)  Tower. A mast pole, spire, monopole, guyed communication tower, lattice tower, free-standing tower, other structure, or combination thereof, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, designed and primarily used to support antennas above grade. 
(14)  Unused telecommunication facilities. Telecommunication facilities corresponding with a tower which has not carried a telecommunications signal for a period of 90 days. 
(15)  Village-owned site. Any property owned by the Village of McFarland which the Plan Commission has designated as a potential telecommunications site. 
(16)  Wireless telecommunication service provider. Licensed wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public or used within a private system. 
(c)  Existing antennas and towers. All telecommunication facilities approved after March 28, 2011, shall conform to this Section. Telecommunications facilities in existence as of March 28, 2011, which do not conform to or comply with this Section, are subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Telecommunications facilities may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now existing but may not be replaced or materially altered without complying in all respects with this Chapter. 
(2)  If such telecommunications facilities are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, the tower and corresponding telecommunications facilities may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building and zoning permit therefore without otherwise complying with this Section, provided, however, that such repair is fully completed within 12 months of the date of damage. However, if the cost of repairing the tower to its former use, physical dimensions, and location would exceed 50 percent of the cost of a new tower of like kind and quality, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this Section. 
(3)  An additional equipment building or cabinet may be approved at an existing site if additional antennas can be accommodated on the tower. Such buildings or cabinets will be subject to Site/Design review, and will require the approval of the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission may require design alterations, landscaping improvements, and other improvements as conditions of approval. 
(4)  If an applicant desires to reestablish an unused telecommunication antenna, or establish an antenna not previously permitted on an existing tower with at least one user, Subsection (c)(3) shall apply. 
(d)  Minor alterations. Replacement of previously approved antennas affixed to an existing telecommunications facility or repairs to an existing telecommunications facility not subject to Subsection (c) shall be considered a minor alteration to an existing telecommunications facilities permit. Such a minor alteration may be approved by the Building Inspector. If the Building Inspector does not approve the alteration, or does not approve the alteration within 30 days of filing an application, the applicant may apply to the Plan Commission in accordance with the telecommunications facilities permit standards contained herein. If such replacement is not fully accomplished within one year of the date of damage then the antenna shall be treated as a new antenna. 
(e)  Exempt facilities. The following facilities shall be exempt from this Section. 
(1)  Non-commercial telecommunications facilities designed for reception of television and reception of radio signals which are less than 40 feet in height if free-standing, and less than eight feet in height if roof-mounted. 
(2)  Non-commercial telecommunications facilities designed for the reception and transmission of radio signals which are used for amateur radio purposes, provided they comply with the following: 
a.  The tower, if any, is used by a federally licensed amateur radio operator. 
b.  The tower, if any, is installed, erected, maintained, and/or operated within a residential zoning district. 
c.  The height of the tower, if any, is less than 50 feet in height if free-standing, and 15 feet in height if roof-mounted. A free-standing tower in excess of 50 feet in height or a roof-mounted antenna in excess of 15 feet in height shall require a conditional use permit. 
d.  The antenna use involved is accessory to the primary use of the property, which is not a telecommunications facility. 
e.  The use of more than one support structure on any parcel shall require a conditional use permit. 
f.  Sufficient anti-climbing measures have been incorporated into the structure, as needed, to reduce the potential for trespass and injury. 
g.  The tower, if any, shall not be located in the front yard. 
h.  The tower, if any, shall not infringe upon the requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
i.  The installation and use of every private antenna shall be in conformity with the Federal Communications Commission's Regulations. 
(3)  Publicly owned and operated telecommunications facilities required in the public interest to provide and maintain a radio frequency telecommunication system, including digital, analog, wireless or electromagnetic waves, for police, fire and other municipal services. 
(4)  Temporary telecommunications facilities including portable facilities erected to maintain communications services in emergency situations after a declaration of emergency or disaster applicable to the Village of McFarland issued by the President of the United States, Governor, or Emergency Management Director. Such exemption shall not exceed a period of 90 days or the duration of the emergency or disaster declaration whichever is longer. Such facilities may be subject to such other reasonable rules, regulations and orders necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(f)  Co-location required. No proposal for the construction of a new telecommunications tower shall be approved unless the applicant documents to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission that the antenna planned for the proposed tower cannot be: 
(1)  Reasonably accommodated on a Village-owned water tower. 
(2)  Located on other Village-owned sites which the Village is willing to make available for mounting or installing the antenna. 
(3)  Located on an existing tower, building or structure. Before the Plan Commission may conclude the antenna cannot be located on an existing tower, building or structure, it must find one or more of the following circumstances exist: 
a.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of all existing or approved towers or buildings, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced or modified to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment. Cost may not be the sole basis of a finding of the existence of this circumstance. 
b.  The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at all available towers or buildings as documented by a qualified professional and the interference cannot be prevented. Cost may not be the sole basis of a finding of the existence of this circumstance. 
c.  Existing or approved towers and buildings within an area where an antenna is necessary to fill a gap in service of the telecommunications provider cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a professional engineer. 
d.  All reasonable efforts have been undertaken prior to application to obtain approval to collocate on an existing or approved tower or building. 
e.  Other reasons that make it impractical to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building. 
(g)  Conditional use permit and site/design plan. Telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be allowed in all zoning districts upon approval by the Plan Commission of a conditional use permit and site/design plan. 
(1)  Application. Application for a conditional use permit and site/design plan shall incorporate the design submittal requirements identified under Subsections (j) and (k) and be submitted to the Community Development Director for review by the Plan Commission. 
(2)  Determination of completeness. Before submitting the application to the Plan Commission, the Community Development Director shall review the application and determine whether the application is complete and shall notify the applicant within 30 days of submittal if the application is deemed incomplete. 
(3)  Time for review. Unless an extension of time is granted by the applicant, the Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove the application within 90 days for all co-location applications or 150 days for all other applications. The review period set forth herein is imposed solely for purposes of complying with FCC rulings relating to the reasonableness of time for review and failure to take final action as provided herein shall not be deemed an automatic approval or to deprive the Plan Commission of jurisdiction to act. 
(4)  Denial of application. If the application is denied, the Plan Commission shall provide, at the time of denial a written decision containing a detailed explanation of the reasons for denial. All such reasons shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record separate from the written decision. 
(5)  Co-location. A condition of all conditional use permits for new towers shall be the requirement that whenever co-location is physically possible, other users shall not be unreasonably refused permission to collocate on the tower. Such permission may be subject to a written agreement under commercially reasonable terms and conditions consistent with prevalent industry standards. 
(h)  Tower and antenna design standards. Proposed or modified towers and antennas not subject to Subsections (c) (d), or (e) shall meet the following design requirements: 
(1)  Any proposed new telecommunications facility shall be designed to accommodate at least four users. However, concealed sites may be permitted to accommodate a single user of if the Plan Commission approves. 
(2)  Any new proposed tower shall have an accessory equipment building to house all necessary equipment. Such accessory equipment building shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall be no closer than 30 feet to an adjacent property line. Any back-up generators shall comply with all applicable noise and sound regulations and may be required by the Plan Commission to incorporate additional noise abatement measures. 
(3)  New towers shall be of a monopole design unless the Plan Commission determines that an alternative design is preferred in cases where structural or design considerations, neighborhood compatibility, location availability, or the number of potential co-locations warrants this consideration. 
(4)  In all residential districts, towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and design, except in instances where color is dictated by federal or state authorities. 
(5)  In all residential districts, the minimum setback from any property line, public right-of-way, building or structure, except for accessory equipment building for a wireless telecommunication tower, shall be equal to 100 percent of the height of the tower plus ten feet from any lot line. Setbacks for new proposed telecommunication towers in all commercial, manufacturing, and agricultural zoning districts shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, using safety and welfare considerations. 
(6)  No part of any telecommunication antenna or tower, equipment, guyed wires, or braces shall at any time extend across or over any part of the public right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or recreational trail. 
(7)  Setbacks shall be measured between the base of the tower located nearest the property line and the actual property line. Accessory equipment shall be measured in a manner commonly used by the Village's Building Inspector. 
(8)  A tower's setback, as required by this Chapter, may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied at the discretion of the Plan Commission to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, building cupola, silo, light standard, power line support device, or similar structure. 
(9)  Towers designed to accommodate five or less users shall not exceed 150 feet in height. Towers designed to accommodate six or more users or antennas shall not exceed 200 feet in height. In no case shall there be more than four accessory equipment buildings per telecommunication site. 
(10)  Towers shall be constructed out of metal or other non-flammable material, unless specifically permitted by the Plan Commission to be otherwise. 
(11)  Telecommunications facilities shall ensure that sufficient anti-climbing measures have been incorporated into the facility to reduce the potential for trespass and injury. 
(12)  When deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission, safety fencing shall be incorporated within the site accommodating the tower and its accessory equipment buildings. 
(13)  When deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission, proper landscaping and screening shall be incorporated into the site. 
(14)  No signs or advertising shall be affixed to the antenna or tower structure. 
(15)  No lights, reflectors, flashers, daytime strobes, steady nighttime light or other illuminating devices, other than those as may be required by the Federal Aviation Administration, shall be affixed or attached to the tower or antennas. 
(16)  Every telecommunication facility shall be designed and constructed so as to comply with the requirements of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters COMM60 through COMM66 as amended from time to time. 
(i)  Submittal requirements. In addition to information required elsewhere in this Code, applications for a conditional use permit for telecommunications facilities and antennas shall include a site/design plan with the following information: 
(1)  Title block that indicates name and address of the current property owner. 
(2)  North arrow and graphic scale. Said scale shall not be smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. 
(3)  Date of original plan and latest date of revised plan. 
(4)  Signature of a qualified and Wisconsin-licensed engineer. 
(5)  Identify all property lines, easements and existing and proposed right-of-way lines with bearings and dimensions clearly labeled. 
(6)  All existing and proposed building structures and paved areas including walks, drives, fences, utility poles, drainage facilities and walls. 
(7)  For new towers identify tower setbacks and height, including a cross-section and elevation. 
(8)  For new towers, the tower's capacity as to type and number of antennas it can accommodate. 
(9)  Exterior elevations and floor plans with dimensions of all equipment buildings. 
(10)  For new towers, a stormwater management plan. 
(11)  A landscaping plan for the proposed site. 
(12)  For new towers description of the area affected in the event of a tower failure or collapse. 
(13)  Other information necessary to evaluate the conditional use application. 
(j)  Building permit. Before issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental information shall be submitted. 
(1)  Affirmation that the proposed tower will comply with any applicable regulations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(2)  A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which demonstrates the tower's compliance with the aforementioned structural, electrical, and radio frequency standards. 
(3)  A performance bond guaranteeing to the Village of McFarland the full cost, at the time of removal, to remove the tower, its accessory buildings, generators, and all other infrastructure if the owner of the site is financially unable to remove the tower and associated facilities. 
(4)  Three sets of plans approved by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce, Safety and Buildings Division for any proposed new tower. 
(k)  Inspection. The Village may, at any time, inspect any telecommunications tower, antenna or other facility to ensure their structural integrity. If, upon such inspection, the Village determines that the facility fails to comply with such applicable codes, and that such failure constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the facility into compliance with the applicable codes and standards. Failure to bring the facility into compliance with the said 30 days shall constitute cause for the removal of the facility at the owner's expense. 
(l)  Non-interference. All new or existing telecommunications services shall comply with all relevant Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation Administration standards and shall not interfere with public safety and other Village and private telecommunications operations. 
(m)  Insurance. The applicant shall provide the Village with proof of liability insurance which protects against losses due to personal injury or property damage resulting from the construction, operation or collapse of the tower, antenna or accessory equipment. 
(n)  Enforcement. The provisions of this Section shall be enforced and penalties imposed for violations hereof as set forth herein and in Section 62-311 of this Code. 
(o)  Fees. Appendix A sets forth the applicable conditional use permit and site/design review fees. The applicant will also be required to pay the actual cost of review by a telecommunications and safety engineer retained by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, §§ 1, 2, 3-28-2011; Ord. No. 2013-07, § 6, 8-26-2013) 
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 2011-05, adopted March 28, 2011, repealed the former § 62-206, and enacted a new § 62-206 as set out herein. The former § 62-206 pertained to signal receiving antennas, and derived from the Code of 1998, § 13-1-140; and Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-140), adopted March 24, 2003.  
Sec. 62-207. - Special use permits required; wind energy systems. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the term "wind energy systems" means windmills that are used to produce electrical or mechanical power. 
(b)  Approval required. No owner shall, within the Village, build, construct, use or place any type or kind of wind energy system without holding the appropriate conditional use permit for said system. 
(c)  Separate permit required for each system. A separate conditional use permit shall be required for each system. Said permit shall be applicable solely to the systems, structures, use and property described in the permit. 
(d)  Basis of approval. The Village Board and Plan Commission shall base their determinations on general considerations as to the effect of such grant on the health, general welfare, safety and economic prosperity of the Village and, specifically, of the immediate neighborhood in which such use would be located, including such considerations as the effect on the established character and quality of the area, its physical attractiveness, the movement of traffic, the demand for related services, the possible hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or nuisance effect as a result of noise, dust, smoke or odor and such other factors as would be appropriate to carry out the intent of the Zoning Code. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-141; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-141), 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Regulations regarding wind energy systems, Wis. Stats. § 66.0401.  
Sec. 62-208. - Permit procedure; wind energy systems. 
(a)  Application. The permit application for a wind energy system shall be made to the Building Inspector on forms provided by the Village. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The address of the property on which the system will be located. 
(3)  Applications for the erection of a wind energy conversion system shall be accompanied by a plat or survey for the property to be served showing the location of the generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to structures. If the system is intended to provide power to more than one premises, the plat or survey shall show all properties to be served and the means of connection to the wind energy conversion system. A copy of all agreements with system users off the premises shall accompany the application. The application shall further indicate the level of noise to be generated by the system and provide assurances as to the safety features of the system. Energy easements shall accompany the application. 
(4)  An accurate and complete written description of the use for which special grant is being requested, including pertinent statistics and operational characteristics. 
(5)  Plans and other drawings showing proposed development of the site and buildings, including landscape plans, location of parking and service areas, driveways, exterior lighting, type of building material, etc., if applicable. 
(6)  Any other information that the Building Inspector or Plan Commission may deem to be necessary to the proper review of the application. 
(7)  The Building Inspector shall review the application and, if the application is complete and contains all required information, shall refer it to the Village Board. 
(b)  Hearing. Upon referral of the application, the Plan Commission shall schedule a public hearing thereof following the procedures for conditional use permits in Subdivision II of this Division. 
(c)  Determination. Following public hearing and necessary study and investigation, the Plan Commission shall, as soon as practical, render its decision and a copy be made a permanent part of the Plan Commission's minutes. Such decision shall include an accurate description of the special use permitted, of the property on which permitted, and any and all conditions made applicable thereto, or, if disapproved, shall indicate the reasons for disapproval. The Plan Commission may impose any conditions or exemptions necessary to minimize any burden on the persons affected by granting the special use permit. 
(d)  Termination. When a special use does not continue in conformity with the conditions of the original approval, or where a change in the character of the surrounding area or of the use itself cause it to be no longer compatible with surrounding areas, or for similar cause based upon consideration for the public welfare, the special grant may be terminated by action of the Plan Commission following a public hearing thereon. 
(e)  Changes. Subsequent change or addition to the approved plans or use shall first be submitted for approval to the Plan Commission and if, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, such change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration, a public hearing before the Plan Commission shall be required and notice thereof be given. 
(f)  Approval does not waive permit requirements. The approval of a permit under this Article shall not be construed to waive the requirement to obtain electrical, building or plumbing permits prior to installation of any system. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-142; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-142), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-209. - Specific requirements regarding wind energy systems. 
(a)  Additional standards. Wind energy conversion systems, commonly referred to as windmills, which are used to produce electrical power, shall also satisfy the requirements of this Section in addition to those found elsewhere in this Article. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the erection of a wind energy conversion system shall be accompanied by a plat or survey for the property to be served showing the location of the generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to structures. If the system is intended to provide power to more than one premises, the plat or survey shall show all properties to be served and the means of connection to the wind energy conversion system. A copy of all agreements with system users off the premises shall accompany the application. The application shall further indicate the level of noise to be generated by the system and provide assurances as to the safety features of the system. Energy easements shall accompany the application. 
(c)  Construction. Wind energy conversion systems shall be constructed and anchored in such a manner to withstand wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square foot in area. 
(d)  Noise. The maximum level of noise permitted to be generated by a wind energy conversion system shall be 50 decibels, as measured on a dB(A) scale, measured at the lot line. 
(e)  Electro-magnetic interference. Wind energy conversion system generators and alternators shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission of radio-frequency energy that would cause any harmful interference with radio and/or television broadcasting or reception. In the event that harmful interference is caused subsequent to the granting of a conditional use permit, the operator of the wind energy conversion system shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(f)  Location and height. Wind energy conversion systems shall be located in the rear yard only and shall meet all setback and yard requirements for the district in which they are located and, in addition, shall be located not closer to a property boundary than a distance equal to their height. Wind energy conversion systems are exempt from the height requirements of this Chapter; however, all such systems over 75 feet in height shall submit plans to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to determine whether the system is to be considered an object affecting navigable air space and subject to FAA restrictions. A copy of any FAA restrictions imposed shall be included as a part of the wind energy conversion system conditional use permit application. 
(g)  Fence required. All wind energy conversion systems shall be surrounded by a security fence not less than six feet in height. A sign shall be posed on the fence warning of high voltages. 
(h)  Utility company notification. The appropriate electric power company shall be notified, in writing, of any proposed interface with that company's grid prior to installing said interface. Copies of comments by the appropriate utility company shall accompany and be part of the application for a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-143; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-143), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-210—62-226. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VI. - Accessory Uses and Structures 
 
Sec. 62-227. - Accessory uses, buildings or structures. 
(a)  Building permit required. No owner shall, within the Village, build, construct, use or place any type of an accessory building, including prefabricated accessory buildings, until a building permit shall have first been obtained from the Building Inspector. Application for an accessory building permit shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector. With such application, there shall be submitted a fee pursuant to the Village Building Code and a complete set of plans and specifications, including a plot plan or drawing accurately showing the location of the proposed accessory building with respect to adjoining alleys, lot lines and buildings. If such application meets all requirements of this Section, the application shall be approved. 
(b)  Principal structure to be present. An accessory building or structure in any zoning district shall not be established prior to the principal building or structure being present or under construction. Any accessory building or structure shall conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as specifically otherwise provided. 
(c)  Placement restrictions. An accessory building, use or structure may be established subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Percentage of required rear yard occupied. No detached accessory building shall occupy more than 40 percent of the area of the required rear yard. 
(2)  Height of accessory buildings in required rear yards. No detached accessory building located in a required rear yard shall exceed 15 feet in height. 
(3)  Temporary storage buildings. Temporary buildings for storage of building materials and equipment and for construction purposes are allowed when on the same or adjoining lot as the principal use for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
(4)  Temporary offices. Temporary real estate offices for purposes of conducting sale of property in the tract are allowed where such temporary office is located for a period not to exceed two years from the date of start of construction or one year after the initial occupancy of an improvement, whichever is lesser. 
(d)  Use restrictions in Residential District. Accessory uses or structures in residential districts shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry except for home occupations as defined herein and shall not be occupied as a dwelling unit. Accessory buildings shall not be used for residential purposes. 
(e)  Accessory buildings in Special and Residence Districts. 
(1)  Location. No accessory building in a Special or Residence District shall be erected in any yard except a rear yard, and all accessory buildings shall be located not less than three feet from all lot lines and from any other building or structure on the same lot except as provided hereunder. 
(2)  On reversed corner lots. On a reversed corner lot in a Residence or Special District, no accessory building shall be located in a required rear yard within 25 feet of an adjoining property to the rear in a Residence District, except when the accessory building is located not closer to the side lot line abutting the street than the least depth which would be required under this Chapter for the front yard of such adjacent property to the rear and in no case shall any part of an accessory building project beyond the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(3)  Materials. No accessory building located in a Special or Residential District shall be constructed or finished with nonresidential building materials such as nondecorative concrete block or nondecorative plywood. Furthermore, all accessory buildings within Special or Residential Districts shall be constructed in a similar style and with similar materials to the principal buildings in the neighborhood. 
(f)  Accessory buildings in Commercial and Manufacturing Districts. Accessory buildings in Commercial or Manufacturing Districts shall not be located nearer than ten feet from the rear lot line. 
(g)  Landscaping uses. Accessory vegetation used for landscaping and decorating may be placed in any required yard area. Permitted vegetation include trees, shrubs and flowers and gardens. Under no circumstances may a tent be used as a dwelling or an accessory structure. 
(h)  Garages in embankments in front yards. Where the mean natural grade of a front yard is more than eight feet above the curb level, a private garage may be erected within the front yard, provided as follows: 
(1)  That such private garage shall be located not less than five feet from the front lot line; 
(2)  That the floor level of such private garage shall be not more than one foot above the curb level; and 
(3)  That at least one-half the height of such private garage shall be below the mean grade of the front yard. 
(i)  Garages on water front lots. In order to preserve the quality and beauty of our lakes and waterways, a private detached garage may be erected within the front or street yard as follows: 
(1)  There must be particular physical or topographical conditions of the property that prevent locating the garage within the standard building envelope of the lot. 
(2)  The garage must comply with all fire separation requirements of the applicable building code. 
(3)  The garage shall be located not less than ten feet from the street lot line. 
(j)  Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting installations shall not be permitted closer than three feet to an abutting property line and, where not specifically otherwise regulated, shall not exceed 15 feet in height and shall be adequately shielded or hooded so that no excessive glare or illumination is cast upon the adjoining properties. 
(k)  Lawn accessories. Walks, drives, paved terraces and purely decorative garden accessories such as pools, fountains, statuary, sun dials, flagpoles, etc., shall be permitted in setback areas but not closer than three feet to an abutting property line other than a street line. 
(l)  Retaining walls. Retaining walls may be permitted anywhere on the lot; provided, however, that no individual wall shall exceed six feet in height, and a terrace of at least three feet in width shall be provided between any series of such walls. 
(m)  Terrace area restrictions. In addition to the definitions and restrictions contained in Chapter 53, Article IX, and Section 59-20, no person shall place any accessory structure or use, including landscaping ornaments, stones and basketball backboard/hoops, in the terrace area. 
(n)  Outdoor furnaces. Outdoor furnaces are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-160; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-160), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2006-02, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 2009-08, § 1, 3-23-2009; Ord. No. 2009-11, §§ 1, 2, 4-27-2009)  
Sec. 62-228. - Outside storage of firewood. 
(a)  No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned property, except that firewood may be temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of 30 days from the date of its delivery. 
(b)  Firewood should be neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than two feet to any lot line and not higher than six feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. Fences, as used in this Section, shall not include hedges and other vegetation. 
(c)  All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly and properly disposed of and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises. 
(d)  Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(e)  Firewood storage is permissible in side and rear yards, but not more than 15 percent of the side and rear yard may be used for storage of firewood at any one time. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-161; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-161), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-229. - Outside storage. 
(a)  No manure, rubbish, inoperable vehicles, salvage material or miscellaneous refuse may be stored within any Residential or Commercial District when the same may be construed as a menace to the public health or safety or may be held to have a depressing influence upon property values in the area. Junk shall be placed in the Manufactured-Intensive Commercial District only if a conditional use permit has been approved. 
(b)  All nonenclosed areas of the site that are used for off-street parking, loading or driveways for motor vehicles shall be paved or effectively dust-proofed and measures shall exist on-site to prevent tracking of mud from the site into public streets. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-162; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-162), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-230. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Section is to provide a means to accommodate a small family business without the necessity of a rezoning into a Commercial District. Approval of an expansion of a limited family business or home occupation at a future time beyond the limitations of this Section is not to be anticipated. Relocation of the business to an area that is appropriately zoned may be necessary. 
(b)  Accessory use. Home occupations are determined to be an allowed accessory use in all Residential Districts. Permits are not required prior to engaging in such activities, but the following standards apply: 
(1)  The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit or attached or detached garage; 
(2)  There shall be no exterior alterations which change the character thereof as a dwelling, nor shall there be any evidence of any kind visible from the exterior of the dwelling or other structure that will indicate it is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling or other allowed accessory use, other than those signs permitted in the district; 
(3)  No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment related to the operation of the home occupation shall be visible outside any structures located on the premises; 
(4)  The home occupation must not create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire hazard, small electrical interference, electrical emissions, any other nuisance not normally associated with the average residential use in the district, or other fire or safety hazards that are noticeably out of character with those produced by normal residential occupancy. Under no circumstances shall a kennel business qualify as a home occupation; 
(5)  The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for more than occasional delivery of materials to or from the premises, and traffic generated by the home occupation may not exceed that which is customary to residential occupancies in the neighborhood; 
(6)  The sale of goods from the location of the home occupation shall be limited to items produced on-site and the sale of Tupperware, Shaklee, Amway, and Avon products or other similar activities that are customarily conducted from a residence as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The direct sale of goods produced off-site other than those described above to the consumer from the dwelling is prohibited; 
(7)  A permitted home occupation shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling; 
(8)  Persons employed by a home occupation shall be limited to resident family members and not more than one nonresident employee; 
(9)  Under no circumstances shall a vehicle repair or body work business qualify as a home occupation; 
(10)  The home occupation must be clearly secondary and incidental to the residential use of the property; 
(11)  The home occupation must not unreasonably interfere with residential occupancy of other parcels in the neighborhood; 
(12)  Signage for the home occupation will be governed by the Village's sign ordinance; 
(13)  Garage sales as a type of home occupation are allowable in all Residential Districts, provided that not more than two are held on a single premises per year and that each such sale shall not exceed four days in duration; 
(14)  Day care is allowable as a home occupation on a residential premises. Conditional use approval may be required, however, if Wis. Stats. § 66.1017, or as it may be hereafter amended, applies; 
(15)  No on-site production shall be conducted that is typically only permitted in the industrial zoning districts; 
(16)  A kennel shall not qualify as a home occupation. Refer to Section 5-48(e) regarding kennel operations; 
(17)  Property owner's written permission is required as part of the compliance checklist required in Subsection (c) of this Section. 
(c)  Compliance checklist. Notwithstanding the provisions listed in Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section, all who undertake allowed home occupations in Residential Districts shall complete and file a Compliance Checklist, in a form as approved by the Plan Commission and made available by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, prior to commencing the home occupation. This form shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer, who shall retain the form while the home occupation is in use. The filed Compliance Checklist shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator to determine compliance of the home occupation with this Code. Such form shall be signed by both the owner and/or occupier of the premises on which the home occupation takes place. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-163; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-163), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 30, 7-24-2017)  
Secs. 62-231—62-255. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VII. - Modifications 
 
Sec. 62-256. - Height modifications. 
The district height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Chapter may be exceeded, but such modifications shall be in accord with the following: 
(a)  Architectural projections. Architectural projections such as spires, belfries, parapet walls, cupolas, domes, flues and chimneys are exempt from the height limitations of this Chapter. 
(b)  Special structure height limitations. Special structures such as elevator penthouses, gas tanks, grain elevators, scenery lofts, telecommunications facilities, manufacturing equipment and necessary mechanical appurtenances, cooling towers, fire towers, substations and smokestacks are exempt from the district specific height limitations of this Chapter. Refer to Section 62-16(a)(5) for exemptions. 
(c)  Essential services height limitations. Essential services, utilities, water towers, and electrical power and communication transmission lines are subject to conditional use permits. 
(d)  Agricultural structures height restrictions. Agricultural structures such as barns, silos and water windmills shall not exceed in height twice their distance from the nearest lot line. 
(e)  Public facilities height restrictions. Public or semi-public facilities such as schools, houses of worship, hospitals, monuments, sanitariums, libraries, governmental offices and stations may be erected to a height of 60 feet, provided all required yards are increased not less than one foot for each foot the structure exceeds the district's maximum height requirement. Refer to Section 62-16(a)(5) for exemptions. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-180; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-180), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2011-08, §§ 1—3, 3-28-2011)  
Sec. 62-257. - Yard modifications. 
The yard requirements stipulated elsewhere in this Chapter may be modified as follows: 
(a)  Uncovered stair restrictions. Uncovered stairs, landings, fire escapes and emergency escape wells may project into any yard, but not to exceed four feet into the required yard and not closer than three feet to any side lot line, and a fire escape must be eight feet or more above ground. 
(b)  Architectural projection restrictions. Architectural projections such as chimneys, flues, sills, eaves, belt courses and ornaments may project into any required yard (setback requirements), but such projection shall not exceed two feet. 
(c)  Cul-de-sac and curve restrictions. Residential lot frontage on cul-de-sacs and curves may be less than 80 feet at the required building setback line, provided the width at the building setback line is at least 80 feet and the street frontage is no less than 40 feet. 
(d)  Essential services exemptions. Essential services, utilities, electric power and communication transmission lines are exempt from the yard and distance requirements of this Chapter. 
(e)  Street yard restrictions. The required street yards may be decreased in any Residential or Business District to the average of the existing street yards of the abutting structures on each side, but in no case less than ten feet in any residential district and five feet in any Business District. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-181; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-181), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-258. - Noises exempted. 
Sirens, whistles and bells that are maintained and utilized solely to serve a public purpose are exempt from the sound level standards of this Chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-182; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-182), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-259—62-279. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VIII. - Performance Standards—Industrial and Commercial Developments 
 
Sec. 62-280. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this Subdivision to use performance standards for the regulation of industrial uses to facilitate a more objective and equitable basis for control and to insure that the community is adequately protected from potential hazardous and nuisance-like effects. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-200; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-200), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-281. - Vibration. 
(a)  No operation or activity shall transmit any physical vibration that is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property line of the source. Vibration perception threshold means the minimum ground- or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. 
(b)  Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user and vibrations from temporary construction or maintenance activities shall be exempt from the above standard. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-201; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-201), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-282. - External lighting. 
No operation or activity shall produce any intense glare or lighting with the source directly visible beyond the boundary of an Industrial or Commercial District. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-202; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-202), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-283. - Odor. 
No operation or activity shall emit any substance or combination of substances in such quantities that create an objectionable odor as defined in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 154.18. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-203; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-203), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-284. - Particulate emissions. 
No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 154.11. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-204; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-204), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-285. - Visible emissions. 
No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 154.11(6). 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-205; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-205), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-286. - Hazardous pollutants. 
No operation or activity shall emit any hazardous substances in such a quantity, concentration or duration as to be injurious to human health or property, and all emissions of hazardous substances shall not exceed the limitations established in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 154.19. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-206; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-206), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-287—62-305. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 62-306. - General administrative system. 
The Community Development Director acts as the "Zoning Administrator." Certain considerations, particularly with regard to granting of permitted conditional uses, planned unit development conditional uses, changes in zoning districts and the Zoning Map, and amending the text of this Zoning Chapter require review and recommendation by the Plan Commission and ultimate action by the Village Board. A Board of Zoning Appeals is provided to assure proper administration of the Chapter and to avoid arbitrariness. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-220; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-220), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-307. - Zoning Administrator. 
Unless specified to the contrary elsewhere in this Code, the Village Board has designated the Community Development Director to serve as the Zoning Administrator and as the administrative enforcement officer for the provisions of this Chapter. The duty of the Zoning Administrator shall be to interpret and administer this Chapter and to issue, after on-site inspection, all permits required by this Chapter other than the issuance of building and occupancy permits. The Zoning Administrator shall further: 
(a)  Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions. 
(b)  Establish that all necessary permits that are required for floodland uses by state and federal law have been secured. 
(c)  Inspect all structures, lands and waters as often as necessary to assure compliance with this Chapter. 
(d)  Investigate all complains made relating to the location of structures and the use of structures, lands and waters, give notice of all violations of this Chapter to the owner, resident, agent or occupant of the premises and report uncorrected violations to the Village Attorney in a manner specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
(e)  Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until the Building Inspector has approved such use or erection. 
(f)  Request assistance and cooperation from the Police Department, Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, Director of Public Works, Village Engineer and Village Attorney as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-221; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-221), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 70, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 62-308. - Role of specific Village officials in zoning administration. 
(a)  Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the Village to the Village Board, other public officials and other interested organizations and citizens. In general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this Chapter, its functions are primarily recommendatory to the Village Board pursuant to guidelines set forth in this Chapter as to various matters and, always, being mindful of the intent and purposes of this Chapter. Recommendations shall be in writing. A recording thereof in the Plan Commission's minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. The Plan Commission may, in arriving at its recommendation, on occasion of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing. 
(b)  Village Board. The Village Board, the governing body of the Village, subject to recommendations by the Plan Commission and the holding of public hearings by the Village Board, has authority to make changes and amendments in zoning districts, the Zoning Map and Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map and to amend the text of this Chapter. The Village Board may delegate to the Plan Commission the responsibility to hold some or all public hearings as required under this Chapter. 
(c)  Board of Zoning Appeals. A Board of Zoning Appeals is established to provide an appeal procedure for persons who deem themselves aggrieved by decisions of administrative officers in enforcement of this Chapter. See Division 5 of this Article for additional provisions. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-222; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-222), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-309. - Occupancy permit. 
(a)  Required. No new structure, new use of land, water or air or change in the use of land, water or air shall hereafter be permitted and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without an occupancy permit. No zoning permit shall be required for alterations that do not involve any change of use or change in the exterior that does not affect gross floor area or extensions into any side yard, front yard or rear yard setbacks. Such permit may be consolidated with a building permit. 
(b)  Application. Applications for an occupancy permit shall be made to the Building Inspector and shall include the following where pertinent and necessary for proper review: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer and contractor. 
(2)  Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded Subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies. 
(3)  Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state or other map drawn to scale and showing such of the following as may be required by the Building Inspector: The location, boundaries, dimensions, uses, and size of the following: 
a.  Subject site; 
b.  Existing and proposed structures; 
c.  Existing and proposed easements, streets and other public ways; 
d.  Public utilities; 
e.  Off-street parking, loading areas and driveways; 
f.  Existing highway access restrictions; 
g.  High water; 
h.  Channel, floodway and floodplain boundaries; and 
i.  Existing and proposed street, side and rear yards. 
(4)  Additional information as may be required by the Building Inspector, or the Plan Commission and Village Board (if involved). 
(5)  The occupancy permit shall be assessed the fees established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  Action. 
(1)  An occupancy permit shall be granted or denied in writing by the Building Inspector within 30 days of application and the applicant shall post such permit in a conspicuous place at the site. 
(2)  The permit shall expire within six months unless substantial work has commenced or within 18 months after the issuance of the permit if the structure for which a permit is issued is not substantially completed, in which case of expiration, the application shall reapply for an occupancy permit before commencing work on the structure. 
(3)  Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter shall be null and void. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-223; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-223), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-310. - Site/design review. 
(a)  Purpose. Site/design review is implemented under municipal authority to promote the public health, safety and welfare and under municipal zoning authority by the Plan Commission. Requirements for design review and approval apply to uses and developments regardless of the characterization of the use or development within this Chapter as a permitted use or conditional use. 
(b)  Scope of site/design review. 
(1)  Applicability. The following developments shall be subject to site/design review by the Plan Commission: 
a.  Development of residential projects consisting of three or more dwelling units. 
b.  Any development in a Commercial District. 
c.  Any development in an Industrial District. 
d.  Any development for which the applicant is a public utility or governmental entity or religious organization. 
e.  Any parking area including five or more parking spaces. 
(2)  Limit. Site/design review shall be limited to development for which current application is made for an erosion control or building permit. This Section shall not be deemed to apply to any existing development or use of land that is not affected by current application for erosion control or building permit, nor shall this Section apply to any rehabilitation of an existing structure so long as the size of the rehabilitated structure is not increased. 
(3)  Development. Any new construction or exterior improvement to real property for which application for a building permit may be required by this Code. 
(4)  Village planning consultant. Any Village planning consultant appointed by the Village Board. 
(c)  Development to comply with site/design standards. No development subject to site/design review shall occur unless such development complies with all applicable site/design review standards. 
(d)  Manner of site/design review. 
(1)  Upon application for a building permit, the applicant shall be advised by the Zoning Administrator whether compliance with site/design review standards is required by this Section. If such compliance shall be required, the applicant shall be provided with a checklist and a site/design review application, which shall be in such form as the Zoning Administrator shall approve, and which shall be accompanied by such information as may be necessary to determine and provide for enforcement of this Section. 
(2)  The site/design review application shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator, who may consult with a planning consultant, if necessary. 
(3)  When the Zoning Administrator deems the application to be complete, review by the Plan Commission shall be scheduled. 
(4)  The Plan Commission's determination of compliance or noncompliance with this Section shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator, in writing, within ten business days of the determination and sent to the applicant via U.S. Mail. The written determination shall specifically describe all areas of noncompliance and shall identify changes necessary to bring the proposed development into compliance. 
(5)  No building permit shall be issued for any development until the Plan Commission has determined that the development is in compliance with site/design review standards. All construction and improvement subject to site/design review shall conform with approved site/design plans. 
(6)  The determinations of the Plan Commission on site/design plan applications shall be appealable to the Village Board pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 62-113. 
(e)  Site/design standards. In reviewing plans for development the Plan Commission shall determine that the following standards are met: 
(1)  Grading. Grading shall insure a positive drainage consistent with established water runoff patterns in the area. All grading shall allow for the installation and maintenance of appropriate landscape materials. Respect for the natural topography in site development will be recommended as a means of capitalizing on the sloping terrain, and earth berms are required to screen out unpleasant views and accentuate pleasant views. 
(2)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required to be installed in accordance with an approved landscaping plan as a component of site and design review. The requirements for landscaping plans are set forth in Appendix B to this Chapter [Code], Village of McFarland Landscaping Standards. All references to the Village Forester shall have the same meaning as referenced in Section 59-20(d). 
(3)  Building relationships. 
a.  The structures shall be related to the site to enhance or maintain current contours. New development shall consider activities on adjacent properties with relation to access from abutting streets, parking areas, service areas, building setbacks, height of structures, and color and materials of adjacent or nearby buildings. 
b.  In the development of the site, the existing quality vegetation should ordinarily be maintained in accordance with Section 59-29. 
(4)  Lighting. The functions of exterior lighting on private property shall be: 
a.  To illuminate building facades, especially those bearing business identification signs. Architectural lighting should be free from glare and of a type to complement the existing development in the district. 
b.  To illuminate pedestrian walks and spaces. Security lighting should provide necessary levels of illumination to insure safety of the property and its residents, while not reflecting direct rays of light into adjacent property. 
c.  To illuminate parking and service areas. Off-street parking area lighting should be so arranged as to conform with applicable provisions of Section 62-172. (The choice of equipment, design, quantity, and placement of on-site lighting shall relate to these functions. Lighting shall be adequate but not excessive. The height and number of lighting standards shall be appropriate to the building and its function and to the neighborhood.) 
(5)  Utility service. It shall be a goal of the Village to eliminate overhead wiring within the Village. To this end, owners of property within the Village, working with the utilities servicing the Village shall, in all new development and major additions, make provision for underground service. This shall be accomplished during building development and construction. Sanitary sewer and water utility services shall comply with Village Standard Specifications. 
(6)  Building design. Buildings shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Materials shall be of a durable, low-maintenance type. The colors shall be harmonious with other buildings in the neighborhood. 
b.  Mechanical elements on the roof or ground shall be screened from the view of adjacent properties and roadways. 
c.  Buildings shall be designed with an architectural flavor that will complement and enrich the character of the Village. 
d.  The overall design of the building shall be of high quality, considering the importance of the particular zoning district. 
e.  With the exception of the M-IC Zoning District, the front, sides, and rear of all commercial and industrial buildings shall be entirely faced with nonmetallic or wood material. In the M-IC District, a minimum of 15 vertical feet of the front of all buildings shall be faced with nonmetallic or wood material extending across the full front of the building, and also extending a distance of not less than 20 feet on each side of the building. The portion of any building facing or backing onto public streets, or abutting a Residential Zoning District, shall be held to the same requirements as that of the front. These requirements may be waived in whole or in part by the Plan Commission. 
f.  An addition shall relate to the existing building in terms of scale, materials and color. 
g.  Structures should be designed to be compatible with the structures that are adjacent to them. 
h.  Unbroken exterior facades exceeding 70 feet in length shall be avoided. 
i.  All building elevations are of importance and should be carefully designed. Building should avoid blank facades. 
(f)  Recommendation of Village Plan Commission. The Village Plan Commission may, during the site/design review process, suggest features of site/design, and construction, building and structural design, that are not a part of site/design standards but that, in the opinion of the Village Plan Commission, would be desirable to make the development a positive asset to the visual appearance of the community and a positive contribution to the growth and stability of the community tax base. Compliance with such recommendations shall not be required of the developer. 
(g)  Validity of site/design approval. Where the Plan Commission has approved or conditionally approved an application for site/design approval, such approval shall become null and void within 12 months of the date of the Plan Commission's action unless construction is commenced or the current owner possesses a valid building permit under which construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance and which shall not be renewed unless construction has commenced and is diligently pursued. No sooner than 60 days nor less than 45 days prior to the automatic revocation of such site/design approval, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the property owner by certified mail of such revocation. Extensions of up to one year each may be granted by the Plan Commission for just cause, if application is made to the Village at least 30 days before the expiration of said permit. 
(h)  Fees. The fee for review of a site/design review application shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code, to be paid at the time of submission of the application. 
(i)  Penalties. Violations of this Section shall be subject to Section 62-311, except that each day a violation continues shall not be deemed a separate violation until the 30 day notice period expires. Nothing herein shall preclude the Village from maintaining a separate action to prevent or abate or remove violations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 5-23-2011) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2011-06, adopted May 23, 2011, repealed the former § 62-310, and enacted a new § 62-310 as set out herein. The former § 62-310 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1998, § 13-1-224; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-224), adopted March 24, 2003; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, adopted June 26, 2006; and Ord. No. 2008-03, § 2, adopted Feb. 25, 2008.  
Sec. 62-311. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land, or to use water or air in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. In case of any violation, the Village Board, the Zoning Administrator, the Building Inspector, the Plan Commission or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may cause appropriate action or proceedings to be instituted to enjoin a violation of this Chapter or cause a structure to be vacated or removed. 
(b)  Remedial action. Whenever an order of the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector has not been complied with within 30 days after written notice has been mailed to the owner, resident agent or occupant of the premises, the Village Board, the Zoning Administrator, the Building Inspector, or the Village Attorney may institute appropriate legal action or proceedings. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Chapter or any order of the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector issued in accordance with this Chapter or resists enforcement shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture and such additional penalties as provided for in Section 1-16. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. The Village shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution provided for in Section 1-16. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-225; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-225), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-312—62-340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING CODE 
 
Sec. 62-341. - Authority. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice requires, the Village Board may, by ordinance, change the district boundaries established by this Chapter and the Zoning Map incorporated herein and/or the Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map incorporated herein, or amend, change or supplement the text of the regulations established by this Chapter or amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the Plan Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-240; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-240), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-342. - Initiation of changes or amendments. 
The Village Board, the Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals and other government bodies and any private petitioners may apply for an amendment to the text of this Chapter to the district boundaries hereby established or by amendments hereto in the accompanying Zoning Map made a part of this Chapter and/or the Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map to be made a part of this Chapter by reference. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-241; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-241), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-343. - Procedure for changes or amendments. 
(a)  Request for changes. Petitions for any change to the district boundaries and maps or amendments to the text regulations shall be addressed to the Village Board and shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, describe the premises to be rezoned or the portions of text of regulations to be amended, list the reasons justifying the petition, specify the proposed use, if applicable, and have attached the following, if petition be for change of district boundaries: 
(1)  Plot plan, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet showing the area proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the location and classification of adjacent zoning districts and the location and existing use of all properties within 300 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(2)  Owners' names and addresses of all properties lying within 100 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(3)  Together with additional information as may be required by the Plan Commission or Village Board. 
(b)  Plan Commission review and recommendations. 
(1)  The Zoning Administrator shall cause the petition to be forwarded to the Plan Commission for its consideration and recommendation. Following receipt of the petition, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing upon each proposed change or amendment, giving notice of the time, place and the change or amendment proposed by publication of a class 2 notice, pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 985. At least ten days prior, written notice shall also be given to the clerk of any municipality within 1,000 feet of any land that would be affected by the proposed change or amendment. The Plan Commission shall also notify the owners of all properties lying within 100 feet of the land proposed to be rezoned. Failure to comply with this provision shall not, however, invalidate any previous or subsequent action on the application. 
(2)  Following such hearing, the Plan Commission shall review all proposed amendments to the text and Zoning Map within the corporate limits of the Village, and shall recommend, in writing, that the petition be granted as requested, modified or denied. A recording of the recommendation in the Plan Commission's official minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. 
(c)  Village Board action. 
(1)  Following receipt and consideration of the Plan Commission's recommendation, the Village Board shall take action on the proposed ordinance implementing the proposed change or amendment. 
(2)  The Village Board shall hold an additional public hearing, preceded by the same notice required for the Plan Commission public hearing, upon the written request of the petitioner, any of the parties identified in Section 62-342 or from sufficient owners of neighboring properties who hold protest rights pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2m, and Section 62-344. In addition, the Village Board may, on its own volition, conduct its own public hearing on the proposed amendment. 
(d)  Fee. The application fee for processing a petition for a zoning change or amendment shall be the fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. The applicant shall also pay all costs incurred by the Village in notifying the public and affected property owners pursuant to Subsections (b) and (c) of this Section. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-242; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-242), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-344. - Protest. 
(a)  In the event of a protest against amendment to the Zoning Map, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more, either of the areas of the land included in such proposed change, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such changes or amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the full Village Board membership. 
(b)  In the event of protest against amendment to the text of the regulations of this Chapter, duly signed and acknowledged by 20 percent of the number of persons casting ballots in the last general election, it shall cause a three-fourths vote of the full Village Board membership to adopt such amendment. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-243; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-243), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-345—62-361. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). 
 
Sec. 62-362. - Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(a)  Scope of appeals. Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Village affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within the reasonable 30 days of the alleged grievance or judgment in question by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Zoning Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with payment of the filing fee established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code, as may be established by the Village Board. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all papers constituting the record of appeals upon which the action appeals from was taken. 
(b)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certified to the Board of Zoning Appeals that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the officer's opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(c)  Meetings. 
(1)  Open to public. All meetings and hearings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open to the public, except that the Board of Zoning Appeals may go into executive session to deliberate after a hearing or an appeal. The final vote on an appeal shall be taken in open session by roll call vote, recorded and open for public inspection in the Board of Zoning Appeal's office. Public notice of all regular and special meetings shall be given to the public and news media as required by the Wisconsin Open Meeting Law. 
(2)  Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chair or by the Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals at the request of two members. Notice of a special meeting shall be mailed to each member at least 48 hours prior to the time set for the meeting, or announcement of the meeting shall be made at any meeting at which all members are present. 
(3)  Hearings. Hearings may be held at any regular or special meeting at the time set by the chair. 
(4)  Quorum. A quorum for any meeting or hearing shall consist of three members, but a lesser number may meet and adjourn to a specified time. 
(d)  Powers of Board of Zoning Appeals. In addition to these powers enumerated elsewhere in this Code, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector or other administrative official in the enforcement of the Zoning Code or any ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.351 or 62.231 (wetlands), Wis. Stats. Ch. 87 (floodplains), Wis. Stats. Ch. 91 (farmland preservation), or Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 (subdivisions). 
(2)  Variances. To hear and rule on appeals for variances as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit and purposes of this Chapter shall be observed and the public safety, welfare and justice secured. 
(3)  Interpretations. To hear and decide application for interpretations of the zoning regulations and the boundaries of the zoning districts after the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(4)  Substitutions. To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses, provided no structural alterations are to be made and the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation. Whenever the Board of Zoning Appeals permits such a substitution, the use may not thereafter be changed without application. 
(5)  Unclassified uses. To hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified uses, provided that such uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district and the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(6)  Temporary uses. To hear and grant applications for temporary uses, in any district, provided that such uses are of a temporary nature, we do not involve the erection of a substantial structure and are compatible with the neighboring uses and the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation. The permit shall be temporary, revocable, subject to any condition required by the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. Compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter shall be required. 
(e)  Board of Zoning Appeals action. In exercising the powers under Subsection (d) of this Section, the Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(f)  Voting. 
(1)  Personal interest. No Board of Zoning Appeals member shall participate in the decision of or vote upon any case in which the member is financially interested, directly or indirectly, but the chair shall direct an alternate member to act instead. Disqualification of a member for interest shall not decrease the number of votes required for acting upon any matter, but such member may be counted in determining whether a quorum is present for the transaction of business. 
(2)  Record of vote. The Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall record the vote of each member on every question in the minutes or, if the member is absent or fails to vote, shall indicate such fact in the record of the proceedings. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-260; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-260), 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e).  
Sec. 62-363. - Applications for hearings. 
(a)  Time of appeal. Appeals shall be filed within 30 days after the receipt of the written decision or order from which the appeal is taken by filing in duplicate a notice of appeal with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The date of receipt of the decision shall not be counted in determining the time for filing of the appeal. Sundays and holidays shall be counted, except if the last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time for filing shall be extended to the next secular day. 
(b)  Who may appeal. Appeals or applications to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be made by: 
(1)  The owner, mortgagee, purchaser under a land contract, optionee or occupant under a written lease for one year or more of the property for which relief is sought. 
(2)  Any officer (other than the Zoning Administrator), department, board or bureau affected by a decision or order of the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved and whose use and enjoyment of property within the Village is directly and adversely affected by a decision or order of the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator or the requested Board of Zoning Appeals action. 
(c)  Appeal and application forms. Every appeal or application shall be made upon forms furnished by the Village Clerk-Treasurer, which have been approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. A scale drawing shall accompany each form showing the location and size of the property, existing improvements, all abutting properties and improvements thereon and change or addition requested. The applicant or appellant shall provide all information requested on the form and any additional information requested in writing by the chair or Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals, which is necessary to inform the Board of Zoning Appeals of the facts of the appeal. Failure to supply such information shall be grounds for dismissal of the appeal or application. 
(d)  Filing appeal or application. The appellant or applicant shall file the required appeal form in duplicate with the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall deliver one copy to the Zoning Administrator or other officer or body from whose decision an appeal is taken. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Zoning Administrator or other officer or body responsible for the original determination shall transmit to the Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals all notes or papers relating to the order or decision from which the appeal is being taken. 
(e)  Fee. All appeals and applications filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be accompanied by payment of a required fee as established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. If the appellant or applicant elects the contested case method, the appellant or applicant shall also pay the amount determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals to cover the additional administrative costs involved. 
(f)  Insufficient notice. No appeal or application shall be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless it is made on the required form. Upon receipt of any communication purporting to be an appeal or application, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall supply the applicant with the proper forms which must be filed within ten days, in addition to the 30 days specified in Subsection (a) of this Section, in order to be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-261; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-261), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2, 2-13-2006; Ord. No. 2006-08, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2017-13 , §§ 31, 32, 7-24-2017) 
State Law reference— Board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e).  
Sec. 62-364. - Hearings. 
(a)  Notice of hearing. Notice of time, date and place of the hearing of an appeal or application shall be given in the following manner: 
(1)  By certified mail or personal service to the appellant or applicant and to the Zoning Administrator or other administrative official or body from whose decision an appeal is taken and the Village Clerk-Treasurer on behalf of the Plan Commission not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  In every case involving a variance, conditional use, exception, planned unit development or public utility exception, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall mail notice to the owners of record of all land within the area included in the application and within 100 feet of any part of the building or premises affected not less than ten days prior to the hearing. Names and last-known addresses of such owners shall be furnished by the applicant at the time of filing the appeal or application. 
(3)  By publication of a class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. Ch. 985. 
(4)  Notice of an application for construction of a building in the bed of a future street, highway or parkway shall be published in the official newspaper not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(5)  Notice of an application for a proposed special exception in a Shoreland-Wetland District shall be mailed to the district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(b)  Time of hearing, docketing. Each appeal or application properly filed shall be numbered serially, docketed in a special book provided therefor and placed upon the calendar by the Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals. Cases docketed more than 15 days preceding a regular meeting shall be set for hearing at such meeting. Cases docketed seven days or less prior to a regular meeting shall be scheduled by the Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals, or designee, for a hearing on the second regular meeting day thereafter unless otherwise directed by the chair. 
(c)  Appearances. The appellant or applicant may appear in person or by agent or attorney. In the absence of an appearance for or against an appeal or application, the Board of Zoning Appeals may dismiss the appeal or application or may dispose of the matter on the record before it. 
(d)  Oath. Unless waived by the appellant or applicant and the chair, or as otherwise specifically provided in this Section, all witnesses shall be sworn before testifying by the chair or presiding officer. 
(e)  Compelling attendance of witnesses. The chair, or, in the absence of the chair, the presiding officer, may compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. Written request for subpoenas shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals not less than two days prior to the hearing except by special permission of the chair. 
(f)  Order of hearing. Appeals and applications shall be heard in numerical order except for good cause shown. 
(g)  Hearing procedure. All hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedure unless otherwise stipulated by the parties and approved by the chair: 
(1)  The chair shall call each hearing to order. 
(2)  Opening statements may be delivered by the appellant or applicant followed by any opening statement from the Zoning Administrator or Village representative. 
(3)  The appellant or applicant shall first present its case followed by the Zoning Administrator or Village representative. Each witness shall be subject to cross-examination followed by the opportunity for re-direct testimony. Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall also be permitted to examine witnesses the timing of which shall be subject to the discretion of the chair. 
(4)  Rebuttal testimony shall be allowed subject to the scope of the matters raised by adverse parties. 
(5)  Evidence from any other aggrieved or interested parties, if any, shall be presented after the Zoning Administrator or Village representative's case in chief. 
(6)  The Board of Zoning Appeals may accept opinion testimony and written testimony from interested parties, which shall not be subject to cross-examination, however, any party may introduce any rebuttal testimony addressing any factual issues raised. 
(7)  Closing statements shall be heard after all evidence is taken. 
(8)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall deliberate and decide the matter in accordance with Section 62-365. 
(h)  Evidence. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be bound by common-law or statutory rules of evidence except for rules of privilege. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall admit all testimony having reasonable probative value, but shall exclude immaterial, irrelevant or unduly repetitious testimony. Basic principles of relevancy, materiality and probative force shall govern the proof of all questions of fact. Objections to evidentiary offers and offers of proof of evidence not admitted may be made and shall be noted in the record. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-262; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-262), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2006-08, § 3, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2006-08, §§ 4, 5, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 33, 7-24-2017) 
State Law reference— Board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e).  
Sec. 62-365. - Decision and disposition of cases. 
(a)  Time of decision. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall render its decision either at the termination of the hearing or within 30 days thereafter and shall notify the parties in interest and the Zoning Administrator in writing of its decision. 
(b)  Form of decision. The final disposition of an appeal or application shall be in the form of a written decision or order signed by the chair and Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such decision shall state the reasons for the Board of Zoning Appeals' determination with findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal or grant or deny the special exception, conditional use of variance. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the applicant, Village Clerk-Treasurer, on behalf of the Plan Commission and any Village committee involved. 
(c)  Vote required. All orders or decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals granting a variance, exception or conditional use or reversing any action or order of the administrator shall be made by a majority of the members present if a quorum exists. 
(d)  Conditions. Variances or conditions imposed in any permit shall be stated in the decision or order embodying the Board of Zoning Appeals' decision and shall also be set forth in the building, conditional use or occupancy permit issued under that order by the Building Inspector. A permit shall be valid only as long as the conditions upon which it is granted are observed. Whenever the Board of Zoning Appeals grants an application or appeal affecting the use of any premises, shall authorization shall be deemed revoked unless the owner, occupant or agent shall, upon request, file with the Board of Zoning Appeals Secretary a written report certifying that all conditions or limitations imposed by the Board of Zoning Appeals have been conformed to and maintained. Variances, substitutions or conditional use permits approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall expire six months after issuance if the performance of work is required and substantial work has not commenced. 
(e)  Filing of decision. Every order of decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be immediately filed with the Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals who shall thereupon forward the decision to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and mail a copy to the applicant or appellant by certified mail. Copies of decisions granting conditional uses or variances in a Floodplain, Shoreland or Wetland district shall be mailed to the district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(f)  Reconsideration. 
(1)  Resubmission. No appeal or application which has been dismissed or denied shall be considered again without material alteration or revision with one year of the Board of Zoning Appeals' decision, except pursuant to court order or by motion to reconsider made by a member voting with the majority or as provided in Subsection (f)(2) of this Section. 
(2)  Rehearing. No rehearing shall be held except upon the affirmative vote for four or more members of the Board of Zoning Appeals upon finding that substantial, new evidence is submitted, which could not reasonably have been presented at the previous hearing. Requests for rehearing shall be in writing, shall state the reasons for the request and shall be accompanied by necessary data and diagrams. Rehearings shall be subject to the same notice requirements as original hearings. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-263; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-263), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2006-08, § 6, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2017-13 , §§ 34, 35, 7-24-2017) 
State Law reference— Board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e).  
Sec. 62-366. - Variances. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  A request for a variance may be made when an aggrieved party can submit proof that strict adherence to the provisions of this Zoning Code would cause the aggrieved party undue hardship or create conditions causing greater harmful effects than the initial condition. A variance granted to a nonconforming use brings that use into conformance with the district and zoning requirements. 
(2)  Persons requesting a variance shall submit such request to the Board of Zoning Appeals, who shall make a determination on the request following notice and hearing. 
(3)  The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the Zoning Code as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Zoning Code will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the Zoning Code shall be observed and substantial justice done. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district, permit a lower degree of flood protection that the flood protection elevation for the particular area or permit standards lower than those required by state law. 
(b)  Application for variances. The application for a variance shall be filed pursuant to Section 62-363. 
(c)  Public hearing of application. The public hearing for a variance shall be conducted pursuant to Section 62-364. 
(d)  Prohibited variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant use variances in Floodplain or Wetland and Conservancy Districts. In all other districts, no use variance shall be granted unless the applicant has first petitioned for a zoning amendment or a conditional use permit, if applicable, and upon a showing that no lawful and feasible use of the subject property can be made in the absence of such variance. Any use variance granted shall be limited to the specific use described in the Board of Zoning Appeals' decision and shall not permit variances in yard, area or other requirements of the district in which located. 
(e)  Standards for granting variances. 
(1)  Unnecessary hardship. Variances shall be granted only where the applicant demonstrates the existence of an unnecessary hardship. An unnecessary hardship exists where compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions governing the property would unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. When considering any variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine whether the particular restriction in question is unnecessarily burdensome in light of the underlying purpose of that restriction. The purpose of the regulation shall be the primary concern, not the burden upon the property owner. Variances may not be granted where they are contrary to the public interest or where granting the variance would violate the spirit of the regulation. A use variance may not be granted unless it is proved that there can be no reasonable use of the property absent a variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the following factors to determine whether an unnecessary hardship exists to justify issuance of an area variance: 
a.  The purpose of the zoning restriction in question; 
b.  The effect of the restriction on the property; and 
c.  The effect of a variance on the neighborhood and the larger public interest. 
(2)  Hardship may not be self-imposed. Variances may not be granted to remedy self-imposed hardships. 
(3)  Hardships must be unique to the property. Where the same hardship is imposed upon other properties in the zoning district, a variance shall not be granted. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-264; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-264), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2006-08, § 7, 4-24-2006)  
Sec. 62-367. - Review by court of record. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the offices of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-265; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-265), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-368—62-392. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
 
Sec. 62-393. - Historic preservation purpose. 
The protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements of special character or special historic interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. This Division is intended to: 
(a)  Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of such improvements, sites and districts that represent or reflect elements of the Village's cultural, social, economic, political, engineering and architectural history. 
(b)  Safeguard the Village's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historic structures, sites and districts. 
(c)  Stabilize and improve property values. 
(d)  Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past. 
(e)  Protect and enhance the Village's attractions to residents, tourists and visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry. 
(f)  Support the business, economy and industry of the Village. 
(g)  Promote the use of historic structures, sites and districts for the education, aesthetic pleasure and welfare of the people of the Village. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-280; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-280), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-394. - Historic structures and sites designation criteria. 
(a)  For the purpose of this Division, a historic structure or historic site designation may be placed on any site, natural or improved, including any improvement located thereon, or any area of particular historic, architectural or cultural significance to the Village, such as historic structures or sites that: 
(1)  Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state or community; 
(2)  Are identified with historic persons or with important events in national, state or local history; 
(3)  Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type specimen, inherently valuable for a study of a period, style, construction method, or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect. 
(b)  The Landmarks Commission may adopt specific written operating guidelines for designation of historic structures, historic sites and historic districts providing such conform with the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-281; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-281), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-395. - Landmarks Commission powers and duties. 
(a)  Designation. The Landmarks Commission may, subject to Subsection (c) of this Section, recommend that the Village Board designate historic structures, historic sites, and Historic Districts within the Village limits, based on the criteria of Section 62-394. Once so designated, such historic structures, sites and districts shall be subject to all the provisions of this Article. 
(b)  Regulation of construction, reconstruction and exterior alteration. 
(1)  Any person filing an application for a building permit involving the exterior of a designated historic structure, or structure within a Historic District shall also file such application with the Landmarks Commission. 
(2)  No person in charge of a historic structure, historic site or structure within a Historic District shall reconstruct or alter any part of the exterior of such structure or construct any improvement upon such designated historic site or improvement parcel within an Historic District or cause or permit any such work to be performed upon such property unless a certificate of appropriateness has been granted by the Landmarks Commission. Unless such certificate has been granted by the Landmarks Commission, the Building Inspector shall not issue a permit for such work. 
(3)  Upon receiving an application, the Landmarks Commission shall determine whether or not: 
a.  The proposed work would destroy, detrimentally change or adversely affect any existing exterior architectural feature of the improvement upon which said work is to be done; and 
b.  The exterior of any proposed new improvement would fail to harmonize with the external appearance of other neighboring improvements on such site; or 
c.  As to any property in a designated Historic District, construction, reconstruction or exterior alteration fails to conform to the objectives and design criteria of the historic preservation plan for said district as duly adopted by the Village Board. 
(c)  Granting of certificate. If the Landmarks Commission decides the above questions applicable in the negative, it shall grant the certificate of appropriateness. Upon the issuance of such certificate, the Building Inspector shall issue the building permit. The Landmarks Commission shall make this decision within 45 days of the filing of the application. Should the Landmarks Commission deny the application, the applicant may appeal such decision to the Village Board, which may grant said certificate by a majority vote of the membership, upon a clear showing of economic hardship by the applicant. In addition, if the Landmarks Commission fails to approve an application, the Landmarks Commission shall, at the applicant's request, cooperate and work with the applicant in an attempt to obtain a certificate of appropriateness within the guidelines of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-282; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-282), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 1, 11-26-2018)  
Sec. 62-396. - Criteria for review of alterations of historic structures. 
(a)  Height. All additions shall be no higher than the existing structure. 
(b)  Second exit platforms. Second exit platforms shall not be added to the front or sides of a structure unless not visible from the street. 
(c)  Solar collectors. Passive and active solar collectors will be allowed only if they do not detract from the architectural integrity of the structure and are as unobtrusive as possible. Solar collectors will not be permitted if they hide from street view significant architectural features of the building or neighboring buildings, if their installation requires the loss of significant architectural features, or if they are of such a large scale that they become a major feature of the design. 
(d)  Repairs. Repairs in materials that exactly duplicate the original in composition, texture and appearance are encouraged. Repairs in new materials that duplicate the original in texture and appearance are also permitted. Repairs in materials that do not duplicate the original in appearance will be permitted on an individual basis if the repairs are compatible with the character and materials of the existing building and if repairs that duplicate the original in appearance are prohibitively expensive. 
(e)  Restoration. Projects that will return the appearance are encouraged and will be permitted if such projects are documented by photographs, architectural or archeological research, or other suitable evidence. 
(f)  Aluminum or vinyl siding. 
(1)  Residing with aluminum or vinyl that replaces clapboards or nonoriginal siding on buildings originally sided with clapboards will be permitted only if the new siding imitates the width of the original siding within one inch, and provided that all architectural details (such as window trim, wood cornices, and ornament) either remain uncovered or are duplicated exactly in appearance. 
(2)  Siding that imitates wood graining will not be permitted. 
(3)  If the alteration adds additional layers of siding or insulation on the building, the new siding may be applied over it if the trim is also built up to project from the siding as in the original. 
(g)  Storm windows, screens and storm doors. The repair and retention of original storm windows, screens and storm doors, or their replacement with new units that duplicate the original in materials and appearance, is encouraged. Replacements with nonoriginal materials, such as combination metal components, may also be permitted. If metal components are used, owners are encouraged to use metal components which have been factory-enameled. Painting of raw aluminum storm windows after a year of weathering of the finish is encouraged. Storm doors that imitate a specific style shall be permitted only if the style matches the style of the house. 
(h)  Additions and alterations to street facades. The appearance of all street facades of a structure shall not be altered unless the design is sensitive to the historic character of the building. Specifically, the design shall be compatible with the existing building scale, color, texture and the proportion of solids to voids. Materials and architectural details used in such alterations and additions shall match those on the existing building. 
(i)  Additions and alterations not visible from the street. Additions and alterations not visible from streets contiguous to the lot lines are permitted if their design is compatible with the scale of the existing building and the materials used are compatible with the existing materials in texture, color and architectural details. Alterations shall harmonize with the architectural design of the building, rather than contrast with it. 
(j)  Side alterations. Side additions shall be set back from the front wall of the structure. 
(k)  Roof alteration. 
(1)  Roof alterations, creating increased building volume, additional windows, headroom or area are not permitted unless approved as a variance by the Plan Commission. In addition, the roof shape of the front of the building shall remain the same unless the owner wishes to restore an earlier, documentable appearance. 
(2)  If the existing roofing material is the same as the original, changes in the appearance of roofing materials (excluding color) are prohibited except when the repair of the existing roof is unfeasible and the cost of replacing it in kind is prohibitive. The new roof shall match the original in appearance (excluding color), as closely as is economically feasible. 
(3)  If the existing roofing material is not original to the house, the new roofing materials shall harmonize in color with the house. Thick wood shakes, rolled roofing and hexagonal shingles are prohibited. Restoration to a documentable earlier appearance is encouraged. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-283; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-283), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-397. - Regulation of demolition. 
(a)  Procedures. No permit to demolish all or part of an historic structure, or improvement in an Historic District, shall be granted by the Building Inspector except as follows: 
(1)  No person in charge of an historic structure or improvement in an Historic District shall be granted a permit to demolish such property under any circumstances without first receiving the written approval of the Landmarks Commission. 
(2)  When a person applies for a permit to demolish such property, such application shall be filed with the Landmarks Commission. Upon such application, the Landmarks Commission may refuse to grant such written approval for up to ten months from the date of such application, during which time the Landmarks Commission and the application shall undertake serious, continuing discussion to try to find a method to save such property. During such period, the applicant and the Landmarks Commission shall cooperate to try to avoid demolition of the property. At the end of the ten months, if no mutually agreeable method of saving the property bearing a reasonable prospect of eventual success is underway, or if no formal application for funds from any governmental unit or nonprofit organization to preserve the property bearing a reasonable prospect of eventual success is underway, or if no formal application for funds from any governmental unit or nonprofit organization to preserve the property is pending, the Building Inspector may issue the permit to demolish the property without the approval of the Landmarks Commission. If a mutually agreeable method for saving the subject property is pending at the end of such ten-month period, the Building Inspector shall delay the issuance of the permit to demolish the subject property for up to two months more. If the plan to save the property is not consummated by the end of the additional two months, the Building Inspector may issue the demolition permit without the approval of the Landmarks Commission. 
(b)  Standard for review of demolition applications. In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness for any demolition, the Landmarks Commission shall consider all of the following standards: 
(1)  Whether the structure is of such architectural or historic significance that its demolition would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of the Village and the State; 
(2)  Whether the structure, although not itself a designated historic structure, contributes to the distinctive architectural or historic character of an Historic District as a whole and should be preserved for the benefit of the people of the Village and the State; 
(3)  Whether the demolition of the structure would be contrary to the purpose and intent of this Section and to the objectives of the historic preservation plan for an Historic District as duly adopted by the Village Board; 
(4)  Whether the structure is of such old and unusual or uncommon design, texture and/or material that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty and/or expense; 
(5)  Whether retention of the structure would promote the general welfare of the people of the Village and the state by encouraging understanding of American culture and heritage; 
(6)  Whether the structure is in such a deteriorated condition that it is not structurally or economically feasible to preserve or restore it, provided that any hardship or difficulty claimed by the owner, which is self-created or which is the result of any failure to maintain the property in good repair cannot qualify as a basis for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness; 
(7)  Whether any new structure proposed to be constructed or change in use proposed to be made is compatible with the buildings and environment of the district in which the subject property is located. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-284; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-284), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-398. - Appeals of Landmarks Commission actions. 
A decision by the Landmarks Commission to deny a certificate of appropriateness may be appealed to the Village Board. The appeal shall be initiated by filing a petition, specifying the grounds therefor, with the Village Clerk-Treasurer within ten days of the date the decision of the Landmarks Commission is made. After a public hearing, the Village Board may, by vote of a majority of its members, reverse or modify the decision of the Landmarks Commission if, after balancing the interest of the public in preserving the subject property and the interest of the owner in using it for such owner's own purposes, the Village Board finds that, owing to special conditions pertaining to the specific piece of property, demolition will preclude any and all reasonable use of the property and/or will cause serious hardship for the owner, provided that any self-created hardship shall not be a basis for reversal or modification of the Landmarks Commission's decision. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-285; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-285), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 36, 7-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 2, 11-26-2018)  
Sec. 62-399. - Recognition of historic structures and historic sites. 
After an historic structure or site has been so designated by the Landmarks Commission, the Landmarks Commission shall cause to be placed on such property, at Village expense, a suitable plaque declaring that such property is an historic structure or site. Such plaque shall be placed for ease of pedestrian visibility. The plaque shall contain all information deemed appropriate by the Landmarks Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-286; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-286), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-400. - Rescission of historic structure of site designation; sale. 
Any owner of record of an historic structure or site who wishes to sell said historic structure but is unable to find a buyer willing to preserve such an historic structure or site, may petition the Landmarks Commission for a rescission of its designation. Such petition shall contain a verified statement that the owner has made reasonable attempts in good faith to find and attract such a buyer and such other information deemed reasonably necessary by the Landmarks Commission. Following the filing of such petition: 
(a)  The owner and the Landmarks Commission shall work together in good faith to locate a buyer for the subject property who is willing to abide by its designation. 
(b)  If, at the end of a period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such petition, no such buyer can be found and if the owner still desires to obtain such a rescission, the Landmarks Commission shall rescind its designation of the subject property. 
(c)  In the event of such rescission, the Landmarks Commission shall notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer, the Building Inspector and the Village Assessor of same, and shall cause the rescission to be recorded at Village expense in the Dane County Register of Deeds. 
(d)  Following any such rescission, the Landmarks Commission may not redesignate the subject property as an historic structure or site for at least two years from the date of rescission. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-287; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-287), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 37, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 62-401. - Historic designation procedures. 
(a)  Recommendations; notice; public hearing; independent investigation; designation. The Landmarks Commission may, after notice and public hearing, recommend that the Village Board establish historic structures, sites and historic districts. At least ten days prior to such hearing, the Landmarks Commission shall give written notice to the owners of record, listed in the Village Assessor's records, of the affected property and other property situated within 200 feet of the affected property. The Landmarks Commission shall also give notice of such hearing to the Director of Public Works, Parks and Recreation Committee, Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department, Police Department, Building Inspector and Plan Commission. Each may respond to the proposed designation or rescission in writing or by appearance. The Landmarks Commission shall then conduct such public hearing and may hear expert witnesses and may subpoena such witnesses and records as it deems necessary. The Landmarks Commission may conduct an independent investigation into the proposed designation or rescission. Within ten days after the public hearing, the Landmarks Commission may recommend to the Village Board the designation of the property as an historic structure, an historic site, or recommend to the Village Board the designation of the property as an historic structure, an historic site, or recommend its inclusion in an historic district, or may rescind the designation. The Village Board may hold a separate public hearing on the owner's or its own request before designation. After the designation or rescission of designation has occurred, notification shall be sent to the property owner and to the persons who appeared at the public hearing. The Landmarks Commission shall cause the designation or rescission to be recorded, at Village expense, in the Dane County Register of Deeds. 
(b)  Voluntary restrictive covenants. The owner of any historic structure or site may, at any time following such designation, enter into restrictive covenants on the subject property after negotiation with the Landmarks Commission. The Landmarks Commission may assist the owner in preparing such covenants in the interest of preserving the historic property. The owner shall record such covenants in the Dane County Register of Deeds, and shall notify the Village Assessor of such covenants and the conditions thereof. 
(c)  Creation of Historic District. 
(1)  The Landmarks Commission may select geographically defined areas within the Village for designation by the Village Board as Historic Districts and shall prepare a historic preservation and land use plan in ordinance form for each area. An Historic District may be designated for any geographic area of particular historic, architectural or cultural significance to the Village that: 
a.  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state or community; 
b.  Is identified with historic persons or with important events in national, state or local history; or 
c.  Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of architectural type specimens inherently valuable for study of a period, style, method, or construction, indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
d.  Is representative of the notable works of master builders, designers, or architects who influenced their age. 
(2)  Each historic preservation plan prepared for by the Landmarks Commission shall include a cultural and architectural analysis supporting the historic significance of the area, the specific guidelines for development and a statement of preservation objectives. 
(d)  Criteria for the review of alterations in Historic Districts. 
(1)  Height. All additions shall be no higher than the existing structure. 
(2)  Second exit platforms. Second exit platforms shall not be added to the front or sides of a structure unless not visible from the street. 
(3)  Solar collectors. Passive and active solar collectors will be allowed only if they do not detract from the architectural integrity of the structure and are as unobtrusive as possible. Solar collectors will not be permitted if they hide from street view significant architectural features of the building or neighboring buildings, if their installation requires the loss of significant architectural features, or if they are of such a large scale that they become a major feature of the design. 
(4)  Repairs. Repairs in materials that exactly duplicate the original in composition, texture and appearance are encouraged. Repairs in new materials that duplicate the original in texture and appearance are also permitted. Repairs in materials that do not duplicate the original in appearance will be permitted on an individual basis if the repairs are compatible with the character and materials of the existing building and if repairs that duplicate the original in appearance are prohibitively expensive. 
(5)  Restoration. Projects that will return the appearance of the building to an earlier appearance are encouraged and will be permitted if such projects are documented by photographs, architectural or archeological research, or other suitable evidence. 
(6)  Aluminum or vinyl siding. 
a.  Residing with aluminum or vinyl that replaces clapboards will be permitted, only if the new siding imitates the width of the original siding within one inch, and provided that all architectural details (such as window trim, wood cornices, and ornament) either remain uncovered or are duplicated exactly in appearance. 
b.  Siding that imitates wood graining will not be permitted. 
c.  If the alteration adds additional layers of siding or insulation on the building, the new siding may be applied over it if the trim is also built up to project from the siding as in the original. 
(7)  Storm windows, screens and storm doors. The repair and retention of original storm windows, screens and storm doors, or their replacement with new units that duplicate the original in materials and appearance is encouraged. Replacements with nonoriginal materials, such as combination metal components, may also be permitted. Painting of raw aluminum storm windows after a year of weathering of the finish is encouraged. Storm doors that imitate a specific style shall be permitted only if the style matches the style of the house. 
(8)  Additions and alterations to street facades. The appearance of all street facades of a structure shall not be altered unless the design is sensitive to the historic character of the building. Specifically, the design shall be compatible with the existing building in scale, color, texture and the proportion of solids to voids. Materials and architectural details used in such alterations and additions shall either match those on the existing building or shall be materials and details used for the original construction of other buildings in the historic district of similar materials, age, and architectural style. 
(9)  Additions and alterations not visible from the street. Additions and alterations not visible from streets contiguous to the lot lines are permitted if their design is compatible with the scale of the existing building and, the materials used are compatible with the existing materials in texture, color and architectural details. Alterations shall harmonize with the architectural design of the building, rather than contrast with it. 
(10)  Side additions. Side additions shall be set back from the front wall of the structure. 
(11)  Roof alterations. 
a.  Roof alterations creating increased building volume, additional windows, headroom, or area are not permitted unless approved as a variance by the Plan Commission. In addition, the roof shape of the front of the building shall remain the same unless the owner wishes to restore an earlier, documentable appearance. 
b.  If the existing roofing material is the same as the original, changes in the appearance of roofing materials (excluding color) are prohibited except when the repair of the existing roof is unfeasible and the cost of replacing it in kind is prohibitive. The new roof shall match the original in appearance (excluding color), as closely as is economically feasible. 
c.  If the existing roofing material is not original to the house, the new roofing materials shall harmonize in color with the house. Thick wood shakes, rolled roofing and hexagonal shingles are prohibited. Restoration to a documentable earlier appearance is encouraged. 
(e)  Criteria for the review of new construction in Historic Districts. 
(1)  Primary buildings. 
a.  Height. The maximum height for new buildings in the R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts shall be 35 feet. Conditional use permits may be granted by the Plan Commission for three story buildings of exceptional design in the R-3 zoning district. The maximum height for new buildings in the C-G zoning district shall be 40 feet, and the C-P, C-H, C-L and C-C zoning districts shall have a 35 foot height limit. Maximum heights for buildings for all commercial districts may be increased upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Plan Commission. 
b.  Roofs. The following roof shapes are encouraged: hipped, gable, gambrel, shed. Roof shapes will be considered on an individual basis, but must be compatible with the building in the visually related area. 
c.  Materials. Materials for the exterior walls of new buildings shall be the same or similar to the materials prevalent in the district. The following materials will be permitted: brick, narrow gauge horizontal clapboards under four inches in exposed width, stone, stucco, smooth shingles, or any combination of the above. The following materials are prohibited: concrete block, asbestos, wide clapboards over four inches in exposed width, diagonal boards, vertical boards, rough sawn wood, rough split shingles, shakes, and sheet metal. Other materials will be considered on an individual basis. 
d.  Visual size. The gross area of the front facade (all walls facing the street) of a single-family, two unit or commercial building shall be no greater than 125 percent of the gross area of the front facades of buildings in the visually related area. The gross area of the front facade of a multiple-family building should be no more than 125 percent of the average gross area of the front facades of all buildings within the visually related area. If this is not possible, changes in the setback should be designed in the front facade of the building to repeat the rhythm and proportions of buildings verses space between them within the visually related area. 
e.  Solar collectors. Solar collectors will be permitted on new buildings, including the front facades. Solar collectors are prohibited if such devices hide from street view significant architectural features of neighboring buildings, or are of such a large scale that they become a major feature of the design. 
f.  Parking lots. No new surface parking lots will be allowed in the R-1, R-1A or R-2 districts. In the other zoning districts, no new parking lots will be allowed unless accessory to and on the same zoning lot as a multiple unit residential building. 
(2)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be compatible with the design of the existing buildings on the zoning lot and as unobtrusive as possible. Exterior wall materials permitted are the same as for construction of new primary buildings, but should be the same as the exterior materials of existing buildings on the same zoning lot wherever possible. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-288; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-288), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 71, 11-11-2013)  
Sec. 62-402. - Historic District review and adoption procedures. 
(a)  The Landmarks Commission shall hold a public hearing when considering the plan for an Historic District. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be made by First Class Mail to the owners of the places, structures or objects of the determination, and as otherwise provided by law. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall also be sent by the Village Clerk-Treasurer to the owners of record, as listed in the assessment records, who are owners of property situated within the district or within 200 feet of the boundaries of the proposed district at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Following the public hearing, the Landmarks Commission shall vote to recommend, reject or withhold action on the plan. The recommendation, if any, shall be forwarded to the Village Board. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Landmarks Commission, the Village Board shall hold a public hearing, notice to be given as noted in Subsection (a) of this Section, and shall, following the public hearing, either designate or reject the Historic District. Designation of the Historic District shall constitute adoption of the plan in Article form prepared for that district directing implementation of said plan. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-289; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-289), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 38, 7-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 3, 11-26-2018)  
Sec. 62-403. - Conformance with regulations. 
Every person in charge of any historic structure, site or improvement in an Historic District shall maintain same or cause or permit it to be maintained in a condition consistent with the provisions of this Article. The Building Inspector shall make periodic exterior inspections at intervals provided by the Village Board of designated historic structures, sites and districts. If the Building Inspector has received a complaint from an identified citizen, the Building Inspector may inspect with physical entry upon the property and improvement, with permission of the owner, to insure that interior alterations or maintenance will not jeopardize the exterior appearance or structural stability of the improvement. If an owner refuses permission for entry, the Building Inspector may obtain a special inspection warrant pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119 and take any other reasonable measures to further enforcement of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-290; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-290), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-404. - Maintenance of historic sites. 
(a)  Every person in charge of an improvement on an historic site or in an Historic District shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement and all interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of such improvement to fall into a state of disrepair. This provision shall be in addition to all other provisions of law relating to the premises' repair. 
(b)  Insofar as applicable to an historic structure, historic site or improvement in an Historic District, any provision of the Village Plumbing Code, Building Code, Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code, and Sign Ordinance may be varied, on application, by the appropriate board having jurisdiction over such ordinance, provided such variance does not endanger public health and safety. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-291; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-291), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-405. - Conditions dangerous to life, health or property. 
Nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit necessary construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any historic structure, any improvement on an historic site or in an Historic District pursuant to order of any governmental agency or pursuant to any court judgment, for the purpose of remedying emergency conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or property. In such cases, no approval from the Landmarks Commission shall be required. 
(Code 1998, § 13-1-292; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-1-292), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-406—62-423. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLOODPLAIN ZONING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Planning and zoning, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23; zoning of wetlands and shorelands, Wis. Stats. § 61.351; site erosion control and stormwater management zoning, Wis. Stats. § 61.354; zoning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7); zoning of wetlands in shorelands, Wis. Stats. § 62.231; special inspection warrants for zoning violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0119; temporary zoning of areas proposed for annexation, Wis. Stats. § 66.0219(6); floodplain zoning, Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-424. - Statutory authorization. 
This Article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23, and the requirements in Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-1), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-425. - Finding of fact. 
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of the Village would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-2), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-426. - Statement of purpose. 
This Article is intended to regulate floodplain development to: 
(a)  Protect life, health and property; 
(b)  Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects; 
(c)  Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers; 
(d)  Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
(e)  Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain; 
(f)  Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain; 
(g)  Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers; 
(h)  Prevent increases in flood elevations that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and 
(i)  Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-3), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-427. - Title of Article. 
This Article shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-4), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-428. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(a)  A-zones. Those areas shown on Official Floodplain Zoning Maps that would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A-zones. The A-zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
(1)  AH Zone: See "area of shallow flooding" definition in Section 62-428(d) of the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  AO Zone: See "area of shallow flooding" definition in Section 62-428(d) of the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Accessory structure or use. A facility, structure, building or use that is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building. 
(c)  Alteration. An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modification other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure. 
(d)  Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or VO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
(e)  Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a Flood Insurance Study and depicted on a Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
(f)  Basement. Any enclosed area of a building having its floor below ground level on all sides. 
(g)  Building. See the definition of "structure" in this Section. 
(h)  Bulkhead line. A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a Village ordinance and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this Article. 
(i)  Campground. Any parcel of land that is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
(j)  Camping unit. Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck or tent. 
(k)  Certificate of compliance. A certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Article. 
(l)  Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water. 
(m)  Crawlways or crawl space. An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for limited access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
(n)  Deck. An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor, which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
(o)  Development. Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; 
(2)  The construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; 
(3)  The repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; 
(4)  The placement of buildings or structures; 
(5)  Subdivision layout and site preparation; 
(6)  Mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; 
(7)  The storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and 
(8)  The installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage systems or water supply facilities. 
(p)  Dryland access. A vehicular access route that is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
(q)  Encroachment. Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or development in the floodway. 
(r)  Existing manufactured home park or Subdivision. A parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
(s)  Expansion to existing manufactured home park. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring of concrete pads. 
(t)  Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(u)  Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by: 
(1)  The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
(2)  The rapid accumulation or runoff or surface waters from any source; 
(3)  The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; and 
(4)  The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
(v)  Flood frequency. The probability of a flood occurrence that is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year. 
(w)  Flood hazard boundary map. A map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
(x)  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). A map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration (FEMA) has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(y)  Flood insurance study (FIS). A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A-zones. Flood insurance rate maps, that accompany the flood insurance study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(z)  Flood profile. A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river. 
(aa)  Flood protection elevation. An elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. 
(bb)  Flood storage. Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
(cc)  Floodfringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway that is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water. 
(dd)  Floodplain. Land that has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes. 
(ee)  Floodplain island. A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
(ff)  Floodplain management. Policy and procedures to insure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
(gg)  Floodproofing. Any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage. 
(hh)  Floodway. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
(ii)  Freeboard. A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood elevations greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed. 
(jj)  Habitable structures. Any structure or portion thereof used or designated for human habitation. 
(kk)  Hearing notice. Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. Ch. 985. For all zoning ordinances, amendments and appeals, a class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. 
(ll)  High flood damage potential. Damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents. 
(mm)  Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground service prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
(nn)  Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register. 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered Historic District or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered Historic District. 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs, which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
(4)  Individually listed on the inventory of historic landmarks established by the Landmarks Commission that have been certified by the State Historical Society of Wisconsin. 
(oo)  Increase in regional flood elevation. A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions, which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
(pp)  Land use. Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see the definition of "development" in this Section.) 
(qq)  Lowest adjacent grade. Elevation of the lowest ground service that touches any of the exterior walls of a structure. 
(rr)  Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basements). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than the basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3. 
(ss)  Maintenance. The act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, non-structural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems with equivalent fixtures, systems or equipment. 
(tt)  Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle." 
(uu)  Mobile recreational vehicle. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles." 
(vv)  Model, corrective effective. A hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the Duplicate Effective Model, adds any cross sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in the current Effective Model. 
(ww)  Duplicate Effective Model. A copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective Flood Insurance Study and referred to as the "Effective Model." 
(xx)  Model, effective. The hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study. 
(yy)  Model, existing (pre-project). A modification of the Duplicate Effective Model or Corrective Effective Model to reflect any man-made modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the Effective Model but prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the Effective Model, then this Model would be identical to the Corrected Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model. 
(zz)  Model, revised (post-project). A modification of the existing Model, Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect revised or post-project conditions. 
(aaa)  NAVD or North American Vertical Datum. Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
(bbb)  NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum. Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
(ccc)  New construction. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction occurred on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by the Village and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
(ddd)  Nonconforming structure. An existing lawful structure or building that is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this Article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the Floodfringe District is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.) 
(eee)  Nonconforming use. An existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.) 
(fff)  Obstruction to flow. Any development that blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood elevation. 
(ggg)  Official Floodplain Zoning Maps. Maps, adopted and made part of this Article, as described in Section 62-430(a), which have been approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and FEMA. 
(hhh)  Open space use. Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
(iii)  Ordinary high-water mark. The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
(jjj)  Person. An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
(kkk)  Private sewage system. A sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a mound system, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel from the structure. 
(lll)  Public utilities. Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
(mmm)  Reasonably safe from flooding. Means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
(nnn)  Regional flood. A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the flood insurance rate map, the RFE is equivalent to the base flood elevation. 
(ooo)  Start of construction. The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the principal structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(ppp)  Structure. Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
(qqq)  Subdivision. Has the meaning given in Section 56-2, and Wis. Stats. Ch. 236(12). 
(rrr)  Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(sss)  Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvements or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement, regardless of the work performed. The term does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building inspector and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
(ttt)  Unnecessary hardship. Where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance. 
(uuu)  Variance. An authorization by the Board of Zoning Appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner that is inconsistent with dimensional standards contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance. Use variances from the terms of this Article are prohibited. 
(vvv)  Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, Floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(www)  Water surface profile. A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
(xxx)  Watershed. The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
(yyy)  Well. An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-90), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 1—11, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-429. - Areas to be regulated. 
This Article regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-10), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-430. - District boundaries. 
(a)  Official Maps and revisions. The boundaries of all Floodplain Districts are designated as floodplains or A-zones on the maps listed below and the revisions in the Village of McFarland Floodplain Appendix on file in the Village Community Development Department. Any change to the base flood elevations in the flood insurance study or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map must be reviewed and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and FEMA before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. These maps and revisions are on file in the Village Community Development Department. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
(b)  Official Floodplain Zoning Maps based on the flood insurance study dated September 17, 2014, volume numbers 55025CV001C and 55025CV002C. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers 55025C 0439 G, 55025C 0437 G, and 55025C 0441 G, dated January 2, 2009, and 55025C 0443H, 55025C 0444H dated September 17, 2014. Approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and FEMA. 
(c)  Official Maps based on other studies. Dane County Flood Storage District, Panel 5 of 21, and Panel 20 of 21 dated September 17, 2014, prepared and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(d)  Establishment of districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into four districts as follows: 
(1)  The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters. 
(2)  The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway. 
(3)  The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood. It encompasses both the Floodway and Floodfringe Districts. 
(4)  The Flood Storage District (FSD) is that area of the floodplain where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional flood discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-11), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2010-03, §§ 1—4, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 2014-08, §§ 1, 2, 6-23-2014)  
Sec. 62-431. - Locating floodplain boundaries. 
Discrepancies between boundaries on Official Floodplain Zoning Maps and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in Subsections (1) or (2) of this Section. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to Division 8. The Zoning Administrator may rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this Section. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to Section 62-577(e) and the criteria in Subsections (1) and (2) of this Section. 
(a)  If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. 
(b)  Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale, visual on-site inspection and any information provided by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(c)  Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must also approve any map amendment pursuant to Section 62-609(6). 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-12), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 5, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 62-432. - Removal of lands from floodplain. 
Compliance with the provisions of this Article shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to Division 8 of this Article. This procedure does not remove the requirements for the mandatory purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to request a Letter of Map Change (LOMC). 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-13), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 6, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 62-433. - Compliance with Article. 
(a)  Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this Article shall be in compliance with the terms of this Article and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(b)  Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all local governments shall comply with this Article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies shall be required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-14), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-434. - Abrogation and greater restrictions; interpretation of Article. 
(a)  Greater restrictions. This Article supersedes all the provisions of Article I of this Chapter. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this Article, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  Abrogation. This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this Article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Article shall prevail. 
(c)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Article are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the Village and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this Article, required by Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this Article is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-15), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-435. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The flood protection standards in this Article are based on engineering experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur or the flood elevation may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Article does not imply or guarantee that nonfloodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. In addition, this Article does not create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-16), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-436. - Severability. 
Should any portion of this Article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Article shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-17), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-437. - Annexed areas for cities and villages. 
The Dane County Floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation of any property shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the Village for all annexed areas until the Village adopts and enforces an ordinance that meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 116 and the National Flood Insurance Program for such annexed areas. These annexed lands are described on the Village's Official Zoning Map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this Section and are on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-18), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-438. - General standards applicable to all Floodplain Districts. 
(a)  General development standards. The Zoning Administrator shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the standards of this Subsection. All Subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the Subdivision definition of this Article. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, natural gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(b)  Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(1)  Except as allowed in Subsection (b)(3) of this Section, no floodplain development shall: 
a.  Obstruct flow, as defined in Section 62-428, increasing regional flood elevation; or 
b.  Increase regional flood elevation due to floodplain storage area lost, which equals or exceeds 0.01 foot. 
(2)  The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood elevations, based on the officially adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map or other adopted map, unless the provisions of Subsection (b)(3) of this Section are met. 
(3)  Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be permitted if amendments are made to this Article, the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Division 8 of this Article. 
(c)  Watercourse alterations. 
(1)  No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(2)  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the Zoning Administrator shall apply for a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA. Any such alterations shall be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR according to Division 8 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-18), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 7, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 12—14, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-439. - Wis. Stats. Chs. 30 and 31, development. 
Development that requires a permit from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, under Wis. Stats. Chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may only be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, base flood elevations established in the Flood Insurance Study, or other data from the officially adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map or other Floodplain Zoning Maps or the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance are made according to Division 8 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-20), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 8, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 62-440. - Public or private campgrounds. 
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(a)  The campground is approved by the Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services. 
(b)  A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning Administrator/Plan Commission. 
(c)  The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground is such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants. 
(d)  There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this Section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the Village emergency government coordinator and the Chief of Police, which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation. 
(e)  This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated, by the officials identified in Subsection (d) of this Section, to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services and all other applicable regulations. 
(f)  Only camping units are allowed. 
(g)  The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours. 
(h)  All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this Section. 
(i)  The Village shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this Section. 
(j)  All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either this Division or Division 3 of this Article for the Floodplain District in which the structure is located. 
(k)  The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued. 
(l)  All service facilities, including, but not limited to, refuse collection, electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-21), 12-8-2008)  
Secs. 62-441—62-463. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) 
 
Sec. 62-464. - Applicability. 
This Division applies to all floodway areas on Official Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to Section 62-522. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-20), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-465. - Permitted uses. 
The following open space uses are permitted in the Floodway District and the floodway areas of the general Floodplain District, if: they are not prohibited by any other ordinance; they meet the standards in Sections 62-466 and 62-467; and all permits or certificates have been issued according to Section 62-574. 
(a)  Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting. 
(b)  Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips. 
(c)  Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of Section 62-466(d). 
(d)  Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with Sections 62-466 and 62-467. 
(e)  Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with Section 62-466(d). 
(f)  Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. Chs. 30 and 31. 
(g)  Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with Section 62-466(c). 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-21), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-466. - Standards for developments in floodway areas. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Any development in floodway areas shall comply with Section 62-438(a) and have a low flood damage potential. 
(2)  Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to Section 62-438(b): 
a.  A cross section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or 
b.  An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood elevation. 
(3)  The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will cause any increase of the flood elevations upstream or downstream based on the data submitted for Subsection (a)(2) of this Section. 
(b)  Structures. Structures accessory to permitted open space uses, classified as historic structures, or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  The structures are not designed for human habitation and do not have a high flood damage potential; 
(2)  The structures must cause no increase to flood levels during the occurrence of the Regional Flood; 
(3)  The structures are properly anchored to prevent them from floating away and restricting bridge openings or other restricted sections of the stream or river; and 
(4)  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation. 
(5)  The structures shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls, having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The opening shall be equipped with screens, louvers or other openings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(c)  Utilities. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and 
(2)  Construction meets the development standards of Section 62-438(b). 
(d)  Fill. Fill or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if: 
(1)  The requirements of Section 62-438(b) are met; 
(2)  No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 30, and a permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this Section are met; 
(3)  The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and 
(4)  The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous waste material. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-22), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 15, 16, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-467. - Prohibited uses. 
All uses not listed as permitted uses in Section 62-465 are prohibited, including the following uses: 
(a)  Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses; 
(b)  Storage of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life; 
(c)  Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts; 
(d)  Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 83; 
(e)  Any public or private wells that are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code Chs. NR 811 and 812; 
(f)  Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(g)  Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 110.15(3)(b); 
(h)  Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway, which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-23), 12-8-2008)  
Secs. 62-468—62-487. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF) 
 
Sec. 62-488. - Applicability. 
This Section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on Official Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to Section 62-522. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-30), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-489. - Permitted uses. 
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the Floodfringe District if the standards in Section 62-490 are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in Section 62-575 have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-31), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-490. - Standards for development in floodfringe areas. 
(a)  Standards. All of the provisions of Section 62-438(b) shall apply. In addition, the following requirements shall apply according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the Floodplain District must comply with Division 6 of the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Residential uses. Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved into the floodfringe area, shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
(1)  The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be two feet above RFE and on elevated fill. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources may authorize other floodproofing measures if the elevations of existing streets or sewer lines makes compliance impractical and the Board of Zoning Appeals grants a variance; 
(2)  The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation (refer to Section 62-579); 
(3)  Contiguous dryland access, defined in Section 62-428 as a vehicle access route above regional flood elevation, shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in Subsection (b)(4) of this Section. 
(4)  In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with Subsection (b)(3) of this Section impractical, the Village may permit new development and substantial improvements where access roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, if: 
a.  The Village has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
b.  The Village has a natural disaster plan approved by the State Division of Emergency Management and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(c)  Accessory structures or uses. An accessory structure or use not connected to a principal structure, and which is less than 600 sq. ft. in size and valued at less than $10,000.00 may be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation, subject to flood velocities of no more than two feet per second, and shall meet all the provisions identified in Sections 62-466(b)(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5), and Subsection (f) of this Section. 
(d)  Commercial uses. Any commercial structure that is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall meet the requirements identified in Subsection (b) of this Section. Subject to the requirements identified in Subsection (f) of this Section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(e)  Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure that is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other floodproofing measures in Section 62-579. Subject to the requirements of Subsection (f) of this Section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(f)  Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with Section 62-579. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(g)  Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans, and the following: 
(1)  When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in compliance with Section 62-579 to the flood protection elevation; 
(2)  Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(h)  Sewage systems. All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, in compliance with Section 62-579, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 383. 
(i)  Wells. All wells shall be floodproofed, in compliance with Section 62-579, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code Chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(j)  Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas. 
(k)  Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this Article. 
(l)  Manufactured homes. 
(1)  Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and Subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval of and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with the Village's Head of Emergency Government Services. 
(2)  In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation, and be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
(3)  Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(m)  Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in Subsections (l)(1), (2) and (3) of this Section. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-32), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 9, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 17—19, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-491. - Other Floodplain Districts. 
Other Floodplain Districts may be established under this Division and reflected on the Floodplain Zoning Map. These districts may include General Floodplain Districts and Flood Storage Districts. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10, 1-11-2010)  
Secs. 62-492—62-518. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP) 
 
Sec. 62-519. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which flood profiles are not available or where flood profiles are available but floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and Floodfringe Districts shall be delineated when adequate data is available. 
(b)  Description of district. The General Floodplain District shall include all A, AO or AH-zones shown on Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, which is based on Flood Insurance Study Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary Maps showing the river and its tributaries in the Village, prepared by FEMA and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-40), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, § 20, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-520. - Permitted uses. 
Pursuant to Section 62-522, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe area. Those uses permitted in floodway (Section 62-465) and floodfringe areas (Section 62-489) are allowed within the General Floodplain District, according to the standards of Section 62-521, provided that all permits or certificates required under Section 62-575 have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-41), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-521. - Standards for development in the General Floodplain District. 
(a)  In AO or AH Zones, the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the conditions specified herein, whichever is higher: 
(1)  At or above the flood protection elevation; 
(2)  Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or 
(3)  The depth as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
(b)  In AO or AH Zones, an applicant shall provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters on structures. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-42), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, § 21, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-522. - Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. 
Upon receiving an application for development within the General Floodplain District, the Zoning Administrator shall: 
(a)  Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan that shows the proposed development with respect to the general Floodplain District limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures, as well as the flood zone as shown on the applicable Flood Insurance Rate Map; 
(b)  Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries: 
(1)  A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in Section 62-575(a)(3). 
(2)  Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information; 
(3)  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream; 
(4)  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(c)  Transmit one copy of the information described in Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources' regional office along with a written request for technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of Section 62-575(a)(3) apply, the applicant shall provide all required information and computations to delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood elevations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-43), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 22, 23, 6-11-2012)  
DIVISION 5. - FLOOD STORAGE DISTRICT (FSD) 
 
Sec. 62-523. - General. 
The Flood Storage District delineates that portion of the floodplain where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to reduce the regional flood discharge. The District protects the flood storage areas and assures that any development in the storage areas will not decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would cause higher flood elevations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 12, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 62-524. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this Section apply to all areas within the Flood Storage District, as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 12, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 62-525. - Permitted uses. 
Any use or development which occurs in a Flood Storage District must meet the applicable requirements in Section 62-490. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 12, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 62-526. - Standards for development in Flood Storage Districts. 
(a)  Development in a Flood Storage District shall not cause an increase equal or greater than 0.01 of a foot in the height of the regional flood. 
(b)  No development shall be allowed that removes flood storage volume unless an equal volume of storage, as defined by the pre-development ground surface, and the regional flood elevation shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost (compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage. 
(c)  If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be developed unless the entire area zoned as Flood Storage District—On this waterway—Is rezoned to the Floodfringe District. This must include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge calculated without floodplain storage, as per Section 62-609. 
(d)  No area may be removed from the Flood Storage District unless it can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 12, 1-11-2010)  
Secs. 62-527—62-552. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - NONCONFORMING USES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 2010-03, adopted Jan. 11, 2010, renumbered former Divs. 5—8 as Divs. 6—9. 
 
Sec. 62-553. - General. 
If these standards conform with Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h) they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises that was lawful before the passage of the ordinance from which this Article is derived or any amendment thereto. The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use that is not in conformity with the provisions of this Article may continue subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this Article. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered modifications or additions. Ordinary maintenance repairs include painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not include any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure. The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure; 
(b)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this Article; 
(c)  The Village shall keep a record that lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their current equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions that have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent; 
(d)  No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would exceed 50 percent of its current equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this Article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section 62-490(b). The costs of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provision of this Subsection; 
(e)  No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structures with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50 percent of the structure's current assessed value shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section 62-490(b). 
(f)  If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under subsections (d) and (e) equals or exceeds 50% of the current assessed value, the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with Section 62-490(b). 
(g)  The following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  Except as provided in Subsection (e)(2) of this Section, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the ordinance requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition exceeds 50 percent of the structure's current equalized assessed value; 
(2)  For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of the construction: 
a.  Residential structures shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls meeting the requirement of Section 62-579. 
2.  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage. 
3.  Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from any federal, state or other source. 
5.  In AO Zones with no elevations specified, the structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards specified in Section 62-521 and shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure. 
b.  Nonresidential structures shall meet the requirements of: 
1.  Sections 62-553(g)(2)a.1. and 2. and 4. and 5. 
2.  Having either the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards of Section 62-579. 
3.  In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards of Section 62-521. 
(h)  A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with Section 62-466(a), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with Section 62-579 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the development standards of Section 62-553 if it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation of an historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-50), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 24—27, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-554. - Floodway areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such modification or addition: 
(1)  Has been granted a permit or variance, which meets all ordinance requirements for granting such permits or variance; 
(2)  Meets the requirements of Section 62-553; 
(3)  Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood elevation; and 
(4)  Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to Section 62-579, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation. 
(5)  If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade; 
b.  The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials; 
c.  Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and 
d.  The use must be limited to parking or limited storage. 
(b)  No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 383. 
(c)  No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code Chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-51), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, § 28, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-555. - Floodfringe areas. 
(a)  No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the Village, and the modification or addition is placed on fill or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the standards for that particular use in Section 62-490, except where Subsection (b) of this Section is applicable. 
(b)  Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection (a) of this Section would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the Board of Zoning Appeals, using the procedures established in Section 62-577, may grant a variance from those provisions of Subsection (a) of this Section for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed in this Subsection. Modifications or additions that are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(1)  No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures; 
(2)  Human lives are not endangered; 
(3)  Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed; 
(4)  Flood depths will not exceed two feet; 
(5)  Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and 
(6)  The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in Section 62-490(f). 
(c)  If neither the provisions of Subsection (a) or (b) of this Section can be met, one addition to an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in the floodfringe, if the addition: 
(1)  Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or variance; 
(2)  Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and 
(3)  In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the building, does not exceed 50 percent of the current equalized assessed value of the building. 
(d)  All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. SPS 383. 
(e)  All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well, shall meet the applicable provisions of this Article and Wis. Admin. Code Chs. NR 811 and 812. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-52), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, § 29, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-556. - Flood storage areas. 
No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure in a flood storage area unless the standards outlined in Section 62-526 are met. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 13, 1-11-2010)  
Secs. 62-557—62-573. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Div. 6. 
Note— The Division provides for the appointment of appropriate boards and staff and the development of necessary policies and procedures to administer the floodplain zoning ordinance in accordance with this Article. Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7), these officials shall also administer the floodplain zoning ordinance. 
 
Sec. 62-574. - Zoning Administrator. 
The Village Zoning Administrator is authorized to administer this Article and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(a)  Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(b)  Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this Article and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(c)  Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(d)  Keep records of all official actions, including: 
(1)  All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved; 
(2)  Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations for floodplain development; 
(3)  Records of water surface profiles, floodplain Zoning Maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures, including changes, appeals, variances and amendments; 
(4)  Issuance of floodproofing certificates; 
(5)  List of all known nonconforming structures and uses; 
(6)  All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures. 
(e)  Submit copies of the following items to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources' regional office: 
(1)  Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments; 
(2)  Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information required by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources including an annual summary of the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken; 
(3)  Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning assessments. 
(f)  Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this Article to the Village Plan Commission and Attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources' Regional office. 
(g)  Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA regional office. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-60), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, § 30, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-575. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Building permit. A building permit or approval by the Plan Commission, if applicable, shall be obtained before any new development or any repair or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the Zoning Administrator shall include: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor; 
b.  Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification. 
(2)  Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
a.  Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the parcel; 
b.  Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
c.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street centerlines; 
d.  Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage disposal systems or private water supply systems; 
e.  Location and elevation of existing or future access roads; 
f.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from Official Floodplain Zoning Maps; 
g.  The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using National Geodetic and Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); 
h.  Data sufficient to determine the Regional Flood Elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of Divisions 2 and 3 of this Article are met; and 
i.  Data sufficient to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood elevation or discharge in accordance with Section 62-438(b). This may include any of the information noted in Section 62-466. 
(3)  Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the State. The contractor engaging the engineer shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of all hydraulic and hydrologic studies. All such studies shall also be reviewed the Department. 
a.  Zone A Floodplains. 
1.  Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.07(3). 
2.  Hydraulic Modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.07(4), and the following: 
i.  Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study. 
ii.  Channel sections must be surveyed. 
iii.  Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the development of cross section over bank and floodplain mapping. 
iv.  Maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of the channel of each location. 
v.  The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used. 
vi.  A survey of bridge and culvert openings in the top of road is required at each structure. 
vii.  Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet. 
viii.  Standard accepting engineering practices shall be used when assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and contraction coefficients or effective low limits. The base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high water marks to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available, adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard accepted engineering practices. 
ix.  The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet. 
3.  Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway. 
i.  If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation. 
ii.  If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be analyzed within the base model to show the difference between existing and proposed conditions. The study shall insure that all coefficients remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on standard accepted engineering practices is provided. 
b.  Zone AE Floodplains. 
1.  Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.07(3). 
2.  Hydraulic Model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code § 116.07(4), and the following: 
i.  Duplicate Effective Model. The Effective Model shall be reproduced to insure correct transference of the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a continuous Flood Insurance Study model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If data from the Effective Model is available, models shall be generated the duplicate the Flood Insurance Study profiles and the elevations shown in the Floodway Data Table in the Flood Insurance Study report to within 0.1 foot. 
ii.  Corrected Effective Model. The Corrected Effective Model shall not include any man-made physical changes occurring after the Effective Model date, but shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for Department review. 
iii.  Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model. The Existing Model shall be required to support conclusions about actual impacts of the project associated with the Revised (Post-Project) Model or to establish more up-to-date models on which to base the Revised (Post-Project) Model. 
iv.  Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model. The Revised (Post-Project) Model shall incorporate the Existing Model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions. 
v.  All changes to the Duplicate Effective Model and subsequent models shall be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes. 
vi.  Changes to the Hydraulic Models shall be limited to the stream reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the Effective Model and result in water surface elevations and top-widths computed by the revised models matching those in the Effective Model upstream and downstream of the revised reach as required. The Effective Model shall not be truncated. 
3.  Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the Department for review which meets the following conditions: 
i.  Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary Floodway Maps, construction plans, bridge plans. 
ii.  Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval and a planinemptric map showing the applicable items. If the digital version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the Flood Insurance Rate Map may be more easily revised. 
iii.  Annotated Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel showing the revised one percent and 0.2 percent annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries. 
iv.  If an annotated Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Boundary Floodway Map and digital mapping data (either GIS or CADD) are used, then all supporting documentation or metadata must be included with the data submission along with the Universal Transverse Mercator Projection and State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications. 
v.  The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain boundaries. 
vi.  All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in accordance with the effective map and a cross section look up table shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme. 
vii.  Both the current and proposed floodways shall be visible on the map. 
viii.  The stream centerline or profile baseline used to measure street distance in the model shall be visible on the map. 
(4)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this Article shall expire one year after issuance. 
(b)  Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building that is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this Article; 
(2)  Application of such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit; 
(3)  If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is completed; 
(4)  The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or registered architect that floodproofing measures meet the requirements of Section 62-579. 
(c)  Other permits. The applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-61), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, § 31, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-576. - Plan Commission functions. 
(a)  The Plan Commission shall: 
(1)  Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and 
(2)  Review and advise the Village Board on all proposed amendments to this Article, maps and text. 
(b)  The Plan Commission shall not: 
(1)  Grant variances to the terms of this Article; or 
(2)  Amend the text or Zoning Maps in place of official action by the Village Board. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-62), 12-8-2008)  
Sec. 62-577. - Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(a)  Generally. The Board of Zoning Appeals, created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e) is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this Article. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of its business. The Zoning Administrator may not be the Secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall: 
(1)  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this Article. 
(2)  Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on Official Floodplain Zoning Maps. 
(3)  Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance standards. 
(c)  Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the Village affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the Board of Zoning Appeals, by filing with the Zoning Administrator, and with the Board of Zoning Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all records regarding the matter appealed. 
(d)  Notice and hearing for appeals including variances. 
(1)  Notice. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall: 
a.  Fix a reasonable time for the hearing; 
b.  Publish a class 2 notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; 
c.  Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
(2)  Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall: 
a.  Resolve boundary disputes according to Subsection (e) of this Section; 
b.  Decide variance applications according to Subsection (f) of this Section; 
c.  Decide appeals of permit denials according to Section 62-578. 
(3)  Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
a.  Be made within a reasonable time; 
b.  Be sent to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources regional office within ten days of the decision; 
c.  Be a written determination signed by the chair or of the Board of Zoning Appeals; 
d.  State the specific facts that are the basis for the Board of Zoning Appeals' decision; 
e.  Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; 
f.  Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board of Zoning Appeals proceedings. 
(e)  Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board of Zoning Appeals in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries: 
(1)  If a Floodplain District boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined. 
(2)  In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(3)  If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board of Zoning Appeals should notify the Plan Commission or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the Village Board for a map amendment according to Division 8 of this Article. 
(f)  Variance. 
(1)  The Board of Zoning Appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this Article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
a.  Literal enforcement of this Article provisions will cause unnecessary hardship; 
b.  The hardship is due to adoption of this Article and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended; 
c.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and 
d.  The variance is consistent with the purpose of this Article in Section 62-426. 
(2)  In addition to the criteria in Subsection (f)(1) of this Section, to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria should be met: 
a.  The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation; 
b.  Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the regional flood elevation; 
c.  Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause; shall be the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances; shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts; and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. 
(3)  A variance shall not: 
a.  Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district; 
b.  Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss; 
c.  Be granted for a hardship that is self-created; 
d.  Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area; 
e.  Permit a lower degree of flood protection in the floodplain than the flood protection elevation; 
f.  Allow actions without the amendments to this Article or maps required in Section 62-609; 
g.  Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
(4)  When a floodplain variance is granted the Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify the applicant in writing that the variance may increase flood insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-63), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 14, 1-11-2010) 
State Law reference— Board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e).  
Sec. 62-578. - Review appeals of permit denials. 
(a)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall review all data constituting the basis for the appeal of permit denial. This may include: 
(1)  Permit application data listed in Section 62-575(a); 
(2)  Floodway/floodfringe determination data in Section 62-522; 
(3)  Data listed in Section 62-466(a)(2)b. where the applicant has not submitted this information to the Zoning Administrator; 
(4)  Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals with the appeal. 
(b)  For appeals of all denied permits the Board of Zoning Appeals shall: 
(1)  Follow the procedures of Section 62-577; 
(2)  Consider Plan Commission recommendations; and 
(3)  Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(c)  For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Board of Zoning Appeals shall: 
(1)  Uphold the denial where the Board of Zoning Appeals agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners. 
(2)  Grant the appeal where the Board of Zoning Appeals agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-64), 12-8-2008) 
State Law reference— Board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e).  
Sec. 62-579. - Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses. 
(a)  No permit or variance shall be issued for a non-residential structure designed to be water tight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure for development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate. 
(b)  For a structure to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either: 
(1)  Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
(2)  Meets or exceeds the following standards: 
a.  A minimum of two openings have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(c)  Floodproofing measures shall be designed to: 
(1)  Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces or other regional flood factors; 
(2)  Protect structures to the flood protection elevation; 
(3)  Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; 
(4)  Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and 
(5)  Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-65), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, § 32, 6-11-2012) 
Editor's note— Section 32 of Ord. No. 2012-05A, adopted June 11, 2012, changed the title of § 62-579 from "Floodproofing" to "Floodproofing standards for nonconforming structures or uses."  
Sec. 62-580. - Public information. 
(a)  The Village may place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood. 
(b)  All flood maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available with the Zoning Administrator for distribution. 
(c)  All real estate transfers shall show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-66), 12-8-2008)  
Secs. 62-581—62-608. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - AMENDMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Div. 6. 
 
Sec. 62-609. - Amendments. 
Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 62-610. 
(a)  In AE Zones within a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases may be permitted unless the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 62-610. Any such alterations shall be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR. 
(b)  In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with Section 62-610. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05A, § 34, 6-11-2012)  
Sec. 62-610. - General. 
The Village Board may change or supplement the Floodplain Zoning District boundaries and this Article in the manner provided by law. Actions that require an amendment to the floodplain ordinance and/or submittal of a Letter of Map Change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Any change to Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, including floodway lines or boundary of any floodplain areas; 
(b)  Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain Zoning Maps; 
(c)  Any fill in the floodplain that raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain; 
(d)  Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood elevation 0.01 foot or more; 
(e)  Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis. Admin. Code § NR 116.05, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the Village; 
(f)  All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a flood insurance rate map and requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-70), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 33, 35, 6-11-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 33, 35, adopted June 11, 2012, renumbered and amended former § 62-609 as § 62-610.  
Sec. 62-611. - Procedures. 
Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. Such petitions shall include all necessary data required by Sections 62-522 and 62-575(a). 
(a)  The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan Commission for a public hearing and recommendation to the Village Board. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources' Regional office for review prior to the hearing according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(b)  No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(c)  Any person petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow, causing any increase in the regional flood elevation, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal permission from all adversely affected property owners and shall notify all local units of government in which adversely affected property is located before the amendment can be approved by the Village Board. 
(d)  For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the Plan Commission or Village Board shall consider data submitted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, the Zoning Administrator's visual on-site inspections and other available information. (See Section 62-431.) 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-71), 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 33, 36, 6-11-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-05A, §§ 33, 36, adopted June 11, 2012, renumbered and amended former § 62-610 as § 62-611.  
Secs. 62-612—62-629. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Div. 6. 
 
Sec. 62-630. - Generally. 
Any violation of the provisions of this Article by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the Village Attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the Village not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00, together with all taxable costs and assessments of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this Article is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the Village, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(13-2-80), 12-8-2008)  
Secs. 62-631—62-639. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Planning and zoning, Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23; zoning of wetlands and shorelands, Wis. Stats. § 61.351; site erosion control and stormwater management zoning, Wis. Stats. § 61.354; zoning, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7); zoning of wetlands in shorelands, Wis. Stats. § 62.231; special inspection warrants for zoning violations, Wis. Stats. § 66.0119; temporary zoning of areas proposed for annexation, Wis. Stats. § 66.0219(6); floodplain zoning, Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-640. - Statutory authorization. 
This Article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 61.351, 87.30 and 281.33. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-1; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-1), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-641. - Findings of fact and purpose. 
Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and the pollution of the navigable waters of the Village would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare and impair the tax base. The legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility of all municipalities to: 
(a)  Promote the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare; 
(b)  Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands; 
(c)  Prevent and control water pollution by filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters and to maintain stormwater and floodwater capacity; 
(d)  Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other fish and aquatic habitat; 
(e)  Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and 
(f)  Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth moving activities. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-2; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-2), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-642. - Title of Article. 
This Article shall be known as the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Ordinance/Article for the Village of McFarland, Wisconsin. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-3; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-3), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-643. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Accessory structure or use. A detached subordinate structure or a use that is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principal structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use. 
(b)  Boathouse. As defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.121(1), a permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all structures that are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any combination of structural parts. 
(c)  Class 2 public notice. Publication of a public hearing notice under Wis. Stats. Ch. 985, in a newspaper of circulation in the affected area. Publication is required on two consecutive weeks, the last at least seven days prior to the hearing. 
(d)  Conditional use. A use that is permitted by some ordinances, provided that certain conditions specified in the ordinance are met and that a permit is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or, where appropriate, the Village Plan Commission, if designated by the Village Board. 
(e)  Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; 
(2)  The construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; 
(3)  The placement of buildings or structures; 
(4)  Ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and 
(5)  The deposition or extraction of earthen materials. 
(f)  Drainage system. One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices, which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge. 
(g)  Environmental control facility. Any facility, temporary or permanent that is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
(h)  Fixed houseboat. As defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.121(1), a structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway. 
(i)  Navigable waters. Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. Notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Wis. Stats. § 62.231, and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 117, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if: 
(1)  Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river; 
(2)  Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching; and 
(3)  Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
(j)  Ordinary high-water mark. The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic. 
(k)  Planning agency. The Village Plan Commission created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1). 
(l)  Regional flood. A flood determined to be representative or large floods known to have generally occurred in Wisconsin and which may be expected to occur or be exceeded on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics, once in every 100 years. 
(m)  Shorelands. Lands within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
(n)  Shoreland-Wetland District. The zoning district, created in this shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps, which have been adopted and made a part of this Article as described in Section 62-705. 
(o)  Unnecessary hardship. That circumstance where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purpose of this Article. 
(p)  Variance. An authorization granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals to construct, alter or use a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards of this Article. 
(q)  Wetlands. Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions. 
(r)  Wetland alteration. Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-41; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-41), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-644. - Compliance. 
The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland area of the Village shall be in full compliance with the terms of this Article and other applicable local, state, or federal regulations. (However, see Section 62-709 for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-10; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-10), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-645. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, town and counties are required to comply with this Article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13), applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.12(4)(a), applies. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-11; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-11), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-646. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  This Article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23 or 87.30, which relate to shoreland-wetlands, except that where another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than the provisions contained in this Article, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b)  This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this Article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Article shall prevail. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-12; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-12), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-647. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally constructed in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this Article is required by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 117, and where the Article provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 117 standard in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this Article is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this Article. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-13; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-13), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-648. - Federal compliance. 
All activities or proposed activities involving wetlands or suspected wetlands adjacent to navigable waterways irrespective of distance from said waterway shall be referred to the Corps of Engineers to determine the scope of compliance with applicable federal regulations prior to any wetland alteration occurring. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-14; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-14), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-649. - Measurement of distances. 
All distances unless otherwise specified shall be measured horizontally. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-41)  
Sec. 62-650. - Enforcement and penalties. 
Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced, or any use or accessory use established after the effective date of ordinance from which this Article is derived in violation of the provisions of this Article, by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation. The Zoning Administrator shall refer violations to the Village Board and the Village Attorney who shall prosecute such violations. Any person, firm, association or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a forfeiture as specified in Section 1-16, together with the taxable costs of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this Article is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the Village, the state or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30(2). 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-40; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-40), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-651—62-673. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 62-674. - Zoning Administrator. 
The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers: 
(a)  Advise applications as to the provisions of this Chapter and assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms. 
(b)  Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this Chapter. 
(c)  Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions. 
(d)  Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties. 
(e)  Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation and map or text amendments within ten days after they are granted or denied to the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(f)  Investigate and report violations of this Chapter to the appropriate Village planning agency and the District Attorney, corporation counsel or Village Attorney. 
(g)  Provide written notice to the appropriate district office of the Department at least ten days prior to any hearing on appeals, conditional use permits, or other issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-30; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-30), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-675. - Zoning permits. 
(a)  When required. Unless another Section of this Chapter specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator before any new development, as defined in Section 62-640, or any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated. 
(b)  Application. An application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the Village and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the following information: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner and contractor, where applicable. 
b.  Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed use or development. 
c.  Whether or not a private water or sewage system is to be installed. 
(2)  Site development plan. The site development plan shall be drawn to scale and submitted as a part of the permit application form and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Dimensions and area of the lot; 
b.  Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and centerline of all abutting streets or highways; 
c.  Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
d.  Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
e.  Boundaries of all wetlands; 
f.  Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover; 
g.  Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from the floodplain Zoning Maps; 
h.  Location of existing or future access roads; and 
i.  Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration. 
(c)  Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this Chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(d)  Certificates of compliance. 
(1)  Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required, no land shall be occupied or used; and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt, or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof and the proposed use thereof conform to the provisions of this Chapter. 
b.  Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a zoning or conditional use permit. 
c.  The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after notification of the completion of the work specified in the zoning or conditional use permit, providing the building or premises and proposed use thereof conform with all the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2)  The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises, or part thereof pursuant to rules and regulations established by the Village Board. 
(3)  Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this Subsection is derived, certifying after inspection, the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(e)  Conditional use permits. 
(1)  Application. Any use listed as a conditional use in this Chapter shall be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Zoning Administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the Plan Commission following the procedures in Section 62-679. 
(2)  Department review. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources at least ten days prior to the public hearing on the application. 
(3)  Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the standards applicable to the conditional uses designated in Section 62-707(c), the Plan Commission shall attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this Chapter, as are necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter as listed in Section 62-641. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration, type of shore cover; erosion controls; increased setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties deed restrictions; location of piers, dockets, parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon which to base its determination, the Plan Commission may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent information that is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purposes of this Chapter. 
(4)  Revocation. Where the conditions of a building permit or conditional use permit are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the Plan Commission. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-31; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-31), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-676. - Fees. 
The fees for various services performed are as follows: 
(a)  Issuance of building permit. As provided for the Building Code. 
(b)  Issuance of certificate of compliance. As established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  Public hearings. Actual cost to Village. 
(d)  Publication of legal notice. Actual cost as billed to the Village. 
(e)  Issuance of conditional use permits. As established by the Village Board from time to time and provided in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-32; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-32), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-677. - Recording. 
Where a zoning permit or conditional use permit is approved, an appropriate record shall be made by the Zoning Administrator of the land use and structures permitted. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-33; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-33), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-678. - Revocation. 
Where the conditions of a zoning permit are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-34; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-34), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-679. - Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. The Village President shall appoint a Board of Zoning Appeals under Chapter 2, Article IV, and Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), consisting of five members subject to confirmation by the Village Board. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of the business of the Board of Zoning Appeals as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)3. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals: 
(1)  Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter. 
(2)  May authorize, upon appeal, a variance from the dimensional standards of this Chapter where an applicant convincingly demonstrates: 
a.  That literal enforcement of the terms of the Chapter will result in unnecessary hardship for the applicant; 
b.  That the hardship is due to special conditions unique to the property and is not self-created or based solely on economic gain or loss; 
c.  That such variance is not contrary to the public interest as expressed by the purpose of this Chapter; and 
d.  That such variance will not grant or increase any use of property that is prohibited in the zoning district. 
(c)  Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the community affected by any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board of Zoning Appeals, by filing with the official from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Zoning Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons therefor. The Zoning Administrator or other official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all the papers constituting the record on which the appeal action was taken. 
(d)  Public hearings. 
(1)  Before making a decision on an appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall give public notice of the hearing by publishing a class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. Ch. 985, specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the Board of Zoning Appeals. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney and present testimony. 
(2)  A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the Department at least ten days prior to all public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning. 
(e)  Decisions. 
(1)  The final disposition of an appeal, or application for a variance, to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be in the form of a written decision, made within a reasonable time after the public hearing, signed by the Board of Zoning Appeals chair. Such decision shall state the specific facts, which are the basis of the Board of Zoning Appeals' determination and shall either affirm, reverse or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution, or grant the application for a variance. 
(2)  A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources within ten days after the decision is issued. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-35; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-35), 3-24-2003) 
State Law reference— Board of appeals, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e).  
Sec. 62-680. - Amending shoreland-wetland zoning regulations. 
The Village Board may, from time to time, alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this Chapter in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 117, and the following: 
(a)  A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the Plan Commission. 
(b)  All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning regulations shall be referred to the Plan Commission, and a public hearing shall be held as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2. The appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
(c)  In order to insure that this Chapter will remain consistent with the shoreland-protection objectives of Wis. Stats. § 281.31, the Village Board may not rezone a wetland in a Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions: 
(1)  Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity; 
(2)  Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland; 
(3)  Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
(4)  Shoreline protection against soil erosion; 
(5)  Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds; 
(6)  Wildlife habitat; or 
(7)  Areas of special recreational scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species. 
(d)  Where the district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Subsection (c) of this Section, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources shall so notify the Village of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment. 
(e)  The appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources shall be provided with: 
(1)  A copy of the recommendations and report, if any, of the Plan Commission on the proposed text or map amendment within ten days after the submission of those recommendations to the Village Board; and 
(2)  Written notice of the Village Board's action on the proposed text or map amendment within ten days after the action is taken. 
(f)  If the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources notifies the Plan Commission in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Subsection (c) of this Section, that proposed amendment, if approved by the Village Board, may not become effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the Village Board approval was mailed to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, as required by Subsection (e) of this Section. If, within the 30-day period, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources notifies the Village Board that the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the Village under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6), the proposed amendment may not become effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6), is completed or otherwise terminated. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-36; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-36), 3-24-2003)  
Secs. 62-681—62-703. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 62-704. - Purpose of shoreland-wetland zoning. 
This Division is adopted to maintain safe and healthful conditions, to prevent and control water pollution, to protect fish spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life and wildlife habitation, to preserve shore cover and natural beauty and to control building and development in wetlands whenever possible. When development is permitted in a wetland, the development should occur in a manner which minimizes adverse impacts upon the wetland. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-20; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-20), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-705. - Official Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Maps. 
The following maps are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter and are on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer: 
(a)  Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps stamped "FINAL" on October 29, 1984. 
(b)  Capital Area Regional Planning Commission Maps depicting Village wetland boundaries. 
(c)  United States Geological Survey Map entitled "Madison East," number 43089-A3-TF-024 (1983), DMA 3170 III SE-Series V861, Quadrangle 7.5 min. series. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-21; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-21), 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 39, 7-24-2017)  
Sec. 62-706. - District boundaries. 
(a)  The Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in the Village, which are five acres or more and are shown on the final Wetland Inventory Map that has been adopted and made a part of this Chapter in Section 62-705 and which are: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the Village shall be presumed to be navigable if they are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps, which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this Chapter in Section 62-705. 
(2)  Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps, which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this Chapter in Section 62-705. Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps, County Soil Survey Maps or other existing community floodplain Zoning Maps used to delineate floodplain area, which have been adopted by the Village shall be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas in the Village. 
(b)  Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for the final determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark. 
(c)  When an apparent discrepancy exists between the Shoreland-Wetland District boundary shown on the Official Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Maps and the actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped is in error. If the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources staff concurs with the Zoning Administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a land use or building permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the Official Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Maps, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for initiating a shoreland-wetland map amendment within a reasonable period. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-22; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-22), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-707. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. Chs. 30 and 31, and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable: 
(a)  Activities and uses that do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs, including the following, provided they are in keeping with the Village's Zoning Code: 
(1)  Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating; 
(2)  The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops; 
(3)  The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber; 
(4)  The pasturing of livestock; 
(5)  The cultivation of agricultural crops; and 
(6)  The construction and maintenance of duck blinds. 
(b)  Uses that do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
(1)  The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures, which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected; 
(2)  The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries; 
(3)  The maintenance and repair of existing drainage ditches, where permissible under Wis. Stats. § 30.20, or of other existing drainage systems to restore pre-existing levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is permissible under Wis. Stats. Ch. 30, and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible; 
(4)  The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
(5)  The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
(6)  The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in Section 62-680(c), and that the project complies with applicable federal regulations; and 
(7)  The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction. 
(c)  Uses that are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
(1)  The construction and maintenance of roads that are necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted in this Section, provided that: 
a.  The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
b.  The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section 62-680(c); 
c.  The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross sectional area practical to serve the intended use; 
d.  Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; 
e.  Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road; and 
f.  Said construction complies with applicable federal regulations. 
(2)  The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings, provided that: 
a.  The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the Shoreland-Wetland District or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals; 
b.  The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
c.  The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; 
d.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed; and 
e.  Said construction complies with applicable federal regulations. 
(3)  The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that: 
a.  Any private development allowed under this Subsection (c)(3) shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose; 
b.  Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed; 
c.  The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this Subsection (c)(3) are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in Subsection (c)(3); 
d.  Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values; and 
e.  The development complies with applicable federal regulations. 
(4)  The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines and water, gas and sewer distribution lines, and related facilities, provided that: 
a.  The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
b.  Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and 
c.  Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section 62-680(c). 
d.  Such construction and maintenance complies with applicable federal regulations. 
(5)  The construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that: 
a.  The railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
b.  Only limited wetland alteration necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; 
c.  Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland as listed in Section 62-680(c); and 
d.  Such construction or maintenance complies with applicable federal regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-23; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-23), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-708. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Any use not listed in Section 62-707 is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this Chapter in accordance with Section 62-680(c). 
(b)  The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-24; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-24), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-709. - Nonconforming structures and uses. 
The lawful use of a building, structure, or property which existed at the time the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived, or an applicable amendment to this Chapter, took effect and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The shoreland-wetland provisions of this Chapter authorized by Wis. Stats. § 62.231, shall not limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling, or expansion of a nonconforming structure in existence on the effective date of the shoreland-wetland provisions, or of any environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to such a structure. All other modifications to nonconforming structures are subject to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to 50 percent of current fair market value. 
(2)  If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to the appropriate provisions of this Chapter. 
(3)  Any legal nonconforming use of property that does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived or subsequent amendment of this Chapter adopted under Wis. Stats. §§ 62.231 or 61.351, may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of this Chapter. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended. 
(4)  The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses that are located below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121. 
(5)  Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(Code 1998, § 13-3-25; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(13-3-25), 3-24-2003)  
Sec. 62-710. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 62-711. - Findings of fact and purpose. 
The residents of the Village of McFarland depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of this Article is to establish a groundwater protection overlay district to institute land use regulations and restrictions within a defined area which contributes water directly to the municipal water supply providing protection for the aquifer and municipal water supply of the Village of McFarland and promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of Village residents. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-712. - Wellhead protection plan. 
The Village of McFarland adopted a wellhead protection plan on January 23, 2017. This plan developed detailed studies of all of McFarland's existing wells together with future McFarland Well #5. The wellhead protection plan is adopted by this reference into this Article, and shall be publicly available on the Village's website and at the Village Clerk-[Treasurer]'s office. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-713. - Definitions. 
(a)  Aquifer. A saturated, permeable, geologic formation that contains, and will yield, significant quantities of water. 
(b)  Cone of depression. The area around a well in which the natural water level has been lowered at least by one-tenth of a foot by pumping of a well. 
(c)  Department. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 
(d)  Existing facilities. Current facilities, practices and activities which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution within that portion of the Village's wellhead protection area that lies within the corporate limits of the Village. Existing facilities include but are not limited to the type listed in the Department's form 3300-215, Public Water Supply Potential Contaminant Use Inventory Form which is incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(e)  Recharge area. The land area which contributes water to a well by infiltration of water into the subsurface and movement with groundwater toward the well. This area may extend beyond the corporate limits of the Village. 
(f)  Five-year time of travel. The recharge area upgradient of the cone of depression, the outer boundary of which is defined by the estimated distance at all points from any pumping well that groundwater will take five years to travel to any pumping well. 
(g)  Hazardous chemicals. Chemicals and chemical mixtures that are required to have an MSDS and meets the definition of hazardous chemical under the OSHA regulations found at 29 CFR § 1910.1200(c). Substances packaged for consumption for humans or animals are not considered hazardous chemicals. Hazardous chemicals include: 
(1)  Chemicals for which there is scientific evidence that acute or chronic health effects may result from exposure including carcinogens, toxic and highly toxic agents, irritants, corrosives, sensitizers, hepatotoxins, agents that act on the hematopoietic system, reproductive toxins, and agents which damage the lungs, skin, eyes, or mucous membranes as defined in 29 CFR § 1910.1200, Appendix A, "Health Hazard Definitions (Mandatory)." 
(2)  Mixtures of chemicals which have been tested as a whole and have been determined to be a health hazard. 
(3)  Mixtures of chemicals which have not been tested as a whole but which contain any chemical which has been determined to be a health hazard and comprises one percent or greater of the composition on a weight-per-unit weight basis. 
(4)  Mixtures of chemicals which include a carcinogen if the concentration of the carcinogen in the mixture is one-tenth of one percent or greater of the composition on a weight-per-unit weight basis. 
(5)  Ingredients of mixtures prepared within the Groundwater Protection Overlay District in cases where such ingredients are health hazards but comprise more than one-tenth of one percent of the mixture on a weight-per-unit weight basis if carcinogenic, or more than one percent of the mixture on a weight-per-unit weight basis if no carcinogenic. 
(6)  Petroleum and non-solid petroleum derivatives (except non-polychlorinated biphenyl ("PCB") dielectric fluids used in equipment or for transmission of electric power to homes and businesses). 
(g)  Well field. A piece of land used primarily for the purpose of supplying a location for construction of wells to supply a municipal water system. 
(h)  Wellhead protection area. That area of land which contributes water to a municipal well based on accepted hydrogeological research, outlined and described as a "wellhead protection area" by the Village's most recent and up to date wellhead protection plan, approved by the Department. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-714. - Areas to be regulated. 
This Article regulates the area within the wellhead protection area. Any parcel that is fully or partially within a wellhead protection area is considered fully part of the Groundwater Protection Overlay District set forth in this Article. The boundaries of the Groundwater Protection Overlay Districts shall be shown on the Village of McFarland zoning map. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-715. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District subject to the separation distances in Section 62-718: 
(a)  Parks, provided there is no on-site waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated with this use. 
(b)  Playgrounds. 
(c)  Wildlife areas. 
(d)  Non-motorized trails, such as bike, skiing, nature and fitness trails. 
(e)  Residential, commercial and industrial establishments that are municipally sewered and whose use, aggregate of hazardous chemicals in use, storage, handling and/or production may not exceed 20 gallons or 160 pounds at any time (except for those listed in Sections 62-713(f)(2) and (3) of this Article. 
(f)  Routine tillage, planting, and field management operations in support of agricultural crop production, where nutrients from legume, manure, and commercial sources are accounted for and credited toward crop nutrient need. The combination of all nutrient sources applied or available on individual fields may not exceed University of Wisconsin soil test recommendations for that field. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-716. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be conditionally permitted in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District subject to the separation distances in Section 62-718: 
(a)  Motor vehicle services, including filling and service stations, repair, renovation and body work. 
(b)  Residential, commercial and industrial establishments that are municipally sewered and whose use, aggregate of hazardous chemicals in use, storage, handling and/or production exceeds 20 gallons or 160 pounds at any time. 
(c)  Geothermal wells, also known as ground source heat pump along with any associated piping and/or ground loop component installations. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-717. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District: 
(a)  Hydrocarbon, petroleum or hazardous chemical storage tanks, as specified under 29 CFR § 1910.1200(c) and under 40 CFR Part 370. 
(b)  Cemeteries. 
(c)  Chemical manufacturers (Standard Industrial Classification Major Group 28). 
(d)  Coal storage. 
(e)  Dry cleaners. 
(f)  Electroplating facilities. 
(g)  Foundries and forge plants. 
(h)  Industrial liquid waste storage lagoons and pits. 
(i)  Landfills and any other solid waste facility, except post-consumer recycling. 
(j)  Manure and animal waste storage. 
(k)  Mining of any kind, including metallic, sand and aggregate pits. 
(l)  Pesticide and fertilizer dealer, manufacturing, transfer or storage facilities. 
(m)  Private on-site wastewater treatment systems or holding tanks receiving 12,000 gallons per day or more. 
(n)  Railroad yards and maintenance stations. 
(o)  Rendering plants and slaughterhouses. 
(p)  Salt or deicing material bulk storage. 
(q)  Salvage or junk yards. 
(r)  Septage or sludge spreading, storage or treatment. 
(s)  Septage, wastewater, or sewage lagoons. 
(t)  Stockyards and feedlots. 
(u)  Stormwater infiltration basins without pre-treatment, including vegetative filtration and/or temporary detention. 
(v)  Wood preserving operations. 
(w)  Any other use determined by the Village Board to be similar in nature to the above listed uses. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-718. - Separation distances. 
The following minimum separation distances as specified in Wis. Admin. Code § NR 811.12(5), shall be maintained in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District: 
(a)  Ten feet between a well and a parcel containing an emergency or standby power system that is operated by the same facility which operates the well and that has a double wall above ground storage tank with continuous electronic interstitial leakage monitoring. These facilities shall meet the installation requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval from the department of safety and professional services or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 93.110. 
(b)  Fifty feet between a well and a parcel containing either a storm sewer main or a sanitary sewer main where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main class materials and joints. Gravity sanitary sewers shall be successfully air pressure tested in place. The air pressure test shall meet or exceed the requirements of the four psi low pressure air test for plastic gravity sewer lines found in the latest edition of Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin. Force mains shall be successfully pressure tested with water to meet the American Waterworks Association ("AWWA") C600 pressure and leakage testing requirements for one hour at 125 percent of the pump shut-off head. 
(c)  Two hundred feet between a well field and a parcel containing any sanitary sewer main not constructed of water main class materials, sanitary sewer manhole, lift station, one- or two-family residential heating fuel oil underground storage tank or above ground storage tank or private onsite wastewater treatment system ("POWTS") treatment tank or holding tank component and associated piping. 
(d)  Three hundred feet between a well field and a parcel containing any farm underground storage tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the tank and any piping connected to it. These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 93.110. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances. 
(e)  Three hundred feet between a well field and a parcel containing any farm above ground storage tank with double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary containment and under a canopy; other above ground storage tank system with double wall, or single wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy and with electronic interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring for a single wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 93.260, and receive written approval from the Department of Commerce or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 93.110. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances. 
(f)  Four hundred feet between a well field and a parcel containing a POWTS dispersal component with a design capacity of less than 12,000 gallons per day, a cemetery or a storm water retention or detention pond. 
(g)  Six hundred feet between a well field and a parcel containing any farm underground storage tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the tank and any piping connected to it; any farm above ground storage tank with double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary containment and under a canopy or other above ground storage tank system with double wall, or single wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy; and with electronic interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring for a single wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations shall meet the standard double wall tank or single wall tank secondary containment installation requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 93.110. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances. 
(h)  One thousand feet between a well field and a parcel containing any land application of municipal, commercial, or industrial waste; the boundaries of a land spreading facility for spreading of petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under state administrative regulations while that facility is in operation; agricultural, industrial, commercial or municipal wastewater treatment plant treatment units, lagoons, or storage structures; manure stacks or storage structures; or POWTS dispersal component with a design capacity of 12,000 gallons per day or more. 
(i)  One thousand eight hundred feet between a well field and any parcel containing any solid waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small demolition facility; sanitary landfill; any property with residual groundwater contamination that exceeds Wis. Admin. Code § NR 140 enforcement standards; coal storage area; salt or deicing material storage area; any single wall farm underground storage tank or single wall farm above ground storage tank or other single wall underground storage tank or above ground storage tank that has or has not received written approval from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its designated Local Program Operator under Wis. Admin. Code § ATCP 93.110, for a single wall tank installation. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances; and bulk pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-719. - Conditional use permits. 
Applicants may request the Village in writing, to permit additional land uses in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District. 
(a)  Required application materials. 
(1)  All requests shall be in writing, whether on or in substantial compliance with forms to be provided by the Village and may require an environmental assessment report prepared by a licensed environmental engineer. Said report shall be forwarded to the Village and/or designee(s) for recommendation and final decision by the Village Board. 
(2)  Applicants shall reimburse the Village for all consultant fees associated with this review at the invoiced amount. 
(3)  Any exemptions granted shall be conditional and may include required environmental and safety monitoring consistent with local, state and federal requirements, and/or bonds and/or securities satisfactory to the Village. 
(b)  Referral to Plan Commission. A properly filed application shall be referred to the Plan Commission for its review and recommendation. The Plan Commission shall forward its recommendations to the Village Board. Upon receipt of the recommendations, the Village Board shall hold a public hearing. 
(c)  Standards for conditional use. The Village Board shall apply the following factors: 
(1)  The Village's responsibility, as a public water supplier, to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
(2)  The degree to which the proposed land use practice, activity or facility may threaten or degrade groundwater quality in the Village or the Village's recharge area. 
(3)  The economic hardship which may be faced by the landowner if the application is denied. 
(4)  The availability of alternative options to the applicant, and the cost, effect and extent of availability of such alternative options. 
(5)  The proximity of the applicant's property to other potential sources of contamination. 
(6)  The then existing condition of the Village's groundwater public water well(s) and well fields, and the vulnerability to further contamination. 
(7)  The direction of flow of groundwater and other factors in the area of the applicant's property which may affect the speed of the groundwater flow, including topography, depth of soil, extent of aquifer, depth to water table and location of private wells. 
(8)  Any other hydrogeological data or information which is available from any public or private agency or organization. 
(9)  The potential benefit, both economic and social, from the approval of the applicant's request for a permit. 
(d)  Types of conditions which the Village Board may require. The Village Board may stipulate conditions and restrictions including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  A requirement for periodic environmental and safety sampling, testing, and reporting to establish the continued protection of the public water supply. The Village may require an applicant to install one or more groundwater monitoring well(s), at the expense of the applicant; 
(2)  The establishment of safety structures to prevent groundwater contamination; 
(3)  The establishment of an operational safety plan to define processes and procedures for material containment, operations monitoring, best management practices, and storm water runoff management to prevent groundwater contamination; 
(4)  Written policies and procedures for reporting and cleaning up any spill of a hazardous material; 
(5)  The provision of copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approval or certificates, and on-going environmental monitoring results to the Village. 
(6)  A written agreement pursuant to which the applicant agrees to be held financially responsible for all environmental cleanup costs in the event of groundwater contamination; 
(7)  Bonds and/or securities satisfactory to the Village for future monitoring and cleanup costs if groundwater contamination occurs in the future. 
(8)  The foregoing conditions are listed for illustration purposes and are not exclusive. 
(e)  Transfers of interest in property. The permit holder may not transfer a conditional use permit issued under this section to successor owners of the property without the express written consent of the Village Board. The Village Board may set conditions and restrictions on the transfer including but not limited to a stipulation that the permit shall not be transferred unless the new owner expressly and in writing assumes the same terms, if any, for personal liability as were required of the former owner in the conditional use permit to be transferred. Written permission shall be obtained prior to the voluntary transfer of the subject property. When an involuntary transfer occurs, the new owner, trustee, or other successor to an interest in the real property shall apply to the Village within 60 days for permission to continue the use granted by the conditional use permit. 
(f)  Payment of costs. The applicant shall be solely and exclusively responsible for any and all costs associated with the application. The conditional use will become effective only after any costs incurred by the Village during the conditional use application review process and billed to the applicant are paid by the applicant. Those costs may include: 
(1)  The Village's expenses, including consultant's and attorney's fees, if any, associated with the review at the invoiced amount plus administrative costs. 
(2)  The cost of an environmental impact study if so required by the Village or its designee. 
(3)  The cost of groundwater monitoring or groundwater wells if required by the Village or its designee. 
(4)  The costs of an appraisal for the property or other property evaluation expense if required by the Village or its designee. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-720. - Existing non-conforming uses. 
Non-conforming uses lawfully in existence within the Groundwater Protection Overlay District at the date of adoption of this Article may continue to exist in the form and scope in which they existed at that time subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Owners of existing facilities have an affirmative duty to provide copies of all federal, state and local facility operation approvals or certificate and on-going environmental monitoring results to the Village. 
(b)  Existing facilities shall timely replace equipment or expand in a manner that improves the existing environmental and safety technologies already in existence. 
(c)  In the event a lawful non-conforming use poses a direct hazard to the Village's public water supply, the Village may take any action permitted by law to abate the hazard. 
(d)  Existing facilities shall have the responsibility of devising and filing with the Village, a contingency plan satisfactory to the Plan Commission for the immediate notification of the appropriate Village officers in the event of an emergency. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-721. - No acceptance of liability by Village. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to imply that the Village has accepted any of an owner or operator's liability if a facility or use, whether permitted as of right or pursuant to a conditional use permit, contaminates groundwater in any aquifer. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-722. - Zoning Administrator. 
The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers: 
(a)  Advise applications as to the provisions of this Article and assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms. 
(b)  Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this Article. 
(c)  Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions. 
(d)  Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties. 
(e)  Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation and map or text amendments within ten days after they are granted or denied to the appropriate district office of the Department. 
(f)  Investigate and report violations of this Article to the appropriate Village planning agency and the District Attorney, Corporation Counsel or Village Attorney. 
(g)  Provide written notice to the appropriate district office of the Department at least ten days prior to any hearing on appeals, conditional use permits, or other issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-723. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In the event an individual and/or facility causes the release of any contaminants which endangers water quality in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District, the owner, operator or other responsible party causing said release shall immediately cease and desist all activities and operations posing any risk to groundwater quality, and shall provide notice to the Village and provide clean-up satisfactory to the Village, and provide clean-up satisfactory to the Village. 
(b)  The owner, operator or other responsible party shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The actual cost of Village consultant fees at the invoice amount; 
(2)  The cost of Village equipment employed in the clean-up; and 
(3)  The cost of mileage reimbursed to Village employees attributed to the clean-up. 
(c)  Following any such discharge, the Village may require additional test monitoring or other requirements as outlined in Section 62-719(a), (d) and (f) herein. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-724. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land or water in violation of this Article. Any person who is specifically damaged by such violations may institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this Article. In addition, violation of this Article shall constitute a public nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-725. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, limited liability company or other entity that fails to comply with the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100.00 or more than $5,000.00, plus statutory costs, fees and assessments. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Sec. 62-726. - Conflict and severability. 
If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph or phrase of this Article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, or other applicable administrative or governing body, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other Section, Subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more Sections, Subsections, sentences, clauses, paragraphs, or phrases may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-22-2017)  
Appendix A - FEES[1] 
Section	Description	March. 25, 2019

CHAPTER 2—ADMINISTRATION

2-313(a)(3) 	Application to the Plan Commission to amend the Comprehensive Plan 	$500.00 plus actual costs 
2-875(f) 	Public records per-page fee for copies, certified or otherwise, of any document 	$0.25 

CHAPTER 5—ANIMALS

5-43 	Dog and cat licenses: 	
		Neutered male dog or cat/spayed female dog or cat 	$18.00 
		Unneutered male dog or cat/unspayed female dog or cat 	$23.00 
5-48(a) 	Kennel license (per year) 	$100.00 (up to 12) plus $3.00 each additional animal over 12 
5-49 	Late fee 	$5.00 

CHAPTER 8—BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS

8-208 	Permit for razing buildings 	$100.00/Residential; 
$150.00/Commercial 
8-281 	Application for a permit to transfer, place or dump solid fill 	$50.00 
		Additional fee per truck 	$10.00 
8-341(a) 	Fee for permit to move building/structure along public ROW 	$50.00 
		Additional fee for building remaining on public highway (per day) 	$10.00 
8-368(a) 	Permit to construct a fence 	$50.00 
8-401 	Building permit fee to construct, erect, or alter a swimming pool—based on value: 	
		$0.00—$1,000.00 	$50.00 
		$1,000.00—$25,000.00 	$50.00 + $11.00 per $1,000.00 
		Over $25,000.00 	$325.00 + $5.00 per $1,000.00 over $25,000.00 
8-463(b) 	Public water impact fee (size of meter): 	
		     5/8 -inch 	$650.00 
		      ¾-inch 	$650.00 
		      1-inch 	$1,625.00 
		      1¼-inch 	$2,405.00 
		      1½-inch 	$3,251.00 
		      2-inch 	$5,201.00 
		      3-inch 	$9,752.00 
		      4-inch 	$16,253.00 
		      6-inch and above 	$32,507.00 
8-463(c) 	Public water impact fee, April 1, 1998—September 30, 1998: 	
	Size of meter:      5/8 -inch 	$175.00 
		      ¾-inch 	$175.00 
		      1-inch 	$438.00 
		      1¼-inch 	$648.00 
		      1½-inch 	$875.00 
		      2-inch 	$1,400.00 
		      3-inch 	$2,625.00 
		      4-inch 	$4,375.00 
		      6-inch and above 	$8,750.00 
8-463(c) 	Public water impact fee, October 1, 1998—March 31, 1999: 	
	Size of meter:      5/8 -inch 	$350.00 
		      ¾-inch 	$350.00 
		      1-inch 	$875.00 
		      1¼-inch 	$1,296.00 
		      1½-inch 	$1,750.00 
		      2-inch 	$2,800.00 
		      3-inch 	$5,250.00 
		      4-inch 	$8,750.00 
		      6-inch and above 	$17,500.00 
8-464(b) 	Park improvement impact fee: 	
	Type of dwelling unit: 	
		      Single-family 	$1,099.65 
		      Multi-family 	$712.52 
		      Group quarters 	$551.51 
8-464(b) 	Park-land impact fee (also known as fees in lieu of parkland dedication): 	
	Type of dwelling unit: 	
		      Single-family 	$3,915.46 
		      Multi-family 	$2,719.90 
		      Group quarters 	$1,494.45 
8-465(b) 	Public library impact fee: 	
		Type of development: 	
		Single-family 	$710.00 
		Two-family, multifamily 	$431.00 
8-487(b)(1) 	Sign permit fee 	$50.00 + $2.00/sq. ft. 
8-522 	Building permit fees: 	
		New buildings—residential: 	
		Per square foot of building 	$0.15 min. $125.00 
		Electronic municipal plan entry 	$150.00 
		Early start permit 	$200.00 
		New buildings—commercial: 	
		Per square foot of building 	$0.18 min., $125.00 
		Certified municipal plan review: Building plan 	$100.00 
		Plan entry fee 	$100.00 + sq. ft. fee below 
		      Less than 2,500 sf 	$250.00 
		      2,501—5,000 sf 	$300.00 
		      5,001—10,000 sf 	$500.00 
		      10,001—20,000 sf 	$700.00 
		      20,001—30,000 sf 	$1,100.00 
		      30,001—40,000 sf 	$1,400.00 
		      40,001—50,000 sf 	$1,900.00 
		      50,001—75,000 sf 	$2,600.00 
		      75,001—100,000 sf 	$3,300.00 
		      100,001—200,000 sf 	$5,400.00 
		      200,001—300,000 sf 	$9,500.00 
		      300,001—400,000 sf 	$14,000.00 
		      400,001—500,000 sf 	$16,700.00 
		      Over 500,000 sf 	$18,000.00 
		Certified municipal plan review: HVAC plan 	
		Plan entry fee 	$100.00 + sq. ft. fee below 
		      Less than 2,500 square feet 	$150.00 
		      2,501—5,000 square feet 	$200.00 
		      5,001—10,000 square feet 	$300.00 
		      10,001—20,000 square feet 	$400.00 
		      20,001—30,000 square feet 	$500.00 
		      30,001—40,000 square feet 	$800.00 
		      40,001—50,000 square feet 	$1,100.00 
		      50,001—75,000 square feet 	$1,400.00 
		      75,001—100,000 square feet 	$2,000.00 
		      100,001—200,000 square feet 	$2,600.00 
		      200,001—300,000 square feet 	$6,100.00 
		      300,001—400,000 square feet 	$8,800.00 
		      400,001—500,000 square feet 	$10,800.00 
		      Over 500,000 square feet 	$12,100.00 
		Early start permit 	$250.00 
		Repair work, additions or alterations to 	
		      $0.00 to $1,000.00 	$50.00 
		      $1,000.00—$25,000.00 	$0.20/ft 2 (minimum $150.00) 
		      Over $25,000.00 	$0.30/ft 2 (minimum $250.00) 
	Fire escapes 	$50.00 
	Reroofing, re-siding and windows: 	
		      First $500.00 or less 	$50.00 
		      Additional fee per $1,000.00 of value or fractional part thereof above $500.00 	$5.00 
	Installation of elevator 	$50.00 
	New, replacement or relocation of fuel oil and gasoline storage 	
		      550 gallons or less 	$50.00 
		      551 gallons to 10,050 gallon capacity 	$10.00 
		      Above 10,051 gallon capacity 	$10.00 
		      Plus per additional 1,000 gallon capacity or 	$0.05 
	Canopies, per square foot of surface: 	$0.10 
		      Minimum fee 	$50.00 
		      Awnings, for each individually supported 	$50.00 
	Reinspection permit 	$50.00 
	New construction UDC seal 	$50.00 
8-581 	Plumbing permit fee—Residential 	$50.00 
		      Plus per square foot of 	$0.05 
	Sewer and water laterals (per lateral) and Stormwater pipe: 	$60.00 
		      Commercial 	$50.00 + $0.10/ft. of pipe 
	Plumbing permit fee—commercial 	$50.00 
	Per square ft.       Group I building 	$0.05 
		      Group II building 	$0.08 
		      Group III building 	$0.10 
		      Group IV building 	$0.04 
	Addition or replacement of plumbing fixtures to existing 	$50.00 
		Plus per fixture 	$7.00 
	Red tag or reinspection fee 	$50.00 
8-616 	HVAC permit fee—Basic HVAC permit 	$50.00 
	HVAC permit fee—Fireplace or wood stove 	$50.00 
		      Plus per square foot—Residential 	$0.05 
	Building class fee (per square foot)—Commercial: 	
		      Group I building 	$0.05 
		      Group II building 	$0.08 
		      Group III building 	$0.10 
		      Group IV building 	$0.04 
	Replacement of air conditioning—Commercial 	$75.00 
	Replacement of furnace—Commercial 	$75.00 
	Replacement of air conditioning—Residential 	$50.00 
	Replacement of furnace—Residential 	$50.00 
	Addition of A/C to existing structure 	$75.00 
	Alterations/additions 	$50.00 + $5.00 per $1,000.00 of value 
	Red tag or reinspection fee 	$50.00 
	All fees doubled if work commenced prior to permit 	
8-645(c) 	Fee for an electrical contractor, firm, person or corporation 	$50.00 
8-647 	New construction—Electrical: 	
		Residential buildings; 1—2 family (per square foot) 	$0.05 
		Commercial buildings (per square foot): 	
		      Group I building 	$0.05 
		      Group II building 	$0.08 
		      Group III building 	$0.10 
		      Group IV building 	$0.04 
		Electrical permit 	$50.00/Residential; 
$80.00/Commercial 
		Temporary service 	$50.00/Residential; 
$80.00/Commercial 
		Panel/service entrance, 100 amp 	$70.00/Residential; 
$110.00/Commercial 
		      Each additional 100 amp 	$10.00 
		Additions, alterations, and repairs permit fee 	$50.00 + openings/Residential; 
$80.00 + openings/Commercial 
		      1—5 openings 	$20.00 
		      6—10 openings 	$30.00 
		      11—15 openings 	$40.00 
		      16—20 openings 	$45.00 
		      21—25 openings 	$50.00 
		      26—30 openings 	$55.00 
		      31—35 openings 	$60.00 
		      36—40 openings 	$65.00 
		      >41—45 openings 	$70.00 
		      46—50 openings 	$75.00 
		      51—60 openings 	$80.00 
		      61—70 openings 	$85.00 
		      71—80 openings 	$90.00 
		      81—90 openings 	$95.00 
		      91—100 openings 	$105.00 
		      101 + openings 	+ $1.00 per opening 
8-848(a) 	Fees established in lieu of on-site stormwater management practices—Residential (2009) 	
		      Construction cost per acre 	$1,223.00 
		      Land cost per acre 	$550.00 
		      Total cost per acre 	$1,773.00 
	Fees established in lieu of on-site stormwater management practices—Commercial and Industrial (2009) 	
		      Construction cost per acre 	$2,255.00 
		      Land cost per acre 	$1,388.00 
		      Total cost per acre 	$3,643.00 
8-909(a) 	Fees for erosion control plans 	
8-909(a)(1) 		Simplified plan checklists 	$350.00 
8-909(a)(2) 		Sites larger than 20,000 square feet in area 	$500.00 
8-909(a)(3) 		Sites larger than two acres in area and five acres or less in area 	$750.00 
8-909(a)(4) 		Sites larger than five acres in area 	$1,000.00 deposit plus actual cost 
8-909(b) 	Fees for stormwater management plans 	
8-909(b)(1) 		Stormwater management plan without detention plan 	Fee equal to actual cost billed to the Village by Consultants 
8-909(b)(2) 		Stormwater management plan with detention plan 	Fee equal to actual cost billed to the Village by Consultants 

CHAPTER 11—BUSINESSES

11-54 	Alcohol beverages: 	
	License fees: 	
11-54(a)(1) 		Class "A" fermented malt beverages retailer's license (per year) 	$200.00 
11-54(a)(2) 		Class "B" fermented malt beverage license (per [year]) 	$100.00 
11-54(a)(3) 
or 11-49(b) 		Temporary class "B" fermented malt beverage license (per event) 	$10.00 
11-54(a)(4) 		Temporary "class B" wine license (per event) 	$10.00 
11-54(a)(5) 		Fermented malt beverage wholesaler's license 	$25.00 
11-54(a)(6) 		"Class A" intoxicating liquor retailer's license 	$500.00 
11-54(a)(7) 		"Class B" intoxicating liquor retailer's license 	$500.00 
11-54(a)(8) 		"Class C" wine license (per year) 	$100.00 
11-54(a)(9) 		Reserve "class B" intoxicating liquor license: 	
		      Fee for initial issuance 	$10,000.00 
		      Renewal fee (annual) 	$500.00 
11-54(a)(10) 		"Class B" license for full-service restaurants 	
		      Fee for initial issuance 	$10,000.00 
		      Renewal fee (annual) 	$500.00 
11-61(a) 	License transfer fee 	$10.00 
11-61(b) 	Change of agent 	$10.00 
11-69(d) 	Outdoor sports activities with "class B" licenses event application review fee 	$50.00 
11-73(a) 	Operator's license fee 	$35.00 
11-73(b) 	Temporary operator's license 	$15.00 
11-73(c) 	Provisional operator's license 	$15.00 
11-99 	Cigarette license 	$100.00 
11-132(c) 	Direct seller application filing fee (annual) 	
		Annual license 	$100.00 
		30-day license 	$40.00 
		Seven-day license 	$20.00 
11-155(a)(1) 	License to operate amusement devices 	$15.00 
11-155(a)(2) 	Video game of chance license 	
11-155(b)(1) 		Minor arcade license (per year) 	$100.00 
11-155(c)(1) 		Major arcade license (per year) 	$300.00 
11-157(b) 		Minor arcade license transfer fee 	
11-220 	Nonmetallic mining permit fee 	$100.00 
11-251 	Blasting and rock crushing: 	
		Permit fee, quarries 	$50.00 
		Permit fee, gravel crushing operations 	$50.00 
11-362(a) 	Tourist rooming house permit fees (per rooming house) 	
11-362(a)(1) 		Initial permit application fee 	$500.00 (includes any initial Village inspections necessary), plus $50.00 for each non-owner local agent. 
11-362(a)(2) 		Renewal permit application fee 	$100.00 
11-362(a)(3) 		Change or addition of local agent 	$50.00 

CHAPTER 17—EMERGENCY SERVICES

17-26(c)(1) 	False alarms: 	
	Responded to by Police Department: 	
		First two false alarms for a location 	No charge 
		Third false alarm per location 	$50.00 
		Fourth false alarm per location 	$75.00 
		Fifth false alarm per location 	$100.00 
		Sixth and subsequent false alarm per location 	$125.00 
	Responded to by Police and Fire Department: 	
		First two false alarms for a location 	No charge 
		Third and subsequent false alarm per location 	$150.00 
17-59(d) 	Ambulance fees: Resident charge 	$775.00/BLS 
$925.00/ALS 
17-59(e) 	Ambulance fees: Nonresident charge 	$875.00/BLS 
$1,025.00/ALS 
17-59(f) 	Ambulance fees: Medical supplies and procedures 	Included in base amb fees. 
17-59(g) 	Ambulance fees: Loaded mileage fee (per mile) 	$15.75/Resident 
$16.25/Nonresident 
17-59(h) 	Ambulance fees: No transport—resident 	$100.00/Basic 
$300.00/ALS 
	Ambulance fees: No transport—nonresident 	$275.00/Basic 
$375.00/ALS 
17-59(i) 	Ambulance fees: Advanced life support intercept 	Actual cost 

CHAPTER 20—ENVIRONMENT

20-25 	Cutting grass and weeds and weed abatement 	Cost of mowing and weed and abatement, including yard treatments 

CHAPTER 23—FINANCE AND TAXATION

23-74 	Request for statement of real property status: 	
		      Regular 	$35.00 
		      Expedited 	$55.00 
23-119(e)(4) 	Appeal filing fee 	$200.00 
23-143 	Late filing fee 	$25.00 

CHAPTER 26—FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION

26-81(b) 	Reimbursement of response costs for any fire call on any public highway for any emergency response 	$500.00 
26-118 	Permit Fee: Fire alarm and Supp Plan Review and Insp 	
		      Less than 2,500 sf 	$150.00 
		      2,501—5,000 sf 	$187.00 
		      5,001—10,000 sf 	$375.00 
		      10,001—20,000 sf 	$675.00 
		      20,001—30,000 sf 	$1,050.00 
		      30,001—40,000 sf 	$1,350.00 
		      40,001—50,000 sf 	$1,650.00 
		      50,001—75,000 sf 	$1,950.00 
		      75,001—100,000 sf 	$2,250.00 
		      100,001—200,000 sf 	$2,550.00 
		      200,001—300,000 sf 	$2,850.00 
		      300,001—400,000 sf 	$3,300.00 
		      400,001—500,000 sf 	$3,600.00 
		      Over 500,000 sf 	$3,900.00 
	Permit Fee: Fire alarm and Supp Insp State Appr Sys 	
		      Less than 2,500 sf 	$75.00 
		      2,501—5,000 sf 	$112.50 
		      5,001—10,000 sf 	$187.50 
		      10,001—20,000 sf 	$300.00 
		      20,001—30,000 sf 	$450.00 
		      30,001—40,000 sf 	$600.00 
		      40,001—50,000 sf 	$750.00 
		      50,001—75,000 sf 	$975.00 
		      75,001—100,000 sf 	$1,125.00 
		      100,001—200,000 sf 	$1,275.00 
		      200,001—300,000 sf 	$1,500.00 
		      300,001—400,000 sf 	$1,575.00 
		      400,001—500,000 sf 	$1,725.00 
		      Over 500,000 sf 	$1,875.00 
	Re-submittal of approved plan 	$125.00 
	Re-submittal of denied plan 	Higher of 50% or $200.00 
	Occupancy permit 	$35.00 
	Alteration to existing systems: 	
		Up to 20 sprinklers or 3 devices 
(larger systems considered new) 	$125.00 
	Shell building tenant build-out 	50% of normal fee based on size of tenant space 
	Additional identical buildings 	Higher of 125.00 or 25% of full fee for additional buildings 
	Private service (mains/hydrants) 	$125.00 
	Misc. devices (DACT, kitchen hood, dry chemical systems, deluge systems alarm dialers, fire door activators, clean agent [systems, standpipes, etc.)] 	$200.00 
26-145(c) 	Plan examination: 	
		1st tank or component 	$35.00 
		Each additional component 	$10.00 
	Site inspection (first tank system or component) 	$100.00 
		Each additional component 	$50.00 
	Relining 	$65.00 
	Self-service/key-card-code system 	$78.00 
	Leak detection or protection: 	
		Plan examination 	$22.00 
		Site inspection 	$43.00 
		Revision of previously approved plan 	$22.00 
26-145(d) 	Plan review 	$50.00 
	Site inspection: 	
		First tank 	$100.00 
		Each additional tank 	$50.00 

CHAPTER 35—MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

35-248(c)(4)d 	Processing fee, notice to appear in court for nonmoving traffic 	  
$15.00 
35-283(c) 	Bicycle identification tag 	$5.00 
35-311(e) 	Fee for bail deposits 	$3.00 
35-444 	Parade and procession permit fee 	Any amounts determined under [section] 35-446 

CHAPTER 36—EVENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY REQUIRING A PERMIT

36-16 	Application for special event permit 	$100.00 

CHAPTER 44—PARKS AND RECREATION

44-24(d) 	Park shelter rental: 	
	Diamond reservation—Lewis Park (nonresident) 	$25.00 
	Diamond reservation—Wm McFarland Park (nonresident) 	$25.00 
	Soccer field reservations—Wm McFarland Park (nonresident) 	$25.00 
	Temporary structure fee 	Based on actual cost 
	Park rental fees (no fields): 	
	      Limited basic parks (gazebo and small parks) 	$10.00 
	      McDaniel - shelter (resident) 	$50.00 
	      McDaniel - shelter (nonresident) 	$75.00 
	      McDaniel - shelter local business group 	$75.00 
	      McDaniel - shelter nonlocal business group 	$140.00 
	      Lewis and Brandt - shelter only (resident) 	$100.00 
	      Lewis and Brandt - shelter only (nonresident) 	$150.00 
	      Lewis and Brandt - local business group 	$150.00 
	      Lewis and Brandt - nonlocal business group 	$300.00 
44-24(d) 	Park shelter rental: 	
	Special event application fee (nonrefundable) 	$100.00 
	Special event fee per day 	$200.00 
	Brandt Park - shelter and softball fields (local) 	$200.00 
	Brandt Park - shelter and softball fields (nonresident) 	$300.00 
	Vendor fee 	$100.00 
44-24(e) 	Refundable security deposit—Facility rental 	$100.00 
	Lewis Park Shelter refundable deposit 	$200.00 
	Special event security deposit 	$250.00 
44-26(4)(d) 	Dog park permit: 	
		      Resident: 	$15.00 annual 
		      Seniors 55 and older 	$10.00 
		      Additional dog annual 	$6.00 
		      Daily permit 	$3.00 
		      Nonresident: 	$25.00 annual 
		      Seniors 55 and older 	N/A 
		      Additional dog annual 	$6.00 
		      Daily permit 	$4.00 

CHAPTER 47—PUBLIC UTILITIES

47-45 	Processing fee, private well operation permit application 	$75.00 
47-20 	New construction water use fee 	$50.00 
47-79(d)(2) 	Bimonthly customer charge - sanitary sewer users 	
	Size of meter: 	Bimonthly charge 
		     5/8 -inch 	$28.05 
		      ¾-inch 	$28.05 
		      1-inch 	$40.71 
		      1¼-inch 	$49.11 
		      1½-inch 	$61.01 
		      2-inch 	$86.11 
		      3-inch 	$142.98 
		      4-inch 	$224.78 
		      6-inch 	$430.48 
47-79(d)(3) 	Charge for each 1,000 gallons of normal domestic strength 	$3.14 
47-79(d)(4) 	Category A users service charge 	Customer charge plus the volume charge for each applicable billing cycle 
47-79(d)(5) 	Category B users discharging normal domestic strength 	$67.26 
		Additional charge for more than 12,500 gallons 	$3.14 
47-79(d)(6) 	Category C users high strength surcharge: 	
		BOD charge per pound in excess of 250 milligrams per liter 	$0.186 
		Suspended solids charge per pound in excess of 250 milligrams per liter 	$0.205 
		TP charge per pound in excess of ten milligrams per liter 	$0.035 
		TKN charge per pound in excess of 40 milligrams per liter 	$0.777 
47-80 	Charge per quarter for each meter up to a one-inch meter installed to measure water not discharged to sewer 	$0.92 
47-159(b) 	Utility connection charges 	
		Sewer hookup and lateral for new buildings 	$450.00 
47-271(b) 	Stormwater utility fee per ERU per year 	$88.98 
47-272(h) 	Credit application fee 	$50.00 
	Notice of appeal fee 	$50.00 

CHAPTER 50—SOLID WASTE

50-5 	Solid waste collection charge, per residential unit 	$141.00 
		Residential unit - Btw. 1—4 dwelling units 	

CHAPTER 53—STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES

53-126 	Excavations of streets, alleys, public ways and [grounds—Renewal of permit] 	$10.00 
53-127(b) 	Excavation permit 	$100.00 application fee plus .10/lineal foot 
53-128 	Verifying satisfactory insurance 	$50.00 per verification 
53-240 	Annual bond for excavation permit 	$20,000.00 
53-241 	Street privilege permit 	$10.00 
53-306 	Removal of snow and ice by Village after notice 	Cost, minimum $35.00 
53-482 	Application for driveway permit 	$50.00 

CHAPTER 56—SUBDIVISIONS

56-238(b) 	Engineering fee 	Engineering fee shall be equal to the actual cost as billed to the Village including inspections 
56-238(c)(1)a. 	Preliminary Plat review: 	
		Preliminary Plat review fee 	$500.00, plus actual legal, financial and engineering costs, including publication and notification charges 
		Additional fee, per lot $50.00 	$50.00, plus actual legal and engineering costs, including publication and notification charges 
56-238(c)(1)b. 		Preliminary Plat Reapplication fee if submitted within 36 months of original preliminary plat 	$500.00, plus actual legal, financial and engineering costs, including publication and notification charges 
56-238(c)(2)a. 	Final Plat review: 	
		Final Plat review fee 	$500.00, plus actual legal, financial and engineering costs incurred by the Village 
		Additional fee, per lot $50.00 	$50.00, plus actual legal and engineering costs incurred by the Village 
56-238(c)(2)b. 		Final Plat Reapplication fee if submitted within 36 months of original final plat 	$400.00, plus actual legal, financial and engineering costs 
56-238(c)(2)c. 	Review of the development agreement including addendums for each phase of a plat 	$400.00, plus actual legal, financial and engineering costs incurred by the Village 
56-238(c)(3) 	Certified Survey Map review fee 	$300.00, plus actual legal, financial and engineering costs, including publication and notification charge 
56-238(d) 	Condominium development review: 	
		Condominium review fee 	$300.00, plus actual legal, financial and engineering costs, including publication and notification charges. 
		Additional fee, per unit shown on a condominium plat, less $20.00 for each lot shown on a Preliminary Plat or CSM for the same project 	$40.00, per lot plus publication and notification charges 
56-238(f) 	Digitizing the mapping of the approved land division, plat or condominium 	Cost 
56-238(g)(1) 	Escrow deposits for plats 	$5,000.00 

CHAPTER 59—VEGETATION

59-24(a) 	Permit for planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs 	$5.00 

CHAPTER 62—ZONING

62-17 	Escrow deposits: 	
		R-E, R-3 General Residence and PD Planned Development Districts up to 50 acres 	$5,000.00 
		R-E, R-3 General Residence and PD Planned Development Districts greater than 50 acres 	$10,000.00 
		Site/design review for new buildings/additions totaling 5,000 square feet or more and requiring site/design review under Section 62-310(b). For all other projects requiring site/design review under Section 62-310(b), no escrow deposit shall be required; however, applicants shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village for consulting time 	$2,000.00 
	Staff and consultant review costs 	Consultant costs shall be the actual costs as billed 
62-64 	Where no previous fee has been collected (fees in lieu of parkland dedication) 	$4,115.00 per dwelling unit 
62-69(d) 	Chickens    Annual Permit Fee 	$20.00 
62-108(a)(5) 	Conditional use permit application and issuance fee 	$370.00, plus actual legal and engineering costs, including publication and notification charges incurred by the Village 
62-117(d)(2)d. 	Permit application fee for bed and breakfast establishments 	$100.00 
62-206(d) 	Application for signal receiving antenna permit where a conditional use permit is required 	Same as fee for conditional use permit and site design plus actual legal and engineering cost by a Telecommunications and safety consultant 
62-309(b)(5) 	Occupancy permit fees: 	
		One-family residences 	$50.00 
		All other uses 	$75.00 
		Multifamily residences (per dwelling unit) 	$50.00 
62-310(g) 	Site/design review 	$400.00 plus actual legal and engineering costs 
62-343(d) 	Fee for processing a petition for a zoning change or amendment: 	
		Text amendment 	$405.00 plus actual legal costs, including publication and notification charges. 
		Map amendment 	$405.00 plus publication and notification charges 
62-363(e) 	Application for hearing before Board of Zoning Appeals 	$380.00, plus actual legal and engineering costs, including publication and notification charges incurred by the Village 
62-676(b) 	Fee for issuance of certificate of compliance 	Fee included with occupancy permit 
 
( Ord. No. 2019-07 , § 2(Exh. A), 3-25-2019; Ord. No. 2019-25 , §§ 1, 2, 11-25-2019; Ord. No. 2020-07 , § 1, 2-10-2020; Ord. No. 2020-08 , § 6, 2-24-2020; Ord. No. 2020-10 , § 2, 2-24-2020; Ord. No. 2020-14 , § 5, 4-27-2020) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-07 , § 1, adopted March 25, 2019, repealed App. A in its entirety, and § 2(Exh. A) of said ordinance enacted a new App. A to read as herein set out. Former App. A derived from Ord. No. 2009-25, §§ 2—4, adopted Dec. 14, 2009; Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 1—4, adopted Dec. 14, 2009; Ord. No. 2009-27, §§ 2, 3, adopted Dec. 29, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 25, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2, adopted April 12, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, adopted April 12, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, adopted June 14, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1, adopted July 12, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-16, § 1, adopted July 12, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-24, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 13, 2010; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3, adopted May 23, 2011; Ord. No. 2011-22, adopted Dec. 12, 2011; Ord. No. 2011-23, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 27, 2011; Ord. No. 2012-20, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 26, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-21, adopted Dec. 10, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-22, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 10, 2012; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 72, adopted Nov. 11, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-18A, § 1, adopted Dec. 23, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-19, § 1, adopted Dec. 23, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, adopted Dec. 23, 2013; Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, adopted Dec. 22, 2014; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 12, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, adopted Dec. 28, 2015; Ord. No. 2016-13 , § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2016; Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, adopted March 13, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-25 , §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2017; and Ord. No. 2018-11 , § 1, adopted June 25, 2018. 
 
Appendix B - VILLAGE OF MCFARLAND LANDSCAPING STANDARDS 
Introduction. The purpose and intent of these requirements are to assemble the minimum landscaping standards into one publication which is easy for individuals involved in the landscaping and design portion of a development project to follow. These requirements establish the minimum standards for landscaping of new/expanding commercial and multi-family structures, and parking areas requiring review under Sec. 62-310(c)(1) of the McFarland Municipal Code. Worksheets needed to submit with landscaping plans are provided at the end of the Appendix. 
1.  Definitions As Used In This Section. For the purpose of these Standards, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(a)  CALIPER: A measurement of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measured six (6) inches above natural grade for trees less than or equal to four (4) inches in diameter at such point; and measured twelve (12) inches above grade for all other trees. 
(b)  DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT OR D.B.H.: The diameter of a tree measured at four and one-half (4½) feet above the existing grade at the base of the tree. 
(c)  LANDSCAPING: The process by which an area is planted in vegetation including grasses, groundcover, shrubs, bushes and trees. 
(d)  NONCONTRIBUTORY PLANTS: Plants that are not assigned points. 
(e)  OPAQUE: When describing a landscape buffer means a dense, solid mass of plantings completely obstructing the view of uses on the other side of the buffer. 
(f)  PLANT HEIGHT: The height of a tree or shrub shall be measured from the root collar to the top of the stem. 
(g)  ROOT COLLAR: That part of a plant where the stem and root system meet. 
(h)  SHRUB: Deciduous or evergreen woody plant with an expected mature height of generally not more than fifteen (15) feet, with single or multiple trunks or multiple leaders. 
(i)  TREE: Any woody plant, normally having one dominant stem or trunk, bearing its foliage or crown well above ground level to heights of fifteen (15) feet or more. 
(j)  WOODLAND: An area or stand of trees not being grown for commercial purposes whose total combined canopy covers an area of one-half (½) acre or more and at least fifty (50) percent of which is composed of canopies of trees having a caliper of at least eight (8) inches, or any grove consisting of eight (8) or more individual trees having a caliper of at least ten (10) inches whose combined canopies cover at least fifty (50) percent of the area encompassed by the grove. 
2.  Submittal Requirements. Projects requiring site/design review under Sec. 62-310(c)(1) of the McFarland Municipal Code shall provide landscaping plans. All plans shall be titled in the form of: "Landscape Plan, [name and location of project]" or shown on the "Site Development Plan" and shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than 1?—60' and shall include the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the project developer, the location and names of abutting streets and rights of way, a graphic and written scale, the date of the plan and any subsequent revision; 
(b)  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed property lines, buildings, structures, parking lots and driveways, roadways and rights-of-way, easements, stormwater control features, sidewalks, bicycle paths, refuse disposal areas, fences, light fixtures, other surface utility structures, signs and other freestanding structural features, recreational facilities, setbacks and easements. 
(c)  The location, quantity, installation size, mature size, both scientific and common names, and all applicable landscaping points (refer to Secs. 62-70 and 62-72 of the McFarland Municipal Code) of all proposed plant materials. 
(d)  Plant List and Landscape Point Calculations. 
(e)  The designation, location, species and size of all existing trees eight (8) inches and larger in diameter measured four (4) feet above natural grade with any trees to be removed clearly identified. In the event a significant number of trees exist in concentrated areas on the site, with the exception of Heritage Trees (refer to Sec. 59-20(g) of the McFarland Municipal Code), only the boundaries of the tree, grove, forest or woodland area need be shown. (Refer to Sec. 59-29(d) of the McFarland Municipal Code for additional requirements.) 
3.  Landscape Improvement Standards. The following standards shall be used in determining landscaping improvements required to be installed as part of site/design plan approval: 
(a)  The development, redevelopment, expansion, or substantial modification of buildings or site improvements or substantial changes in use shall include at least the minimum amount of landscaping described in this section and in the district regulations. Landscaping materials which meet the minimum installation sizes shown below shall earn landscaping points per plant as indicated in the following table. Non-contributory plants do not earn points. The classifications of individual plant species corresponds to the classification used in the publication entitled A Guide To Selecting Landscape Plants For Wisconsin, E.R. Hasselkus, U.W. Extension Publication: A2865. 
LANDSCAPING POINTS, INSTALLATION SIZES, AND MINIMUM MATURITY HEIGHTS
PLANT CATEGORY 	LANDSCAPING POINTS PER PLANT 	MINIMUM HEIGHT INSTALLATION SIZE 	MINIMUM MATURE HEIGHT 
Canopy Tree 	40 	2? Caliper & 6' Tall 	40' 
Medium Deciduous Tree 	25 	6' Tall 	30' 
Low Deciduous Tree 	15 	4' Tall 	15' 
Tall Evergreen 	30 	5' Tall 	40' 
Medium Evergreen Tree 	20 	4' Tall 	20' 
Low Evergreen Tree 	12 	3' Tall 	15' 
Tall Deciduous Shrub 	5 	36? Tall 	8' 
Medium Deciduous Shrub 	3 	24? Tall 	5' 
Low Deciduous Shrub 	1 	18? Tall 	2' 
Medium Evergreen Shrub 	5 	18? Tall/Wide 	3' 
Low Evergreen Shrub 	3 	12? Tall/Wide 	2' 
Non-Contributory Plants 	0 	n/a 	n/a 
 
4.  General Design Criteria 
(a)  Selection of Plant Species. Plant material shall be selected for its form, texture, color, and concern for its ultimate size and shape. 
(1)  While many trees and shrubs are desirable as street plantings, some species and cultivars are unsuitable because they are prone to wind and weather damage, produce troublesome seeds or fruit, harbor insect pests, are disease susceptible, considered an invasive species via Administrative Code 40 Wisconsin's Invasive Species Identification, Classification and Control Rule September 2009 or revised version thereof, or block sight and clearance requirements. (Refer to Secs. 59-35 and 59-36 for trees and shrubs permitted or not permitted within the public right-of-way of the McFarland Municipal Code.) 
(2)  Shrubs and trees, which are not native to Wisconsin, have an established history of spreading to nearby parks and conservancy areas. These non-native plants tend to become overlay abundant and ultimately eliminate many desirable native species. The control and eradication of these unsuitable plants create a costly management problem. The following lists identify species of landscape plants that are prohibited for use on private property: 
PROHIBITED LANDSCAPE PLANTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS SUBMITTED UNDER SECTION 62-310(c)(1) 
TREES
Tree-of-Heaven 	Ailanthus altissima 
Russian Olive 	Elaeagnus angustifolia 
Autumn Olive 	Elaeagnus umbellata 
Buckthorn, Common 	Rhamnus cathartica 
Buckthorn, Glossy 	Rhamnus frangula 
SHRUBS
Barberry, Japanese 	Berberis thunbergii 
Honeysuckle, Amur 	Lonicera maacki 
Honeysuckle, Tartarian 	Lonicera morrowii 
Honeysuckle, Morrow's 	Lonicera tatarica 
Honeysuckle, Bella 	Lonicera x bella 
Multiflora Rose 	Rosa multiflora 
Knotweed, Japanese 	Polygonum cuspidatum 
 
GROUND COVER
Garlic Mustard 	Alliaria petiolata 
Burdock, Common 	Arctium minus 
Spotted Knapweed 	Centaurea maculosa 
Thistle, Canada 	Cirsium arvense 
Bindweed, Field 	Convolvulus arvensis 
Crown Vetch 	Coronilla varia 
Teasel, Cut-leaved 	Dipsacus laciniatus 
Teasel, Common 	Dipsacus sylvestris 
Spurge, Cypress 	Euphorbia cyparissias 
Spurge, Leafy 	Euphorbia esula 
Dame's Rocket 	Hesperis matronalis 
Bird's-foot Trefoil 	Lotus corniculatus 
Moneywort 	Lysimachia nummularia 
Purple Loosestrife 	Lythrum salicaria 
Sweet Clover, White 	Melilotus alba 
Sweet Clover, Yellow 	Melilotus officinalis 
Wild Parsnip 	Pastinaca sativa 
Reed Canary Grass 	Phalaris arundinacea 
Reed Grass, Common 	Phragmites australis 
Soapwort 	Saponaria officinalis 
 
[b]  Preservation of Existing Plantings. Upon consultation with the Village Forester (refer to Sec. 59-20(d) of the McFarland Municipal Code), existing trees, plants and other landscape features, which do not excessively interfere with installation of infrastructure, shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan of a site and be protected from damage during development activities. (Refer to Sec. 59-29(d) of the McFarland Municipal Code for additional requirements.) 
[c]  Berming. Earthen berms and existing topography may, wherever practical, be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site, and be varied in height to avoid a monotonous "walled" effect. The maximum slope for any berm constructed on a site shall be three (3) foot run: one (1) foot rise. Berming should not interfere with stormwater control features. 
5.  Selection, Installation, Maintenance and Certification of Plant Materials 
(a)  Plant Quality 
(1)  Planting materials used to comply with this section are to be high quality nursery stock, have been grown in zone four, and are capable of withstanding extremes of individual site microclimates. 
(2)  Trees selected for planting shall be healthy, free of insects, diseases and damage that would threaten the viability of the plant. Parkway trees and parking lot trees, at the time of planting, shall have a minimum branching height of six (6) feet above the ground to allow adequate visual and physical clearance. (Refer to Sec. 7 - Off Street Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements (2).) 
(b)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed according to the following requirements (Refer to Secs. 59-25, 59-27, 59-30 and 59-34 of the McFarland Municipal Code for additional requirements): 
(1)  All plantings shall be installed in accordance with the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. 
(2)  All unpaved areas within a street right-of-way and all swales forming the drainage system for a parcel shall be sodded or a seeded erosion mat, or rain garden, shall be installed. Upon recommendation of the Village Engineer, the Plan Commission may require additional sodding or seeded erosion mats for a lot to prevent soil erosion and blockage of draining systems. 
(3)  Select and locate landscape materials so as to avoid obstructing visual or physical access to fire hydrants. Canopy and medium trees and shrubs shall not be located closer than six (6) feet to fire hydrants, twenty-five (25) feet to utility, or street lighting poles, and fifteen (15) feet for low trees; fifteen (15) feet to driveways or alleys and twenty-five (25) feet to the intersection of two (2) streets from either corner measured on the property line. 
(4)  Locate trees and shrubs in such a way that they do not obstruct views of vehicle operators and pedestrians at intersections, alleys, driveways, parking lots and sidewalks. 
(5)  Trees and shrubs located within fifteen (15) feet of overhead utility wires are to be limited to those with a mature height that is at least five (5) feet less than the height of the wires. 
(6)  Deciduous trees are encouraged on the south, southwest and east sides of buildings to provide shade from the summer sun, and evergreens are encouraged on the north and northwest sides of buildings to dissipate the effect of winter winds where practical. 
(c)  Maintenance 
(1)  Responsibility of Owner. Owner(s) of any property subject to an approved landscaping plan are responsible for the continuous maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping materials and barriers as specified under their approved landscape plan. All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition, and a neat and orderly appearance. Plants shall be replaced as deemed by the Village Forester (refer to Sec. 59-20(d) of the McFarland Municipal Code), and shall be kept free of refuse and debris. Initial installation of plantings shall be warranted for a period of two years. (Refer to Secs. 8-61(b)(2), 59-31 and 59-34 of the McFarland Municipal Code.] 
(d)  Certification. Following the installation of all plantings, the developer shall request that the building inspector certify that all plantings have been completed in accordance with the approved landscaping plan. In the event that the plantings are not in compliance with the approved landscaping plan, the building inspector shall specify the necessary additional plantings or revisions of the plan that are necessary in order to comply with the approved landscaping plan. If any security was required for the landscaping plan it shall not be released by the Village until the building inspector has certified compliance with the approved landscaping plan. 
6.  Multi-Family Residential Landscaping Requirements. All multi-family residential sites shall comply with this subsection. The requirements of this subsection are in addition to the minimum landscape points required by the district regulations. 
(a)  All yards shall be seeded or sodded. 
(b)  Street yards on corner lots and all front yards shall contain a minimum of one (1) canopy tree per fifty (50) lineal feet of street frontage. 
(c)  Rear yards and interior side yards shall contain a mix of canopy, evergreen and other trees equivalent to at least one (1) per fifty (50) lineal feet, and including large shrubs along at least thirty (30) percent of the interior side and rear property lines. The trees and shrubs may be clustered. 
7.  Non-Residential Landscaping Requirements. All non-residential sites shall comply with this subsection. The requirements of this subsection are in addition to the minimum landscape points required by the district regulations. 
(a)  Foundation plantings shall be provided on those sides of a building that face a public right-of-way in a planting bed with a minimum width of five (5) feet adjacent to the entire building length. The planting area shall be free of all paving except where sidewalks and driveways leading directly into the building are necessary for access. In no case shall the foundation planting area be reduced to extend across less than fifty (50) percent of the building face due to said sidewalks or driveways. 
(b)  Service yards, loading docks and exterior work areas on lots adjacent to non-industrial uses shall be screened from view from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. The screening shall consist of any one or any combination of: 
(1)  Solid fencing constructed of commercial-grade wood or plastic composite (refer to Secs. 8-366 to 8-370 of the McFarland Municipal Code]; 
(2)  A masonry wall, of a design approved by the Plan Commission with a height not exceeding eight (8) feet; 
(3)  Plantings, at the time of installation, of not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(c)  Open storage yards if allowed, shall be screened from public streets at a height at least equal to the height of material to be stored or eight (8) feet, whichever is greater. Where stored materials exceed eight (8) feet in height, plantings shall be provided along the outside perimeter of all portions of the fence or wall visible from an adjacent property or public right-of-way. The effective growth of the plantings after three (3) years shall be not less than the height of the materials being screened. The Plan Commission may; however, require more mature plantings at the time of initial installation, due to the nature of the material to be screened. 
8.  Off-Street Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. All required off-street parking areas designed to accommodate five (5) or more vehicles in any zone, shall be landscaped according to the standards in this subsection. The requirements of this subsection are in addition to the minimum landscape points required by district regulations. 
(a)  Landscaping Objectives. The specific requirements of this subsection are intended to recognize both the functional importance of parking areas and the public benefits associated with well-designed landscaped areas which enhance the visual environment, promote public safety, moderate the microclimate, facilitate stormwater control and other environmental impacts and reduce nuisances, such as noise and glare. The standards are designed to soften the visual and other sensory impacts of parking areas through the use of large canopy trees and well-designed clustered plantings; as opposed to screening the entire perimeter with a hedge or fence. All landscape plans for parking areas shall be designed to promote these objectives. 
(b)  Canopy Tree and Curbed Island and Peninsula Requirements. All off-street vehicular parking areas designed for more than five (5) vehicles shall be provided with canopy trees as provided in this paragraph. 
(1)  Canopy Trees. Canopy trees shall be located in curbed islands or within ten (10) feet of the periphery of the parking area surface. All newly planted canopy trees shall have a minimum caliper of two (2) inches and a height of not less than six (6) feet. Existing mature trees with a caliper of at least two (2) inches meeting the location requirements of this paragraph may be applied toward the canopy tree requirements. 
(2)  Curbed Islands and Peninsulas. Parking spaces shall be separated by a curbed island or peninsulas at the rate of one (1) curbed island or peninsula for each linear row of twelve (12) parking spaces for single row configurations, or for each twenty-four (24) parking spaces in double row configurations. All curbed islands or peninsulas shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet as measured from the inside of the curb and a minimum length of ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Number. The minimum number of curbed islands or peninsulas shall be as provided in the following table: 
CURBED ISLAND AND PENINSULA STANDARDS
NUMBER OF STALLS	ISLANDS OR PENINSULAS REQUIRED BY ZONING DISTRICT
	R-3, C-G, C-P, C-H, C-L, C-C, M-IC
1 to 11 	none 
12 to 21 	(24 stalls double row configuration) 1 island or peninsula 
22 to 34 	2 islands or peninsulas 
35 to 46 	3 islands or peninsulas 
47 to 58 	4 islands or peninsulas 
59 to 70 	5 islands or peninsulas 
69 to 74 	6 islands or peninsulas 
75 to 94 	7 islands or peninsulas 
95 to 96 	8 islands or peninsulas 
97 to 118 	9 islands or peninsulas 
Over 119 	9 islands or peninsulas plus 1 island for each 12 spaces or fraction thereof 
 
(c)  Parking Area Screening. Where any part of an off-street parking area designed for five (5) or more vehicles is located within twenty-five (25) feet of a residentially zoned parcel, or is located such that a nearby residentially zoned property would be affected by noise or headlight glare, an opaque screening barrier is required on the parcel where the parking area is located. The effective height of the barrier shall be at least five (5) feet above the parking surface. The barrier may consist of wood or masonry fencing, walls, berms, or plant material. Where plant materials are used for screening, they shall be of suitable size and density to accomplish the screening objective within three (3) years from the time of planting. 
(d)  Minimum Dimensions for Planted Areas (other than curbed islands). All landscaped areas with trees shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in all dimensions as measured from the inside of any frame. All landscape areas without trees, but planted with shrubs, shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in all dimensions as measured from inside the frame. 
(e)  Alternative Screening of Industrial Parking Areas. The Plan Commission may approve a landscaping plan, or portion thereof, for a parking area within an industrial or commercially zoned site, which provides for effective screening of the entire parking area from public view and grant a general exemption from the requirements of 8.(b) and 8.(c) of these standards. The exemption shall be granted only where all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The plan provides for effective screening of the entire parking area from view from all public rights-of-way, public recreation areas and all residentially zoned properties; 
(2)  Where screening is accomplished by the use of plant materials, they are of a suitable size and density to accomplish complete visual screening during the leaf-on season within three (3) years after planting; however, more mature plantings may be required by the Plan Commission; 
(3)  The effective height of the screening is not less than six (6) feet; 
(4)  The plan provides for diversity in the types of plant species or a combination of various plant species and other types of barriers to afford an aesthetically pleasing character to the parking area perimeter; 
(5)  Any portion of the parking area used for visitor parking meets all of the requirements of pars. (b) and (d) and is visually separated from all other parking areas by curbed islands/peninsulas or landscaped planting areas of not less than ten (10) feet wide and ten (10) feet long; 
(6)  The Plan Commission finds that the alternative landscaping plan satisfies the general intent of the parking area landscaping provisions of this section and will not be detrimental to the character of the area; 
(7)  The plan complies with all other applicable ordinances and any private deed restrictions or covenants applicable to the property. 
9.  Miscellaneous Landscaping Requirements. The requirements of this subsection are in addition to the minimum landscape points required by district regulations. 
(a)  Retention and Detention Ponds. Landscaping including trees and shrubs shall be provided around the perimeter of retention and detention ponds generally above the high water level. Only plants which are adapted to temporary flooding may be planted below high water level. 
(b)  Ground Level Air Conditioning Units and Mechanical Equipment. Ground level air conditioning units and other mechanical equipment shall be landscaped on all sides visible from the public right-of-way. The plants used shall have a mature height equal to or exceeding the height of the equipment which it is screening. 
(c)  Ground Signs and Ground Lights. The area immediately surrounding the foundation of ground signs shall be planted with shrubs, groundcover, or perennial flowers. Plants shall be selected for a mature height which will not exceed the bottom of the sign's message. Ground lights for signs shall be screened from view from the public rights-of-way with evergreen shrubs or groundcover to a minimum height equal to that of the light(s). 
(d)  Refuse Receptacles. Refuse receptacles and waste removal areas shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way or adjacent properties. The screening shall consist of a solid fence constructed of masonry, plastic composite, or commercial-grade wood fencing materials and shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet tall. Shrubs or groundcover shall be planted along such screens to help soften their appearance. Refuse receptacles shall be enclosed on the fourth side with a gate to contain trash or other debris. The gate side of the waste receptacle shall be oriented toward the interior of the site. 
PLANT LIST 
PLANT CATEGORY 	QUANTITY 	SCIENTIFIC NAME 	COMMON NAME 	INSTALLATION SIZE 	MATURE SIZE 	POINT VALUE PER PLANT 	TOTAL POINT VALUE 

CANOPY TREE(S) 							
MEDIUM DECIDUOUS TREE(S) 							
LOW DECIDUOUS TREE(S) 							
TALL EVERGREEN TREE(S) 							
MEDIUM EVERGREEN TREE(S) 							
LOW EVERGREEN TREE(S) 							
TALL DECIDUOUS SHRUB(S) 							
MEDIUM DECIDUOUS SHRUB(S) 							
LOW DECIDUOUS SHRUB(S) 							
MEDIUM EVERGREEN SHRUB(S) 							
LOW EVERGREEN SHRUB(S) 							
NON-CONTRIBUTORY PLANT(S) 							
TOTAL POINTS: 	
 
Village of McFarland 
Landscape Point Calculations 
Minimum Points Required for ___________ Zoning District 
  
	Site Measurement 	Points Required 	Points Provided 
Building Foundation 		Per 100 ft. 	
G.F.A. 		Per 1,000 ft. 	
Street Frontage 		Per 100 ft. 	
Paved Area 		Per 10,000 sq. ft. 	
Total Points
 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 5-23-2011) 
