CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MOSINEE, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
Published in 1998 by Order of the Common Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MOSINEE, WISCONSIN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ron Shnowske 
Jeff Starr 
Scott Chittum 
Thomas Kipp 
Tom Helbach 
Thomas Mielke 
Common Council 
____________ 
Robert W. Harrison 
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer 
____________ 
Dean R. Dietrich 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    Democracy is a government of laws. Good democracy requires not only good laws, but laws which are readily available in written form to all who are subject to them, to the public officials and police officers who must administer them and to the judges and attorneys who must interpret and apply them. It is for this reason that the common council of the City of Mosinee has adopted this Code of Ordinances. This Code represents the contribution of the common council to the democratic and efficient administration of the government and affairs of the City of Mosinee. 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Mosinee, Wisconsin. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code, as amended, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the common council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1986 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1  
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of David Poucher, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Robert Harrison, Administrator, and Dean Dietrich, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mosinee, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table and state law reference table. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mosinee, Wisconsin. 
©?Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mosinee, Wisconsin. 1998. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 98-8 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF MOSINEE, WISCONSIN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    WHEREAS, the Common Council for the City of Mosinee has authorized the recodification of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Mosinee in order to provide for an update and clarification of the various ordinances applicable to citizens of the City of Mosinee and to place the newly revised Code of Ordinances on the Internet in order to provide access to all residents through the Internet Web Site; 
    WHEREAS, state statutes authorize the adoption of a Code of Ordinances provided the City publishes a notice to the Citizens and provides an opportunity for citizens to review the Code of Ordinances before final adoption and approval by the Common Council; 
    WHEREAS, the Common Council has authorized the proper notices pursuant to Section 66.035 of the Wisconsin statutes and has provided an opportunity for members of the public to review the Code of Ordinances prior to their adoption and approval by the Common Council; 
NOW THEREFORE, THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MOSINEE DOES HEREBY ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Municipal Code, City of Mosinee, Wisconsin," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and approved. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 5, 1998 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. 
(a) ?Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished as follows: 
For the first offense, any person who shall violate any provision of the Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days; 
For the second offense, any person found guilty of violating any provision of the Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same provision within one year shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00, together with costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding six months. 
(b) ?Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c) ?The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(d) ?In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Common Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 5, 1998, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Adopted and approved this 26th day of October, 1998. 
By: 
/s/ ? 
      Jim Jacobson, Mayor   Attest: 
/s/ ? 
      Bruce R. Jamroz, City Clerk   First Reading: September 28, 1998 
Date of Publication of Notice: 
Second reading: 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 2010-01 ?7-12-2010 Include 13 2010-02 10-11-2010 Include 13 2010-03 12-13-2010 Include 13 2011-01 ?1-10-2011 Include 14 2011-02 ?2-14-2011 Include 14 2011-03 ?2-28-2011 Include 14 2011-04 ?3-14-2011 Include 14 2011-05 ?6-13-2011 Include 14 2011-06 ?7-11-2011 Include 14 2011-07 ?7-11-2011 Include 14 2011-08 ?9-12-2011 Include 14 2011-09 ?8-15-2011 Include 14 2012-01 ?1-?9-2012 Include 15 2012-02 ?2-13-2012 Include 15 2012-03 12-10-2012 Include 15 2012-04 12-10-2012 Include 15 2013-01 ?6-10-2013 Include 16 2013-02 ?9-?9-2013 Include 16 2013-03 10-14-2013 Include 16 2013-04 12-?9-2013 Include 16 2014-01 ?8-11-2014 Include 17 2015-01 ?3-?9-2015 Include 18 2015-02 ?5-11-2015 Include 18 2015-03 10-12-2015 Include 18 2015-04 10-12-2015 Include 18 2015-05 11-?9-2015 Include 18 2015-06 12-14-2015 Include 18 2016-01 ?3-14-2016 Include 19 2016-03 ?4-11-2016 Include 19 2016-04 ?5-?9-2016 Include 19 2016-05 ?6-13-2016 Include 19 2016-06 ?6-13-2016 Include 19 2016-07 ?7-11-2016 Include 19 2016-08 ?7-11-2016 Include 19 2016-09 10-10-2016 Include 19 2017-01 ?4-10-2017 Omit 20 2017-02 ?4-10-2017 Include 20 2017-03 ?4-10-2017 Includee 20 2017-04 ?6-12-2017 Include 20 2017-05 ?8-14-2017 Include 20 2017-06 ?9-11-2017 Include 20 2017-07 11-13-2017 Include 20 2017-08 12-11-2017 Include 20 2018-01 ?2-12-2018 Include 21 2018-02 ?4-?9-2018 Include 21 2018-03 ?6-?6-2018 Include 21 2018-04 ?8-13-2018 Include 21 2018-05 ?8-13-2018 Include 21 2018-06 ?1-?9-2019 Include 21  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Title of Code; citation. 
    These collected ordinances shall be known and referred to as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Mosinee, Wisconsin." References to the Code of Ordinances, City of Mosinee, Wisconsin, shall be cited as follows: "Sec. _____, Code of Ordinances, City of Mosinee, Wisconsin." 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to codify ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.035. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and for all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the common council: 
    Acts by agents. When an ordinance requires an act be done by a person which may be legally performed by an authorized agent of that principal person, the requirement shall be construed to include all acts performed by such agents. 
    City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Mosinee, Wisconsin, and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employes. 
    City clerk, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city clerk," "chief of police" or "other city officers or departments," when referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed to mean the city clerk, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the city. 
    Code and Code of Ordinances. The words "Code," "Municipal Code" and "Code of Ordinances" when used in any section of this Code shall refer to this Code of General Ordinances of the City of Mosinee, unless the context of the section clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Common council; council. The words "common council" and "council" shall mean the common council of the City of Mosinee, Wisconsin. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act or event from which the period of time begins to run shall not be included, but the last day of the period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. If the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. As used in this section, the term "legal holiday" means any statewide legal holiday specified by state law and any other city holiday designated by the common council. 
State Law reference— Legal holidays generally, Wis. Stats. § 895.20. 
    County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Marathon, Wisconsin. 
    Easement. The word "easement" means a right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another; a right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property right in the owner. 
    Fine. The term "fine" shall be the equivalent of the word "forfeiture," and vice versa. 
    Gender. Every word in this Code referring to the masculine gender shall also be construed to apply to females, and vice versa. 
    General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed according to their plain meaning in common usage. However, words or phrases with a technical or special meaning shall be understood and construed according to that technical or special meaning if such is the intent of this Code. 
    Highway. The word "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or employes shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. 
    Law. The word "law" shall mean any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the state, the United States, the county, the city or any agencies thereof, as well as the rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate. 
    May. The word "may" shall be construed as being permissive and discretionary. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," as applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall mean any of the following entities: natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, bodies politic or any other entity of any kind which is capable of being sued. 
    Personal property. The word "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real, personal and mixed property. 
    Public place. The word "public place" shall mean any place subject to the primary control of any public agency including, but not limited to, any park, street, public way, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. The word "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Repeal. When any ordinance having the effect of repealing a prior ordinance is itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive the prior ordinance or any part thereof, unless expressly so provided. 
    Shall. The word "shall" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature; subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    Singular and plural. Every word in this Code referring to the singular number only shall also be construed to apply to several persons or things, and every word in this Code referring to a plural number shall also be construed to apply to one person or thing. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Wisconsin. 
    Street. The word "street" shall include any highway, street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tenant; occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person holding a written or oral lease thereof or who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude the interpretation of the verb in the future tense where appropriate. 
    Wisconsin Administrative Code. The term "Wisconsin Administrative Code" and its abbreviation as "Wis. Adm. Code" shall mean the Wisconsin Administrative Code as of the adoption of this Code, as amended or renumbered from time to time. 
    Wisconsin Statutes. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" and its abbreviation as "Wis. Stats." shall mean, in this Code, the Wisconsin Statutes. 
    Written; in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Similar rules of statutory construction, Wis. Stats. § 990.001. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code so far as they are the same as those of the Code of the City of Mosinee and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Repeal of general ordinances. 
(a) ?Exceptions to repeal. All general ordinances heretofore adopted by the common council are hereby repealed. This shall not include any ordinances or parts of ordinances or resolutions relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with the provisions of this Code, except that some of the following provisions may be amended by this Code of Ordinances: 
(1) ?Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance. 
(2) ?Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or salaries for the city, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city. 
(3) ?The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the Code. 
(4) ?Any appropriation ordinance or resolution. 
(5) ?Any right or franchise granted by the common council to any person, firm or corporation. 
(6) ?Any ordinance or resolution (including CATV) dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, prescribing, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7) ?Any ordinance or resolution establishing the prescribing the street grades of any streets in the city. 
(8) ?Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special assessments therefor. 
(9) ?Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(10) ?Any ordinance annexing property to the city. 
(11) ?Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, maintenance, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures; except that certain amendments were added as part of this codification. 
(12) ?Zoning ordinances including amendments to the zoning map, dwelling building code and other building code ordinances, except that certain amendments were added as part of this codification. 
(13) ?Charter ordinances. 
(14) ?The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the city of whatever name or description. 
(15) ?Water, sewer, solid waste and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction. 
(16) ?Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(17) ?Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones. 
(18) ?Any amendment to the zoning map. 
(19) ?Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, or setting salaries of city officers and employes, or any personnel regulations. 
(20) ?Any temporary or special ordinances. 
(21) ?Any ordinance calling an election. 
(22) ?Any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements. 
(23) ?Any ordinance establishing grades, curblines and widths of sidewalks in the public streets and alleys. 
(24) ?Any ordinance regarding the lighting of streets and alleys. 
(25) ?Any ordinance naming public grounds and parks. 
(26) ?Any ordinance regarding the letting of contracts without bids. 
(27) ?Any ordinance regarding the establishment of wards, ward boundaries and election precincts. 
(28) ?Any ordinance releasing persons from liability. 
(29) ?Any ordinance regarding construction of public works. 
(30) ?Any ordinance regarding water, sewer, solid waste, and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction. 
(31) ?Any ordinance regarding natural and manmade emergencies. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. All ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b) ?Effect of repeals. The repeal or amendment of any provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the common council shall not: 
(1) ?Affect any rights, privileges, obligations or liabilities which were acquired or incurred or which had accrued under the repealed or amended provision, unless the city has expressly reserved the right to revoke such right, privilege, obligation or liability. 
(2) ?Affect any offense, penalty or forfeiture, or prosecution for any offense, or levy of any penalty or forfeiture which has arisen prior to the repeal or amendment of the relevant provision of any ordinance or resolution. The preceding sentence shall not preclude the application of a lesser penalty or forfeiture if the new amending or repealing provision contains such a lesser penalty or forfeiture. The procedure for prosecution of any violations of ordinances repealed or amended shall be conducted according to the procedure set forth in the new amending or repealing provision or other procedure currently in effect. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-10. - Conflict of provisions. 
(a) ?If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b) ?If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 1-11. - Effective date of ordinances. 
(a) ?Code. The Code of Ordinances, City of Mosinee, Wisconsin shall take effect from and after passage and publication as provided by state law. 
(b) ?Subsequent ordinances. All ordinances passed by the common council subsequent to the adoption of the Code of Ordinances, except when otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect from and after their publication. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 1-12. - Fees and charges. 
    All fees and charges by the city are set by council resolution from time to time, and all such fees and charges in effect on the date of adoption of this Code shall continue in force and effect until amended by the council. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty. 
(a) ?Enumerated. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this Code, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows: 
(1) ?First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2) ?Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $50.00, nor more than $1,000.00 for each such offense, together with costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding six months. 
(b) ?Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the city from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(c) ?Other remedies: 
(1) ?The city shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the state statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution above. 
(2) ?Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of the city, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 1-14. - Method of enforcement. 
    The city elects to use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2-1) 
Sec. 1-15. - Information contained in citation. 
    The citation shall contain the following: 
(1) ?The name and address of the alleged violator. 
(2) ?Factual allegations describing the alleged violation. 
(3) ?The time and place of the offense. 
(4) ?The section of the ordinance violated. 
(5) ?A designation of the offense in such manner as can readily be understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so. 
(6) ?The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court. 
(7) ?A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator: 
a. ?That a cash deposit based on the schedule established by section 1-17 may be made which shall be delivered or mailed to the police department prior to the time of the scheduled court appearance. 
b. ?That if a deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary unless he is subsequently summoned. 
c. ?That if a cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not appear in court, he will be deemed to have entered a plea of no contest, or, if the court does not accept the plea of no contest, a summons will be issued commanding him to appear in court to answer the complaint. 
d. ?That if no cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not appear in court at the time specified, an action may be commenced to collect the forfeiture. 
(8) ?A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to indicate that the statement required under subsection (7) has been read. Such statement shall be sent or brought with the cash deposit. 
(9) ?Such other information as the city deems necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2-2) 
Sec. 1-16. - Form of citation. 
    The form of the citation to be used by the city is on file in the administrator's office and is adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2-3) 
Sec. 1-17. - Schedule of deposits. 
(a) ?The schedule of cash deposits shall be established for use with citations issued under this chapter by the common council according to the penalty provision of this Code. 
(b) ?Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or check to the police department who shall provide a receipt therefor. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2-4) 
Sec. 1-18. - Issuance of citation. 
(a) ?Law enforcement officer. Any law enforcement officer may issue citations authorized under this chapter. 
(b) ?City officials. The following city officials may issue citations with respect to those specified ordinances which are directly related to their official responsibilities: 
(1) ?Any police officer. 
(2) ?Building inspector. 
(3) ?Public works director. 
(c) ?Delegated authority. The city officials named in subsection (b) of this section may delegate their authority to issue citations to their subordinates. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2-5) 
Sec. 1-19. - Procedure upon default by violator. 
    Wis. Stats. § 66.119(3), relating to violator's options and procedure on default, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this section by reference. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2-6) 
Sec. 1-20. - Nonexclusivity of Code provisions for enforcement. 
(a) ?Other ordinance. Adoption of this Code does not preclude the common council from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matter. 
(b) ?Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the city or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2-7) 
Sec. 1-21. - Overdue forfeitures. 
(a) ?Denial of license or permit. Pursuant to the authority of Wis. Stats. § 66.117 and for purposes of collecting overdue ordinance forfeitures, no license or permit that may be issued by the city, shall be issued to a person having an unpaid and/or overdue forfeiture resulting from a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the city, or has delinquent taxes or assessments due and owing to the city. 
(b) ?Municipal reciprocity. No license or permit shall be issued to a person having an unpaid overdue forfeiture resulting from a violation of an ordinance of any municipality in the county that is party to a reciprocal agreement with the city. 
(c) ?Exceptions. The issuance of a license or permit shall not be refused to a person who is appealing the imposition of a forfeiture or is applying for a dog license under Wis. Stats. § 174.07. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, §§ 1—3, 4-28-1997) 
Sec. 1-22. - Amendments; language of amendments; new material; repeals. 
(a) ?All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the common council. 
(b) ?Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Municipal Code of the City of Mosinee, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c) ?If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Municipal Code of the City of Mosinee is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
Sec. 1-23. - Effect of amendments to Code. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the common council to make the addition or amendment a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Municipal Code of the City of Mosinee, Wisconsin" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-24. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) ?By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the common council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the common council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all charter ordinances, adopted or amended, during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b) ?In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c) ?When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1) ?Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2) ?Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3) ?Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4) ?Change the words "this ordinance," or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5) ?Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference— Code of ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.035. 
Sec. 1-25. - Administrator to maintain copies of documents incorporated by reference. 
    Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, by ordinance into this Code, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein and the administrator shall maintain in his office a copy of any such material as adopted and as amended from time to time. Except as provided by section 2-356, materials on file at the administrator's office shall be considered public records open to reasonable examination by any person during the office hours of the administrator, subject to such restrictions on examination as the administrator imposes for the preservation of the material. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-8) 
Sec. 1-26. - Separability of provisions. 
    If any provision of this Code of Ordinances is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1-4) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict inconsistent with the provisions of this code saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(3); civil emergencies, ch. 18; court, ch. 22; elections, ch. 26; administration of zoning regulations, § 42-61 et seq.; administration and enforcement of shoreland-wetland regulations, § 42-1121 et seq.; administration and enforcement of floodplain zoning regulations, § 42-1181 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 46; planning, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 74; administration and enforcement of traffic regulations, § 78-41 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City government. 
(a) ?Mayor-council government. The city is a body corporate and politic with the powers of a municipality at common law and governed by the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 62 and 66, laws amending those chapters, other acts of the legislature and the constitution of the state. The city operates under the mayor-council form of government under Wis. Stats. ch. 62. 
(b) ?Division of responsibilities. 
(1) ?Legislative branch. The common council is the legislative branch of the city government. Its primary business is the passage of law in the form of ordinances or resolutions which shall prescribe what the law shall be, not only in relation to the particular facts existing at the time, but as to all future cases arising under it. The common council shall fix the salaries of all officers and employes of the city, and be charged with the official management of the city's financial affairs, its budget, its revenues and the raising of funds necessary for the operation of the city. 
(2) ?Executive branch. The mayor shall be the chief executive officer. He shall take care that all city ordinances and state laws are observed and enforced, and that all city officers, boards and commissions discharge their duties. When present, he shall preside at the meetings of the common council. He shall from time to time give the council such information and recommend such measures as he may deem advantageous to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-1) 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule, Wis. Const., Art. XI, Sec. 3. 
Sec. 2-2. - Official newspaper. 
    The official newspaper of the city shall be determined annually by the common council at its organizational meeting. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-2) 
State Law reference— Official newspapers generally, Wis. Stats. § 985.06. 
Sec. 2-3. - Publication and effect of ordinances. 
(a) ?All general ordinances of the city and all regulations imposing any penalty shall be published in the official paper of the city once and shall be immediately recorded, with the affidavit of publication, by the city administrator in a book kept for that purpose. A printed copy of such ordinance or regulation in any book, pamphlet or newspaper and published or purporting to be published therein by direction of the common council shall be prima facie proof of due passage, publication and recording of such ordinance or regulation. 
(b) ?All ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after passage and publication, unless otherwise provided, and published copies of such ordinances shall have appended the date of first publication. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-20) 
State Law reference— Council proceedings shall be published, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(4). 
Sec. 2-4. - Identities of applicants for public positions. 
(a) ?In this section, the term "final candidate" means each applicant for a position who is seriously considered for appointment or whose name is certified for appointment and whose name is submitted for final consideration to an authority for appointment to any local public office, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 19.42(7w). The term "final candidate" includes, whenever there are at least five candidates for an office or position, each of the five candidates who are considered most qualified for the office or position by an authority, and whenever there are less than five candidates for an office or position, each such candidate. Whenever an appointment is to be made from a group of more than five candidates, the term "final candidate" also includes each candidate in the group. 
(b) ?Every applicant for a position with any authority may indicate in writing to the authority that the applicant does not wish the authority to reveal his identity. Except with respect to an applicant whose name is certified for appointment to a position in the state classified service or a final candidate, if an applicant makes such an indication in writing, the authority shall not provide access to any record related to the application that may reveal the identity of the applicant. 
Secs. 2-5—2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 18; elections, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Councils generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-36. - Composition. 
    The aldermen of the city shall constitute the common council. The common council shall be vested with all the powers of the city not specifically given some other officer, as well as those powers set forth elsewhere throughout this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-1) 
Sec. 2-37. - Eligibility for office. 
(a) ?No person shall be elected by the people to a city office, who is not at the time of election, a citizen of the United States and of this state, and an elector of the city, and in case of a ward office, of the ward, and actually residing therein. 
(b) ?An appointee by the mayor, requiring to be confirmed by the council, who shall be rejected by the council, shall be ineligible for appointment to the same office for one year thereafter. 
(c) ?No member of the common council shall, during the term for which he is elected, be eligible for any office or position which, during such term, has been created by, or the selection to which is vested in, the council, provided that the council may be represented on city boards or commissions where no additional remuneration is paid such representative except as otherwise provided by the law. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(2). 
Sec. 2-38. - Election; term; number. 
    The city shall have six alderpersons in addition to the mayor, who is a member of the common council by virtue of his office as mayor. The six alderpersons shall constitute the common council. One alderperson shall be elected from each ward. At the city election in 1999, alderpersons from wards one, three and five shall be elected to a two-year term, and alderpersons from wards two, four and six shall be elected to a three-year term. Thereafter, alderpersons from wards one, three and five shall be elected at the annual city election in the odd-numbered years, and alderpersons from wards two, four and six shall be elected at the annual city election in the even-numbered years, all alderpersons to hold office for a period of two years. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-2(a); Ord. No. 97-2, § 1, 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 2-39. - Alderman appointment as mayor. 
    An alderman shall be eligible for appointment as mayor to fill an unexpired term. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-2(b)) 
Sec. 2-40. - President. 
    The common council, at its first meeting subsequent to the regular election and qualification of new members, shall, after organization, choose from its members a president, who in the absence of the mayor, shall preside at meetings of the council and during the absence or inability of the mayor, shall have the powers and duties of the mayor, except that he shall not have power to approve an act of the council which the mayor has disapproved, by filing objections with the administrator. He shall, when so officiating, be called "acting mayor." 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(8)(e). 
Sec. 2-41. - General powers. 
(a) ?Generally. The common council shall be vested with all the powers of the city not specifically given some other officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, the common council shall have the management and control of the city property, finances, highways, streets, navigable waters and the public service, and shall have the power to act for the government and good order of the city, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public, and may carry its powers into effect by license, regulation, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation, fine, imprisonment and other necessary or convenient means. The powers hereby conferred shall be in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express language. 
(b) ?Acquisition and disposal of property. The common council may acquire property, real or personal, within or without the city, for parks, libraries, historic places, recreation, beautification, streets, waterworks, sewage or waste disposal, harbors, improvement of watercourses, public grounds, vehicle parking areas and for any other public purpose; may acquire real property within or contiguous to the city, by means other than condemnation, for industrial sites; may improve and beautify the same; may construct, own, lease and maintain buildings on such property for instruction, recreation, amusement and other public purposes; and may sell and convey such city-owned property, except dedicated, platted parks. 
(c) ?Acquisition of easements and property rights. Confirming all powers granted to the common council and in furtherance thereof, the council is expressly authorized to acquire by gift, purchase or condemnation under Wis. Stats. ch. 32, any and all property rights in lands or waters, including rights of access and use, negative or positive easements, restrictive covenants, covenants running with land, scenic easements and any rights for use of property of any nature whatsoever, however denominated, which may be lawfully acquired for the benefit of the public or for any public purpose, including the exercise of powers granted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23; and may sell and convey such easements or property rights when no longer needed for public use or protection. 
(d) ?Construction of powers. Consistent with the purpose of giving to cities the largest measure of self-government in accordance with the spirit of the home rule amendment to the constitution, the grants of power to the common council in this section and throughout this Code of Ordinances shall be liberally construed in favor of the rights, powers and privileges of cities to promote the general welfare, peace, good order and prosperity of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-6(a)—(c), (e)) 
State Law reference— Home rule generally, Wis. Const., Art. XI, Sec. 3, Wis. Stats. §§ 62.09(7) and 62.11. 
Sec. 2-42. - Cooperation with other municipalities. 
    The common council, on behalf of the city, may join with other villages or cities in a cooperative arrangement for executing any power or duty in order to attain greater economy or efficiency, including joint employment of appointive officers and employes. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-7) 
State Law reference— Intergovernmental cooperation generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.30. 
Sec. 2-43. - Internal powers. 
    The common council has the power to preserve order at its meetings, compel attendance of aldermen and punish nonattendance. The common council shall be judge of the election and qualification of its members. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-8) 
Sec. 2-44. - Salaries. 
    The mayor and other aldermen who make up the common council, whether operating under general or special law, may by majority vote of all the members of the common council determine that an annual salary be paid the mayor and aldermen. Salaries heretofore established shall so remain until changed by ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-9) 
State Law reference— Salaries authorized, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(6). 
Sec. 2-45. - Removal from office. 
(a) ?Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed by the common council as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.12(1)(a) and 17.16. 
(b) ?Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.12(1)(c) and 17.16. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-15) 
Sec. 2-46. - Custody of official property. 
    City officers must observe the standards of care imposed by Wis. Stats. § 19.21 with respect to the care and custody of official property. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-16) 
Sec. 2-47. - Oath of office; bonds of officers. 
(a) ?Oath. Every person elected or appointed to any statutory office shall take and file his official oath within ten days after the notice of his election or appointment. 
(b) ?Bonds. The administrator and such other statutory officers as the laws of the state or the common council may direct shall execute and file an official bond in such form as the council may determine. The council may at any time require new or additional bonds of any officer. All official bonds must be approved by the mayor, and when so approved, then be filed within ten days after the officer executing the bonds shall have been notified of this election or appointment. Official bonds shall be filed with the administrator and shall be recorded by him in a book kept by him for that purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(4)(a), (b). 
Secs. 2-48—2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-71. - Standing committees. 
    At the organizational meeting of the common council in each year following the annual election, the mayor shall appoint from the council the following committees, consisting of at least two aldermen each: 
(1) ?Personnel and finance committee responsible for finances, licenses, and personnel matters for the city; 
(2) ?Public works committee responsible for streets, sidewalks, sewer and water utility and street lighting matters for the city; 
(3) ?Building and grounds committee responsible for the building codes of the city and the maintenance of city-owned property; and 
(4) ?Public safety committee responsible for overseeing the police, fire and ambulance operations of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-5(a); Ord. No. 92-6, § 1, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 2-72. - Appointments. 
(a) ?Each member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a majority of the members of the council. All aldermen shall serve on at least one standing committee. 
(b) ?The mayor may declare the entire council a committee of the whole for informal discussion at any meeting or for any other purpose, and shall ex officio be chairman of the same. 
(c) ?The mayor may, from time to time, appoint such special committees as may deem advisable or as provided for by motion or resolution stating the number of members and object thereof to perform such duties as may be assigned to them. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-5(b)) 
Sec. 2-73. - Reports. 
(a) ?All ordinances, resolutions, communications and other matters submitted to the council shall be read by title and author and referred to the appropriate committee by the mayor without motion unless objected to by a councilmember. The administrator shall read and record each such reference by title. Any alderman may require the reading in full of any matter at any time it is before the council. 
(b) ?Each committee shall at the next regular council meeting submit a report on all matters referred to it unless a longer time be granted by vote of the council. Such report shall recommend a definite action on each item and shall be approved by a majority of the committee. Any committee may require any city officer or employe to confer with it and supply information in connection with any matter pending before it. Minority reports may be submitted. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-5(c)) 
Secs. 2-74—2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Council meetings generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(2)(3). 

Sec. 2-96. - Times and place. 
(a) ?Following a regular city election, the common council shall meet on the third Tuesday of April for the purpose of organization. 
(b) ?Regular meetings of the common council shall be held on the second and fourth Monday of each calendar month, at the hour of 7:30 p.m. Any regular meeting falling upon a legal holiday shall be held on the next following secular day, at the same hour and place, or as otherwise designated by majority vote of the common council. All meetings of the council shall be held in the Mosinee City Hall, including special and adjourned meetings. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-10) 
Sec. 2-97. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings may be called per Wis. Stats. § 62.11 upon written notice of the time and purpose thereof to each member of the council, delivered personally or left at the member's usual place of abode at least six hours before the meeting. The city administrator shall cause an affidavit of service of such notice to be filed in his office prior to the time fixed for such special meetings. A special meeting may be held without such notice when all members of the common council are present in person, or consent in writing to the holding of such a meeting, provided the provisions of Wisconsin's Open Meeting Law are complied with. If written consent is obtained, it shall be filed with the administrator prior to the beginning of the meeting. Attendance by any councilmember shall be deemed a waiver on his part of any defect of notice. Any special meeting attended by all aldermen shall be a regular meeting for the transaction of any business that may come before such meeting. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-11) 
Sec. 2-98. - Open meetings. 
    All meetings shall be open to the public and in compliance with Wisconsin's Open Meeting Law. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-12) 
State Law reference— Open meetings generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(3)(c) and ch. 19, subch. V. 
Sec. 2-99. - Quorum. 
(a) ?A majority of the members-elect of the common council shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn if a majority is not present or compel the attendance of absent members. The mayor shall not be counted in computing a quorum. No action shall be taken unless a quorum is present. 
(b) ?The council may, by a majority vote of those present, adjourn from time to time to a specific date and hour. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.11(1), (3)(b). 
Sec. 2-100. - Presiding officers. 
(a) ?Presiding officer. The mayor shall preside over all meetings of the common council. In the absence of the mayor, the president of the council shall preside. In case of absence of the mayor and president of the council, the administrator shall call the meeting to order and the aldermen present shall elect one of their number president pro tem. 
(b) ?Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order, and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or by this division. Any member shall have the right to appeal from a decision of the presiding officer. An appeal shall be sustained by a two-thirds vote of the members present excluding the mayor. In the absence of the administrator, the presiding officer shall appoint an administrator pro tem. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-14) 
Sec. 2-101. - Order of business. 
(a) ?Enumeration. At all meetings, the following order shall be observed in conducting the business of the common council: 
(1) ?Call to order by presiding officer. 
(2) ?Roll call. If a quorum is not present, the meeting shall thereupon adjourn, which may be to a specific date. 
(3) ?Reading and correcting the minutes of the last preceding meeting or meetings. (The administrator shall provide a written copy of the minutes of the preceding meeting to all aldermen and the mayor. The minutes shall not be read aloud. The minutes shall be approved of or amended if corrections are necessary. The administrator shall post one copy on the city hall bulletin board before each meeting.) 
(4) ?Reports of committees. 
(5) ?Unfinished business from previous meetings. 
(6) ?Communications and recommendations of the mayor. 
(7) ?New business, including the introduction of ordinances and resolutions. 
(8) ?Reports of city department heads. 
(9) ?Communications and miscellaneous business. 
(10) ?Comments and suggestions from citizens present. 
(11) ?Adjournment. 
(b) ?Order to be followed; citizen comments. No business shall be taken up out of order unless by unanimous consent of all aldermen and in the absence of any debate whatsoever. The mayor or presiding officer may impose a time limit on the length of time citizens may address the council. 
(c) ?Roll call; procedure when quorum not in attendance. As soon as the council shall be called to order, the administrator shall proceed to call the names of the members, noting who are present and who are absent and record the same in the proceedings of the council. If it shall appear that there is not a quorum present the fact shall be entered on the journal and the council may adjourn, or the presiding officer or, in case of his absence, the administrator may issue a process to any police officer commanding the officer to forthwith summon the absentees. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-15) 
Sec. 2-102. - Introduction of business, resolutions and ordinances; disposition of communications. 
(a) ?Ordinances, resolutions, other communications to be in writing. All ordinances, resolutions or other communications submitted to the council shall be in writing and shall include at the outset a brief statement of the subject matter, a title and the name of the alderman or mayor introducing same. All written material introduced shall be read by the administrator, mayor, committee chairman or the appropriate designee, and then discussed and acted upon as the common council deems appropriate. Every ordinance shall receive two readings before its passage, and such ordinance shall not have its first and second readings upon the same day, except under suspension of the rules. 
(b) ?Subject and numbering of ordinances. Each ordinance shall be related to no more than one subject. Amendment or repeal of ordinances shall only be accomplished if the amending or repealing ordinance contains the number and title of the ordinance to be amended or repealed, and title of amending and repealing ordinances shall reflect their purpose to amend or repeal. 
(c) ?Notice. 
(1) ?The common council may take action on an ordinance or resolution only if it appears on the written agenda for the meeting at which action is requested. 
(2) ?Resolutions or ordinances will be placed on the agenda for council action only if they are submitted to the administrator in written form a minimum of seven days prior to the meeting at which action is requested. 
(d) ?Disposition of petitions, communications and other writings. Every petition or other writing of any kind, addressed to the council, the administrator or other city officer for reference to the common council, shall be delivered by the administrator or such other city officer to the mayor or to the presiding officer of the council as soon as convenient after receipt of same, and in any event, prior to or at the opening of the next meeting of the council following the receipt of same. Every such petition, or other writing, and every paper, communication or other proceeding which shall come before the council for action, may be referred by the mayor or presiding officer, unless objected to by a member of the council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-16) 
Sec. 2-103. - Conduct of deliberations. 
(a) ?A roll call shall not be necessary on any questions or motions except as follows: 
(1) ?When the ayes and noes are requested by any member. 
(2) ?On confirmation and on the adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriations or disbursing money, or creating any liability or charge against the city or any fund thereof. 
(3) ?When required by statute. 
(b) ?All aye and nay votes shall be recorded in the official minutes. 
(c) ?Except as provided in this subsection (c), the common council shall in all other respects determine the rules of its procedure, which shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, which is hereby incorporated by reference, unless otherwise provided by ordinance or statute, except when otherwise limited or modified by this Code: 
(1) ?No alderman shall address the council until he has been recognized by the presiding officer. He shall thereupon address himself to the chairman and confine his remarks to the question under discussion and avoid all personalities. 
(2) ?When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first. 
(3) ?No person other than a member shall address the council, except under order of business, except that citizens may address the council with the permission of the presiding officer as to matters which are being considered by the council at the time. 
(4) ?No motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless and until it has been seconded. No motion shall be withdrawn or amended without the consent of the person making the same and the person seconding it. 
(5) ?The mayor shall not vote except in the case of a tie. When the mayor does vote in case of a tie, his vote shall be counted in determining whether a sufficient number of the council has voted favorably or unfavorably on any measure. A majority vote of all members of the council in favor of any proposed ordinance, resolution or appointment shall be necessary for passage or approval, unless a larger number is required by statute. Except as otherwise provided, a majority vote of those present shall prevail in other cases. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.11. 
Sec. 2-104. - Reconsideration of questions. 
    It shall be in order for any member if in the majority to move for the reconsideration of any vote in question at the same meeting or at the next succeeding regular adjourned meeting. A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-18) 
Sec. 2-105. - Call for the previous question. 
    Any member desirous of terminating the debate may call the previous question when the question announced by the mayor shall be "call the main question." If a majority of the members present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be put to a vote without further debate, and its effect shall be to put an end to all debate and bring the council to a direct vote, first upon the pending amendment and then upon the main question. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-19) 
Sec. 2-106. - Amendment of division. 
    The rules of this division shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and then it shall require a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-21) 
Sec. 2-107. - Suspension of provisions of sections 2-103—2-105. 
    Any of the provisions of sections 2-103—2-105, inclusive, may be suspended temporarily by a majority of the councilmembers present at any meeting. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-22) 
Secs. 2-108—2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Mayor generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(8). 

Sec. 2-141. - Election. 
    The mayor shall be elected in odd-numbered years for a term of two years. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-3(a)) 
Sec. 2-142. - Duties. 
(a) ?The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. He shall take care that city ordinances and statutes are observed and enforced and that all city officials and employes discharge their duties. 
(b) ?The mayor shall from time to time provide the council such information and recommend such measures as he may deem advantageous to the city. When present, he shall preside at the meetings of the council. 
(c) ?The mayor shall have such other duties and responsibilities as are prescribed in the statutes. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-3(b)) 
Sec. 2-143. - Veto power. 
    He shall have the veto power as to all acts of the council, including line item veto authority, except such as to which it is expressly or by necessary implications otherwise provided. All such acts shall be submitted to him by the administrator, and shall be enforced upon his approval, evidenced by his signature, or upon his failing to approve or disapprove within five days, which fact shall be certified thereon by the administrator. If the mayor disapproves, he shall file his objection with the administrator, who shall present it to the council at its next meeting. A two-thirds vote of all the members of the council shall be necessary to make the act effective, notwithstanding the objection of the mayor. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-3(c)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(8). 
Sec. 2-144. - Committee appointments. 
    The chairman of each committee shall be designated by the mayor. The mayor shall be an ex officio member of each standing committee. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-5(b)(1)) 
Secs. 2-145—2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, or setting salaries of city officers and employes, or any personnel regulations saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(17); municipal judge, § 22-36 et seq.; fire department, § 34-41 et seq.; zoning administrator, § 42-62; zoning administrator for shoreland-wetland regulations, § 42-1122; zoning administrator for floodplain zoning, § 42-1181; police department, § 46-31 et seq.; recreation director, § 58-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Payment of expenses and judgments regarding municipal officers in their official capacity generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 895.35, 895.42, 62.09(7)(e); defense of officers by city attorney generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.115. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-176. - Powers and duties; rules of conduct. 
(a) ?Officers shall have generally the powers and duties prescribed for like officers of towns and villages, except as otherwise provided, and such powers and duties as are prescribed by law and except as to the mayor, shall perform such duties as shall be required of them by the council. Officers whose powers and duties are not enumerated in Wis. Stats. ch. 62, shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law for like officers or as are directed by the council. 
(b) ?All officers and departments may make the necessary rules for the conduct of their duties and incidental proceedings. 
(c) ?The general laws for the punishment of bribery, misdemeanors and corruption in office, shall apply to city officers. 
(d) ?Whenever a city official in his official capacity proceeded against or obliged to proceed before any court, board or commission, to defend or maintain his official position, or because of some act arising out of the performance of his official duties, and he has prevailed in such proceedings, or the council has ordered the proceedings discontinued, the council may provide for payment to such official such sum as it sees fit, to reimburse him for the expenses reasonably incurred for costs and attorney's fees. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(7)(a)—(d). 
Secs. 2-177—2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-201. - Appointment; term of office and removal. 
(a) ?Office of the city administrator. In order to provide the city with a more efficient, effective and responsible government operation under a system of a part-time mayor and part-time common council (hereinafter referred to as "council") at a time when city government is becoming increasingly complex, there is hereby created the office of city administrator for the city (hereinafter referred to as "administrator"). 
(b) ?Appointment, term of office and removal. 
(1) ?The administrator shall be appointed with due regard to training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the council. For the purpose of selecting the administrator, the mayor and the members of the council each shall cast one vote. 
(2) ?The administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to removal at any time by a two-thirds vote of the council. This section, however, shall not preclude the council from establishing other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or the Code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 4-12-99) 
Sec. 2-202. - Functions and duties of the administrator. 
    The administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and ordinances of the city and state statutes, shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, responsible only to the mayor and the council for the proper administration of the business affairs of the city, in accordance with to the statutes of the state, the ordinances of the city and the resolutions and directives of the council, with power and duties as follows: 
(1) ?General duties: 
a. ?Carry out directives of the mayor and council which require administrative implementation, reporting promptly to the mayor and council any difficulties encountered; 
b ?Be responsible for the administration of all day-to-day operations of the city government including the monitoring of all city ordinances, resolutions, council meeting minutes and state statutes; 
c. ?Prepare a plan of administration, including an organization chart, which defines authority and responsibility for all nonstatutory positions of the city; and submit it to the city council for adoption as the official organization and administrative procedure plan for the city; 
d. ?Establish when necessary administrative procedures to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of city government according to current practices in local government, not inconsistent with paragraph c. above or directives of the mayor and council; 
e. ?Serve as ex-officio nonvoting member of all boards, commissions and committees of the city, except as specified by the council or state statutes; 
f. ?Keep informed concerning current federal, state, and county legislation and administrative rules affecting the city and submit appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the council; 
g. ?Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state and county funds for local programs and through grant writing or coordination of, assist department heads and the council in obtaining these funds under the direction of the mayor and the council; 
h. ?Represent the city in matters involving legislative and inter-governmental affairs as authorized and directed as to that representation by the mayor and council; 
i. ?Act as public information officer for the city with the responsibility of assuring that the news media are kept informed about the operations of the city and that all open meeting and public records rules and regulations are followed; 
j. ?Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications between citizens and city government to assure that complaints, recommendations and other matters receive prompt attention by the responsible official, and to assure that all such matters are expeditiously resolved; 
k. ?Promote the economic well-being and growth of the city through public and private sector cooperation; 
l. ?Carry out all duties and requirements of the zoning administrator. 
(2) ?Responsibilities to the city council: 
a. ?Attend all meetings of the council, assisting the mayor and the council as required in the performance of their duties; 
b. ?In coordination with the mayor, the council, and the clerk, ensure that appropriate agendas are prepared to all meetings of the council, all council committees, and all other appropriate committees and commissions of the city, together with such supporting material as may be required; with nothing herein being construed as to give the administrator authority to limit or in any way prevent matters from being considered by the council, or any of its committees and commissions; 
c. ?Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as requested by the mayor or the council, or as needed; 
d. ?Keep the mayor and council regularly informed about activities of the administrator's office by oral or written report at regular and special meetings of the council; 
e. ?In the event that action normally requiring council approval is necessary at a time when the council cannot meet, the administrator shall receive directives from the mayor. 
(3) ?Personnel: 
a. ?Be responsible for the administrative direction and coordination of all employees of the city according to the established organizational procedures of the city and the state statutes; 
b. ?Recommend to the council the appointment, promotion, and when necessary for the good of the city, the suspension or termination of department heads, except those officials selected by boards and commissions defined in the state statutes; 
c. ?In consultation with the appropriate department head, be responsible for the appointment, promotion, and when necessary for the good of the city, the suspension or termination of employees below the department head level, except those employees in units governed by other personnel procedures defined in the state statutes; 
d. ?Serve as personnel officer for the city with responsibilities to see that complete and current personnel records, including specific job descriptions, for all city employees are kept; evaluate in conjunction with department heads the performance of all employees on a regular basis; recommend salary and wage scales for city employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements; develop and enforce high standards of performance by city employees; assure that city employees have proper working conditions; work closely with department heads to promptly resolve personnel problems or grievances; 
e. ?Assist in labor contract negotiations and collective bargaining issues; 
f. ?Work closely with department heads to assure that employees receive adequate opportunities for training to maintain and improve their job-related knowledge and skills and act as the approving authority for requests by employees to attend conferences, meetings, training schools, etc., provided that funds have been budgeted for these activities. 
(4) ?Budgeting and purchasing: 
a. ?Be responsible for the preparation of the annual city budget, in accordance with guidelines as may be provided by the city council and in coordination with department heads, and pursuant to state statutes, for review and approval by the mayor and the council; 
b. ?Administer the budget as adopted by the council; 
c. ?Report regularly to the council on the current fiscal position of the city; 
d. ?Supervise the accounting system of the city and insure that the system employs methods in accordance with current professional accounting practices; 
e. ?Serve as the purchasing agent for the city, supervising all purchasing and contracting for supplies and services, subject to the purchasing procedures established by the council and any limitation contained in the state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 4-12-99) 
Sec. 2-203. - Cooperation. 
    All officials and employes of the city shall cooperate with and assist the administrator so that the city government shall function effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, tit. 2, 9-8-1997) 
Sec. 2-204. - Additional duties. 
    The administrator shall be responsible for the following additional duties: 
(1) ?Perform all election duties as required by statute and keep and maintain all election records and all property used in conjunction with holding of elections; 
(2) ?Publish all legal notices unless otherwise provided; file and preserve all contracts, bonds, oaths of office and other documents not required to be filed elsewhere; 
(3) ?Issue all licenses required by ordinance or statute, except as otherwise provided; 
(4) ?Prepare the tax roll and tax notices required by the state; 
(5) ?Attend meetings, take minutes and maintain files for the common council, and such other official boards and commissions as may be directed; 
(6) ?Maintain a file on all city records, ordinances, resolutions and vouchers; 
(7) ?Type and distribute reports for the council and for federal and state agencies; 
(8) ?Audit and obtain approval on claims charged against the city; 
(9) ?Prepare financial and bank statements; 
(10) ?Issue purchase orders; 
(11) ?Assist the city assessor in maintaining property assessment records; 
(12) ?Administer oaths and affirmations; 
(13) ?Maintain fiscal records for the city; 
(14) ?Issue licenses to various vendors in city; 
(15) ?Make reports to the state on assessments; 
(16) ?Prepare and send invoices for services provided by municipal utilities; 
(17) ?Perform record keeping, billing, collections, banking, investments, accounting and financial reporting of all city operations; 
(18) ?Develop and implement improved internal control and financial reporting procedures as necessary or as requested; 
(19) ?Collect all taxes for the city and other taxing bodies; 
(20) ?Invest idle funds for maximum interest earnings; 
(21) ?Prepare the monthly treasurer's report; 
(22) ?Maintain payroll records and prepare payroll checks from approved employe time sheets; 
(23) ?Prepare check vouchers for payment of approved claims for signature; and 
(24) ?Perform other duties as may be directed by the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-2(b)) 
Sec. 2-205. - Bond. 
    The city administrator shall execute to the city a surety company fidelity bond in the amount set by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-2(c)) 
Sec. 2-206. - Deputy. 
    The administrator may appoint a deputy, subject to confirmation by a majority of all the members of the common council. The deputy administrator shall act under the administrator's direction and, during the temporary absence or disability of the administrator or during a vacancy in such office, shall perform the duties of administrator. The acts of the deputy shall be covered by such official bond as the common council shall direct. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-3) 
Sec. 2-207. - Receiving money; receipt. 
(a) ?The administrator or deputies shall not receive any money into the treasury from any source except on account of taxes levied and collected during the fiscal year for which he may then be serving, without giving a receipt therefor in the manner specified by the common council. 
(b) ?Upon the payment of any money (except for taxes as provided in subsection (a) of this section), the administrator and deputy shall make out a receipt in duplicate for the money so received. The administrator and deputy shall charge the amount thereof to the treasury and credit the proper account. The payment of the money to any receiving agent of the city or to the city or to the administrator and deputy shall be safeguarded in such manner as the common council shall direct. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-11) 
State Law reference— Required receipts generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.113. 
Sec. 2-208. - Statement of real property status. 
    The administrator is authorized to prepare a statement of real property status form to be used to provide information often requested for transfers of real property such as the amount of outstanding special assessments; deferred assessments; changes in assessments; amount of taxes; outstanding water, electric and sewer bills; current water, electric and sewer bills; contemplated improvements; floodplain status; violations of the building and health codes; and similar information. Any such information sought shall be provided to the person requesting it on such form. The administrator shall collect a fee set by the council from time to time for furnishing such information on such form. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-12) 
Sec. 2-209. - Duplicate bond eliminated. 
(a) ?Bond eliminated. The city elects not to give the bond on the city treasurer provided for by Wis. Stats. § 70.67(1). 
(b) ?City liable for default of treasurer. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.67(2), the city shall be obligated to pay, in case the administrator and deputy shall fail to do so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid by such administrator and deputy to the county treasurer. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-2) 
Secs. 2-210—2-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ATTORNEY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Duties generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(12). 

Sec. 2-231. - Appointment; term. 
    The office of city attorney is an appointed position. The mayor shall annually appoint at the organizational meeting a city attorney, subject to confirmation by majority of the members of the common council. The city attorney's term shall commence on May 1 succeeding his appointment. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-4(a)) 
Sec. 2-232. - Duties. 
    The city attorney shall have the following duties: 
(1) ?The attorney shall conduct all of the law business in which the city is interested. 
(2) ?He shall, when requested by city officers, give written legal opinions, which shall be filed with the city. 
(3) ?He shall draft ordinances, bonds and other instruments as may be required by city officers. 
(4) ?The city attorney shall perform such other duties as provided by state law and as designated by the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-4(b)) 
Sec. 2-233. - Outside counsel; papers as city property. 
(a) ?The council may employ and compensate special counsel to assist in or take charge of any matter in which the city is interested, or divide legal responsibilities between several attorneys. 
(b) ?All papers prepared by the city attorney, copies thereof, correspondence received by him, copies of letters, and all papers and materials of every nature and description which comes to his hands as city attorney, shall be the property of the city, and shall be turned over by the city attorney to his successor in office. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-4(c)) 
Secs. 2-234—2-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ASSESSOR 

Sec. 2-256. - Selection; appointment. 
    The city elects not to be governed by those portions of Wis. Stats. § 62.09(3)(b) relating to the method of selection of the city assessor which are in conflict with such statute. The city assessor shall be appointed by the mayor at the first regular meeting of the council in May of odd-numbered years, subject to confirmation by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-7) 
State Law reference— Public officials' oaths and bonds, Wis. Stats. § 19.01; corporation as assessor, Wis. Stats. § 62.09(1)(c); affidavit of assessor, Wis. Stats. § 70.49. 
Secs. 2-257—2-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENGINEER 

Sec. 2-281. - Appointment. 
    The city engineer, or consulting engineering firm, shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. He shall be a civil engineer. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-9(a)) 
Sec. 2-282. - Duties. 
    The duties of the city engineer are as follows: 
(1) ?He shall do all ordinary and necessary engineering work for the city as directed by the common council such as establishing grades and lines for walks and streets, surveying work, establishing elevations for sewer and water mains, etc. 
(2) ?He shall provide necessary technical and engineering support to the various officers, departments and divisions of the city at their request or at the direction of the common council. 
(3) ?If, however, the city undertakes extensive improvements requiring engineering work and superintendence which the city engineer finds impossible for him to perform or which requires special expertise, the common council may employ an engineer on a per diem or contract basis to perform such work. 
(4) ?He shall perform such other duties as may be directed by the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-9(b)) 
State Law reference— Required records generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.14(7). 
Secs. 2-283—2-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ETHICAL STANDARDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics generally, Wis. Stats. § 19.42 et seq. 

Sec. 2-311. - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employes be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of the government. In recognition of these goals, there is established a code of ethics for all city officials and employes, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees and commissions of the city. The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employes by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the city and by directing disclosure by such officials and employes of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. The provisions and purpose of this article and such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-9-1) 
Sec. 2-312. - Responsibilities of public office. 
(a) ?Public officials and employes are bound to observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their primary concern. Their conduct in both their official and private affairs shall be above reproach. 
(b) ?Public officials are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state and to carry out impartially the law of the nation, state and city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-9-2) 
Sec. 2-313. - Dedicated service. 
(a) ?All officials and employes of the city should be loyal to the objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain these objectives. Appointive officials and employes should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority. 
(b) ?Public officials and employes shall not exceed their authority or breach law, or ask others to do so, and they shall work in full cooperation with other public officials and employes unless prohibited from doing so by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(Code 1986, § 2-9-3) 
Sec. 2-314. - Use of public property; obligations of citizens. 
(a) ?No public official or employe shall request, use or permit the use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such official or employe in the conduct of official business. 
(b) ?No public official or employe shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(Code 1986, § 2-9-4) 
Sec. 2-315. - Conflict of interest. 
    No official or employe, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public judgement or will tend to impair his independence or judgement or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(Code 1986, § 2-9-5) 
Sec. 2-316. - Specific conflicts of interest. 
    Specific conflicts of interest are enumerated below for the guidance of officials. The following list is illustrative merely and not exclusive: 
(1) ?Incompatible employment. No alderman or other public official or employe shall engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of their official duties or tends to impair independence of judgement or action in the performance of their official duties. If an alderman, official or employe possesses a financial or personal interest in any business or transaction, any presumption of conflict of interest with his public duties shall be removed by their disclosure of the nature and extent of such investment to the common council for the records of that authority. 
(2) ?Disclosure of confidential information. No alderman, other public official or employe shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the city, nor shall they use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of themselves or others. 
(3) ?Gifts and favors. No alderman or other public official or employe shall accept any gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person who to their knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the city; nor shall any such official or employe accept any gift, favor or thing of value that may tend to influence them in the discharge of their duties, or grant in the discharge of their duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. Any alderman or other public official or employe who accepts any gift, favor or thing of value shall, in the case of an alderman, disclose the matter in the minutes of the next council meeting, and in the case of other officials or employes, report the matter to the council for disclosure in the minutes of the next meeting. 
(4) ?Representing private interests before city agencies or courts. No alderman or other public official or employe whose salary is paid in whole or in part by the city shall appear in behalf of private interests before any agency of the city. They shall not represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the interest of the city in any litigation to which the city is a party. 
(5) ?Contracts with the city. No city employe or officer who in their capacity as such officer or employe participates in the making of a contract in which they have a private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, or perform in regard to that contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on their part, shall enter into any contract with the city unless within the confines of Wis. Stats. § 946.13. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the designation of a public depository of public funds, nor to contracts for the purchase of commodities in any one year under $300.00. 
(6) ?Disclosure of interest in legislation. An alderman who has a financial or other private interest in any legislation shall disclose on the records of the council the nature and extent of such interest. This subsection shall not apply if the alderman disqualified himself from voting. Any other public official or employe who has a financial or other private interest, and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion to the council shall disclose on the record of the council the nature and extent of such interest. 
(Code 1986, § 2-9-6) 
Sec. 2-317. - Advisory opinion. 
    Any questions as to the interpretation of any provisions of the code of ethics shall be referred to the city attorney for an advisory opinion, and such opinion shall be given to the common council for its action, if any. 
(Code 1986, § 2-9-7) 
Sec. 2-318. - Sanctions. 
    Violation of any provision of this section should raise conscientious questions for the aldermen or any other official or employe concerned as to whether voluntary resignation or other action is indicated to promote the best interest of the city. Violation may constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment or other disciplinary action. 
(Code 1986, § 2-9-8) 
Secs. 2-319—2-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC RECORDS 

Sec. 2-351. - Definitions. 
(a) ?Statutory definitions. The definitions in Wis. Stats. § 19.32, as amended, are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. 
(b) ?Additional definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Actual cost means the total cost of personnel including wages, fringe benefits and all other benefits and overhead related to the time spent in search of records. 
    Custodian means that officer, department head, division head or employe of the city designated under section 2-353 or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any city records or file, deposit or keep such records in his office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is required by this section to respond to requests for access to such records. 
    Direct cost means the actual cost of personnel plus all expenses for paper, copier time, depreciation and supplies. 
(Code 1986, § 2-7-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-352. - Duty to maintain. 
(a) ?Except as provided under section 2-357, each officer and employe of the city shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or employe or his deputies, or to the possession or control of which he or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employes. 
(b) ?Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employe's term of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employe shall deliver to his successor all records then in his custody and the successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or employe, who shall file such receipt with the administrator. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the administrator, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt. 
(Code 1986, § 2-7-2) 
Sec. 2-353. - Legal custodian(s). 
(a) ?Each elected official is the legal custodian of his records and the records of his office, but the official may designate an employe of his staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(b) ?Unless provided in subsection (c) of this section, the administrator or designee shall act as legal custodian for the common council and for any committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the common council. The following offices or authorities shall have as a legal custodian of records the individual so named: 
Authority Designated 
Legal 
Custodian City assessor's office City assessor General city records (including council records and financial records) Administrator Fire department Fire chief Police department Chief of police  
(c) ?For every authority not specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the authority's chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate an employe of his staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(d) ?Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his absence or the absence of his designee, and each legal custodian shall send notice of the designated deputy to the administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 2-7-3) 
Sec. 2-354. - Public access to records. 
(a) ?Except as provided in section 2-356 any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(b) ?Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours. 
(c) ?If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy. 
(d) ?A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to city employes to inspect, copy or abstract a record. 
(e) ?The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. 
(f) ?A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying records as follows: 
(1) ?The cost of photocopying per copy shall be set by the council from time to time. Such cost has been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost of reproduction. Such charge shall be reviewed annually by the common council. 
(2) ?If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing shall be charged. 
(3) ?The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audiotapes or videotapes, shall be charged. 
(4) ?If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also be charged. 
(5) ?There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefor exceeds $50.00, in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester. 
(6) ?The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and may require a cash deposit adequate to ensure payment, if such estimate exceeds an amount set by the council from time to time. 
(7) ?Elected and appointed officials of the city shall not be required to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of their official duties. 
(8) ?The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge where he determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest. 
(g) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.34, and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. This subsection does not apply to members of the council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-7-4) 
Sec. 2-355. - Access procedures. 
(a) ?A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under Wis. Stats. § 19.37. Except as provided in this section, no request may be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under section 2-354(f)(6). A requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so require. 
(b) ?Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring with the city attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance. 
(c) ?A request for a record may be denied as provided in section 2-356. If a request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied, in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under Wis. Stats. § 19.37(1), or upon application to the attorney general or a district attorney. 
(Code 1986, § 2-7-5) 
Sec. 2-356. - Limitations on right to access. 
(a) ?As provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.36, the following records are exempt from inspection under this article. 
(1) ?Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law. 
(2) ?Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state. 
(3) ?Each authority shall make available for inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1) any record produced or collected under a contract entered into by the authority with a person other than an authority to the same extent as if the record were maintained by the authority. This subsection does not apply to the inspection or copying of a record under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1)(am). 
(4) ?Computer programs, although the material used as input for a computer program or the material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to inspection. 
(5) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.36(5), a record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a trade secret as defined in Wis. Stats. § 134.90(1)(c). 
(b) ?As provided by Wis. Stats. § 43.30, public library circulation records are exempt from inspection under this section. 
(c) ?In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the city attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the request record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which were necessary and given in order to obtain the information contained in them. 
(2) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(a), records of current deliberations after a quasijudicial hearing. 
(3) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(b) and (c), records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline of any city officer or employe, or the investigation of charges against a city officer or employe, unless such officer or employe consents to such disclosure. 
(4) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(d), records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention. 
(5) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(e), records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of city property, investing of city funds, or other city business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure. 
(6) ?Deliberating by the council on unemployment compensation in a meeting at which all employer members of the council or all employe members of the council are excluded. 
(7) ?Deliberating by the council on worker's compensation in a meeting at which all employer members of the council or all employe members of the council are excluded. 
(8) ?Deliberating under Wis. Stats. § 157.70 if the location of a burial site, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 157.70(1)(b), is a subject of the deliberation and if discussing the location in public would be likely to result in disturbance of the burial site. 
(9) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(f), financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to in such history or data. 
(10) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(g), communications between legal counsel for the city and any officer, agent or employe of the city, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the city or any of its officers, agents or employes is or is likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged under Wis. Stats. § 905.03. 
(11) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.85(1)(h), requests for confidential written advice from an ethics board, and records of advice given by such ethics board on such requests. 
(d) ?If a record contains information that is subject to disclosure under Wis. Stats. § 19.31(1)(a), (am), and information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that is not subject to such disclosure. The custodian shall confer with the city attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the city attorney when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of the custodian, and the city attorney there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure. 
(Code 1986, § 2-7-6) 
Sec. 2-357. - Destruction of records. 
(a) ?City officers may destroy the following nonutility financial records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442, but not less than seven years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such shorter period: 
(1) ?Bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs. 
(2) ?Bonds and coupons after maturity. 
(3) ?Canceled checks, duplicates and check stubs. 
(4) ?License and permit applications, stubs and duplicates. 
(5) ?Payrolls and other time and employment records of personnel included under the Wisconsin Retirement Fund. 
(6) ?Receipt forms. 
(7) ?Special assessment records. 
(8) ?Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting documents pertaining thereto. 
(b) ?City officers may destroy the following utility records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442, subject to state public service commission regulations, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current billings and customers' ledgers may be destroyed not less than two years after payment or receipt of the sum involved or the effective date of such record. 
(1) ?Contracts and papers relating thereto; 
(2) ?Excavation permits; and 
(3) ?Inspection records. 
(c) ?City officers may destroy the following records of which they are the legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless another period has been set by statute, and then after such a period, or unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period. 
(1) ?Contracts and papers relating thereto. 
(2) ?Correspondence and communications. 
(3) ?Financial reports other than annual financial reports. 
(4) ?Justice dockets. 
(5) ?Oaths of office. 
(6) ?Reports of boards, commissions, committees and officials duplicated in the council proceedings. 
(7) ?Election notices and proofs of publication. 
(8) ?Canceled voter registration cards. 
(9) ?Official bonds. 
(10) ?Police records other than investigative records. 
(11) ?Resolutions and petitions, providing the text of the same appears in the official city minutes. 
(d) ?Election materials. Notwithstanding the provisions appearing in this section, it is intended hereby that election materials may be destroyed according to lesser time schedules as made and provided in Wis. Stats. § 7.23. 
(e) ?Unless notice is waived by the state historical society, at least 60 days' notice shall be given the state historical society prior to the destruction of any record as provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a). 
(f) ?Any tape recordings of a governmental meeting of the city may be destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than 90 days after the minutes of the meeting have been approved and published, if the purpose of the recording was to make minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1986, § 2-7-7) 
Sec. 2-358. - Preservation through microfilm. 
    Any city officer, or the director of any department or division of city government may, subject to the approval of the council, keep and preserve public records in his possession by means of microfilm or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth in Wis. Stats. § 16.61(7)(a) and (b), and shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law and of sections 2-354—2-356. 
(Code 1986, § 2-7-8) 
Sec. 2-359. - Identities of law enforcement informants. 
(a) ?In this section: 
(1) ?The term "informant" means an individual who requests confidentiality from a law enforcement agency in conjunction with providing information to that agency or, pursuant to an express promise of confidentiality by a law enforcement agency or under circumstances in which a promise of confidentiality would reasonably be implied, provides information to a law enforcement agency or, is working with a law enforcement agency to obtain information, related in any case to any of the following: 
a. ?Another person who the individual or the law enforcement agency suspects has violated, is violating or will violate a federal law, a law of any state or an ordinance of any local government. 
b. ?Past, present or future activities that the individual or law enforcement agency believes may violate a federal law, a law of any state or an ordinance of any local government. 
(2) ?"Law enforcement agency" has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 165.83(1)(b), and includes the department of corrections. 
(b) ?If an authority that is a law enforcement agency receives a request to inspect or copy a record or portion of a record under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1)(a) that contains specific information including, but not limited to, a name, address, telephone number, voice recording or handwriting sample which, if disclosed, would identify an informant, the authority shall delete the portion of the record in which the information is contained or, if no portion of the record can be inspected or copied without identifying the informant, shall withhold the record unless the legal custodian of the record, designated under Wis. Stats. § 19.33, makes a determination, at the time that the request is made, that the public interest in allowing a person to inspect, copy or receive a copy of such identifying information outweighs the harm done to the public interest by providing such access. 
Sec. 2-360. - Contractor records. 
(a) ?All contractors and/or subcontractors performing construction work for the City of Mosinee and its utilities, where a prevailing wage rate has been issued by the city or DILHR, shall submit a signed payroll reports on a monthly basis to the city and/or its authorized representative for immediate verification of rate compliance or city ordinances. 
(b) ?The payroll reports shall list each employee's name, address, Social Security number, job classification, wage rate, health, pension, vacation, other deductions, regular and overtime hours worked. Failure to submit this information on a timely basis will result in the withholding of payments due the contractor. 
(c) ?This compliance procedure shall not cost the taxpayers of the City of Mosinee tax dollars to enact or follow inasmuch as it will benefit the local tradesmen and tradeswomen. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 4-9-2001) 
Secs. 2-361—2-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation commission, § 58-56 et seq.; planning commission, § 62-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-391. - Meetings and public notice. 
(a) ?Regular meetings; public notice. Every board, committee, authority and commission created by or existing under the ordinances of the city shall: 
(1) ?Fix a regular date, time and place for its meetings; 
(2) ?Publish notice in the official city newspaper in advance of each such regular meeting of the date, time and place thereof; and/or 
(3) ?Post, on the front door of the city hall, and two other public places, an agenda of the matters to be taken up at such meeting. 
(b) ?Special meetings. Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall preclude the calling of a special meeting or with dispensing with the publication of notice or such posting of the agenda, for good cause, but such special meetings shall nonetheless comply in all respects with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 19.81 to 19.89. 
(c) ?Minutes. The secretary of each board, committee, authority and commission shall file a copy of the meeting minutes of such board or commission with the administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-7) 
Secs. 2-392—2-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF REVIEW 

Sec. 2-411. - Composition. 
    The board of review of the city shall consist of five residents of the city, none of whom shall occupy any public office or be publicly employed. Such members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council and shall hold office as members of such board for five years and until their successors are appointed and qualified, the first appointments to be for one, two, three, four and five years, respectively. Members shall be from the city at large. Salaries of the members of the board of review shall be set by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-1(a)) 
Sec. 2-412. - Duties. 
    The duties and functions of the board of review shall be as prescribed in Wis. Stats. §§ 70.46 and 70.47. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-1(b)) 
Sec. 2-413. - Meetings. 
(a) ?Annual meeting. The board of review shall meet annually at any time during the 30-day period beginning on the second Monday of May at city hall and notice of such meeting shall be published pursuant to Wisconsin State Statutes. 
(b) ?Notice. Notice of the time and place of such meeting shall be posted by the administrator in at least three public places in the city and on the door of the city hall if the place of the meeting has been otherwise designated. 
(c) ?Sessions. At its first meeting, the board of review shall receive the assessment roll and sworn statements from the city clerk and prior to adjournment shall be in session for at least two hours between 8:00 a.m. and midnight for taxpayers to appear and examine such assessment roll and other assessment data and be heard in relation to the assessment. If the assessment roll is not completed, the board shall adjourn for such time as shall be necessary to complete the roll, and shall post a written notice on the outer door of the place of meeting stating to what time said meeting is adjourned. 
(d) ?Adjournment. The board may adjourn from day to day or from time to time, until such time as its business is completed, providing that adequate notice of each adjournment is so given. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-1(c); Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-2003) 
Sec. 2-414. - Duty. 
    The board shall carefully examine the assessment roll and correct all apparent errors in description or computation. It shall add all omitted property but shall not raise or lower the assessment of any property except after hearing, all as provided by statute. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-1(d)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 70.47. 
Secs. 2-415—2-435. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, § 42-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Boards of appeals generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e). 

Sec. 2-436. - Establishment. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council, for three-year terms. The mayor shall also appoint, subject to council confirmation, two alternate members for terms of three years, who shall act with full power only when members of the zoning board of appeals refuses or declines to vote, are disqualified because of interest, or when absent. In making appointments to the board, consideration shall be given to the composition of the board so that there be not only members qualified to handle zoning matters but also members qualified by experience and training to pass on matters of building construction and safety. Appointments shall be made at the organizational meeting the third Tuesday in April. Terms of office shall commence May 1. The mayor shall designate a member as chairperson. Members and alternate shall serve without compensation and shall be removable by the mayor for cause upon written charges and after public hearing by the council. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of members vacating positions on the board. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-2(a)) 
Sec. 2-437. - Organization. 
(a) ?The zoning board of appeals shall adopt rules for its government and procedure. Meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson, and at such other times as the zoning board of appeals may determine. The chairperson, or in his absence an elected acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(b) ?The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the zoning board of appeals, which is the administrator's office, and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-2(b)) 
Sec. 2-438. - Powers. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall have dual capacities as follows: 
(1) ?Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the city zoning code. 
(2) ?Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the city zoning and floodplain zoning regulations upon which the zoning board of appeals is required to pass. 
(3) ?Authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the city zoning regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the zoning code shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done; provided, however, that no such action shall have the effect of establishing in any district a use or uses not permitted in such district. 
(4) ?Permit the erection and use of a building or premises in any location, subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general purposes of the zoning code, for such purposes which are reasonably necessary for public convenience and welfare. 
(5) ?The zoning board of appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify any order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises. The concurring vote of four members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass, or to effect any variation in the requirement of the zoning code. The grounds of every such determination shall be stated and recorded. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-2(c)) 
Secs. 2-439—2-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MOSINEE HOUSING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-461. - Appointment, qualifications and tenure of commissioners. 
(a) ?The mayor shall, with the confirmation of the council, appoint five persons who are citizens of the city as commissioners of the housing authority. No commissioner may be connected in any official capacity with any political party nor shall more than two be officers of the city. 
(b) ?The commissioners' terms of office shall be five years. A commissioner shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and has qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as other appointments. Three commissioners shall constitute a quorum. The mayor shall file with the administrator a certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any commissioner and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the due and proper appointment of such commissioner, if such commissioner has been duly confirmed as provided in this section and has duly taken and filed the official oath before entering office. Commissioners shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be entitled to necessary expenses including traveling expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-6(a)) 
Sec. 2-462. - Selection of officers. 
    When the office of the chairman of the authority becomes vacant, the authority shall select a chairman from among its members. The authority shall select from among its members a vice-chairman and it may employ a secretary (who shall be executive director), technical experts and such other officers, agents and employes, permanent and temporary, as it may require, and shall determine their qualifications, duties and compensation. The authority may call upon the city attorney or chief law officer of the city for such legal services as it may require. The authority may delegate to one or more of its agents or employes such powers or duties as it may deem proper. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-6(b)) 
Sec. 2-463. - Powers and duties. 
    The Mosinee Housing Authority shall have all the powers and perform all of the duties conferred upon it by Wis. Stats. § 66.40. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-6(c)) 
Secs. 2-464—2-479. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - POLICE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-480. - Appointment, qualifications and tenure of commissioners. 
(a) ?The police commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council, for five-year terms. When the commission is created, the five commission members shall be appointed for varying terms. Of the persons first appointed to the newly created commission, one shall hold office for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and one for five years. 
(b) ?Appointments shall be made at the organizational meeting held the third Tuesday in April. Terms of office shall commence May 1. Members shall be removable by the city council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing by the council. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of members vacating positions on the board. 
(c) ?Every member of the commission must be a resident of the City of Mosinee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 10-22-2001) 
Sec. 2-481. - Selection of officers. 
    The commission shall select from among its members a president and a vice president/secretary. When the office of president of the commission becomes vacant, the commission shall select a president from among its members. 
(Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 10-22-2001) 
Sec. 2-482. - Meetings and organization. 
(a) ?[Meetings.] All meetings of the commission shall be at the call of the president or upon written request of any two members directing the secretary to hold such meetings. 
(b) ?[Quorum.] Three commission members present at the meeting shall constitute a quorum. 
(c) ?Notice. Notice of the time and place of all commission meetings shall be posted in accordance with Wisconsin State Statutes. 
(d) ?[Minutes and records.] The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and shall keep other pertinent records that may come into the commission's possession. Commission records are subject to the Wisconsin Public Records Law. The president or his designee, shall be designated to serve as custodian of the commission's records. 
(e) ?[Rules and regulations.] The commission shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as may be required for the ordinary conduct of its business. 
(Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 10-22-2001) 
Sec. 2-483. - Powers and duties. 
    The police commission shall have the following powers and duties conferred upon it by Wisconsin State Statutes Section 62.13: 
(1) ?Appoint, suspend or remove the chief of the police department. 
(2) ?Approve all appointments made by the police chief, including the promotion of subordinates. 
(3) ?Approve competitive examinations used to judge suitability for appointment of subordinates. 
(4) ?Approve each list of individuals determined to be eligible for appointment. 
(5) ?Suspend the chief of a department or subordinates pending the filing and hearing of charges against them. 
(6) ?Initiate charges against the chief of the police department or any subordinate. 
(7) ?Hear charges filed against the chief of the police department or a subordinate, make findings and determinations, and impose penalties. 
(8) ?Hear appeals of disciplinary actions initiated by the chief of the police department against any subordinate. 
(Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 10-22-2001) 
Secs. 2-484—2-489. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TOURISM COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-490. - Appointment, qualifications and tenure of commissioners. 
(a) ?The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of members of the common council present when the vote is taken. One of the commission members shall represent the common council and one of the commission members shall represent the Wisconsin hotel and motel industry. Members of the commission shall serve for a one-year term, at the pleasure of the mayor, and may be reappointed. 
(b) ?Appointments shall be made at the common council's organizational meeting held the third Tuesday in April. Terms of office shall commence immediately following the organizational meeting. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of members vacating positions on the commission. Members shall be removable by the common council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 2-491. - Selection of officers. 
    The commission shall select from among its members a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary. When the office of chairperson of the commission becomes vacant, the commission shall select a new chairperson from among its members. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 2-492. - Meetings and organization. 
(a) ?All meetings of the commission shall be at the call of the chairperson or upon written request of any two members directing the secretary to hold such meetings. 
(b) ?Three commission members present at the meeting shall constitute a quorum. 
(c) ?Notice . Notice of the time and place of all commission meetings shall be posted in accordance with Wisconsin State Statutes. 
(d) ?The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and shall keep other pertinent records that may come into the commission's possession. Commission records are subject to the Wisconsin Public Records Law, subject to the confidentiality requirements of the Wisconsin Room Tax Statute. The chairperson or their designee, shall be designated to serve as custodian of the commission's records. 
(e) ?The commission shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as may be required for the ordinary conduct of its business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 3-14-2016) 
Sec. 2-493. - Powers and duties. 
(a) ?The commission shall have the powers and duties conferred upon it by Wis. Stats. § 66.0615 to coordinate tourism promotion and tourism development within the city including, but not limited to, marketing projects, transient tourist information services and tangible municipal development activities. 
(b) ?The commission shall provide an annual report to the city common council pertaining to the amounts and purposes for which the room tax revenues were allocated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 3-14-2016) 
Secs. 2-494, 2-495. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Administrative review generally, Wis. Stats. § 68.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-496. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Municipal authority means the council, commission, committee, agency, officer, employe or agent of the city making a determination under section 2-498, and every person, committee or agency of the city to make an independent review under section 2-503(3). 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-4) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-497. - Persons aggrieved. 
    A person aggrieved includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association, public or private organization; officer, department, board, commission or agency of the city, whose rights, duties or privileges are adversely affected by a determination of a municipal authority. No department, board, commission, agency, officer or employe of the city who is aggrieved may initiate review under this article of a determination of any other department, board, commission, agency, officer or employe of the city, but may respond or intervene in a review proceeding under this article initiated by another. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-5) 
Sec. 2-498. - Review of administrative determinations. 
    Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the council or a board, commission, committee, agency, officer or employe of the city or agent acting on its behalf may have such determination reviewed as provided in this article. The remedies under this article shall not be exclusive, but an election to proceed hereunder shall be an election of remedies. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-1) 
Sec. 2-499. - Determinations reviewable. 
    The following determinations are reviewable under this article: 
(1) ?The grant or denial, in whole or in part, after application of an initial permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except an alcohol beverage license. 
(2) ?The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except as provided in section 2-500(4). 
(3) ?The denial of a grant of money or other thing of substantial value under a statute or ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant. 
(4) ?The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a municipal employe or officer, other than by a court. 
(5) ?The suspension or removal of a city officer or employe except as provided in section 2-500(2), (7). 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 68.02. 
Sec. 2-500. - Determinations not subject to review. 
    The following determinations are not reviewable under this article: 
(1) ?A legislative enactment. A legislative enactment is an ordinance, resolution or adopted motion of the council. 
(2) ?Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures under statute or other provisions of this Code. 
(3) ?The denial of a tort or contract claim for money required to be filed with the city under Wis. Stats. § 62.25. 
(4) ?The grant, denial, suspension or revocation of a fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor license under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(5) ?Judgments and orders of a court. 
(6) ?Determinations made during municipal labor negotiations. 
(7) ?Determinations subject to grievance, arbitration or other procedures provided in collective bargaining agreements. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-3) 
Sec. 2-501. - Reducing determination to writing. 
    If a determination subject to this article is made orally or, if in writing, does not state the reasons therefor, the municipal authority making such determination shall, upon written request of any person aggrieved by such determination made within ten days of notice of such determination, reduce the determination and the reasons therefor to writing and mail or deliver such determination and reasons to the person making the request. The determination shall be dated, and shall advise such person of his right to have such determination reviewed, that such review may be obtained within 30 days, and the office or person to whom a request for review shall be addressed. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-6) 
Sec. 2-502. - Request for review of determination. 
    Any person aggrieved may have a written or oral determination reviewed by written request mailed or delivered to the municipal authority which made such determination within 30 days of notice to such person of such determination. The request for review shall state the grounds upon which the person aggrieved contends that the determination should be modified or reversed. A request for review shall be made to the officer, employe, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who made the determination, but failure to make such request to the proper party shall not preclude the person aggrieved from review unless such failure has caused prejudice to the municipal authority. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-7) 
Sec. 2-503. - Review of determination. 
(a) ?Initial determination. If a request for review is made under section 2-502, the determination to be reviewed shall be termed an initial determination. 
(b) ?Who shall make review. A review under this section may be made by the officer, employe, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who made the initial determination. However, an independent review of such determination by another person, committee or agency of the city, appointed by the mayor without confirmation, shall be provided if practicable. 
(c) ?When to make review. The municipal authority shall review the initial determination within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. The time for review may be extended by agreement with the person aggrieved. 
(d) ?Right to present evidence and argument. The person aggrieved may file with his request for review, or within the time agreed with the municipal authority, written evidence and argument in support of their position with respect to the initial determination. 
(e) ?Decision on review. The municipal authority may affirm, reverse or modify the initial determination and shall mail or deliver to the person aggrieved a copy of the municipal authority's decision on review which shall state the reasons for such decision. The decision shall advise the person aggrieved of his right to appeal the decision, that appeal may be taken within 30 days, and the office or person with whom notice of appeal shall be filed. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-8) 
Sec. 2-504. - Administrative appeal. 
(a) ?From initial determination or decision on review. If the person aggrieved had a hearing substantially in compliance with section 2-505 when the initial determination was made, he may elect to follow sections 2-501—2-503, but is not entitled to a further hearing under section 2-505 unless granted by the municipal authority. He may, however, seek judicial review under section 2-507. If the person aggrieved did not have a hearing substantially in compliance with section 2-505 when the initial determination was made, he shall follow sections 2-501—2-503 and may appeal under this section from the decision made under section 2-503. 
(b) ?Time within which appeal may be taken under this section. Appeal from a decision on review under section 2-503 may be taken within 30 days of notice of such decision. 
(c) ?How appeal may be taken. An appeal under this section may be taken by filing with or mailing to the office or person designated in the municipal authority's decision on review, written notice of appeal. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-9) 
Sec. 2-505. - Hearing on administrative appeal. 
(a) ?Time of hearing. The city shall provide the appellant a hearing on an appeal under section 2-504 within 15 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall serve the appellant with notice of such hearing by mail or personal service at least ten days before such hearing. The office or person with whom a notice of appeal is filed shall immediately notify the city attorney, who shall forthwith advise the mayor of such appeal. 
(b) ?Conduct of hearing. At the hearing the appellant and the municipal authority may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and call and examine witnesses and cross examine witnesses of the other party. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the person conducting the hearing. The mayor shall appoint, without confirmation, an impartial decision maker who may be an officer, committee, board or commission of the city or the council who did not participate in making or reviewing the initial determination, who shall make the decision on administrative appeal. The decision maker may issue subpoenas. The hearing may, however, be conducted by an impartial person, committee, board or commission designated by the mayor to conduct the hearing and report to the decision maker. 
(c) ?Record of hearing. The person conducting the hearing or a person employed for that purpose shall take notes of the testimony and shall mark and preserve all exhibits. The person conducting the hearing may, and upon request of the appellant, shall, cause the proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a recording device, the expense thereof to be paid by the city. 
(d) ?Hearing on initial determination. Where substantial existing rights are affected by an initial determination, the municipal authority making such determination shall, when practicable, give any person directly affected an opportunity to be heard in accordance with this section before making such determination. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-10) 
Sec. 2-506. - Final determination. 
(a) ?Within 20 days of completion of the hearing conducted under section 2-505 and the filing of briefs, if any, the decision maker shall mail or deliver to the appellant its written determination stating the reasons therefor. Such determination shall be a final determination. 
(b) ?A determination following a hearing substantially meeting the requirements of section 2-505 or a decision on review under section 2-503 following such hearing shall be a final determination, judicial review of which may be obtained under section 2-507. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-11) 
Sec. 2-507. - Judicial review. 
(a) ?Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek review thereof by writ of certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the final determination. 
(b) ?The record of the proceedings shall be transcribed at the expense of the person seeking review. A transcript shall be supplied to anyone requesting the same at his expense. If the person seeking review establishes impecuniousness to the satisfaction of the reviewing court, the court may order the proceedings transcribed at the expense of the city, and the person seeking review shall be furnished a free copy of the transcript. By stipulation, the court may order a synopsis of the proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The court may otherwise limit the requirement for a transcript. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-12) 
Sec. 2-508. - Legislative review. 
(a) ?Seeking review pursuant to this article does not preclude a person aggrieved from seeking relief from the council or any of its boards, commissions, committees or agencies which may have jurisdiction. 
(b) ?If in the course of legislative review under this section a determination is modified, such modification and any evidence adduced before the council, board, commission, committee or agency shall be made part of the record on review under section 2-507. 
(c) ?The council, board, commission, committee or agency conducting a legislative review under this section need not conduct the type of hearing required under section 2-505. 
(Code 1986, § 2-8-13) 
Secs. 2-509—2-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LOST, ABANDONED AND SURPLUS PROPERTY[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 46. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-541—2-560. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOST AND ABANDONED PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-561. - City custody. 
(a) ?Property which appears to be lost or abandoned, discovered by officers or turned in to the police department by citizens, shall be disposed of according to this division. 
(b) ?Lost and abandoned property will be examined by the police department for identifying marks in an attempt to determine the owner. If identifying marks are present, they shall be used by the police department to attempt to contact the owner to return the property. If no identifying marks are present, the property shall be turned over to the police department's property custodian. 
(c) ?No police officer shall keep for his own use property found in the course of duty, nor take possession of property during off-duty hours when the discovery was made while on duty. 
(d) ?The police department shall permit citizens to claim lost property if they can provide sufficient proof that they are the rightful owners. 
(e) ?No member of the police department or any other city employe shall receive any lost, stolen, abandoned or other unclaimed property from the police department, unless that person receives a written receipt signed by the chief of police, a copy of which shall remain at the police department. 
(Code 1986, § 3-5-2(a)) 
Sec. 2-562. - Disposal procedures. 
(a) ?Classes of property. All property which has been abandoned, lost or remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days after the taking of possession of the same by the city shall be disposed of as follows, except that if the property is usable for city operations, the property need not be sold at auction, but may become the property of the city: 
(1) ?Vehicles. Vehicles shall be disposed of as set forth in the applicable provisions of ch. 78, art. VII. 
(2) ?Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages. Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages shall be destroyed or sold by sealed bids only to persons holding respectively "Class B" liquor or Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses. 
(3) ?Firearms, ammunition and explosives. Firearms or ammunition shall be returned to their rightful owner, destroyed or transferred to the state crime laboratory, the division of law enforcement services of the Department of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the U.S. Department of Treasury. Any explosive, flammable, or other material proving a danger to life or property may be disposed of immediately upon taking possession thereof. The chief of police and the fire chief are authorized to determine the disposal procedure; provided, however, that any such procedure will attempt to return to its rightful owner any such material which appears to have been stolen. 
(4) ?Other property with a fair market value of $100.00 or less. An item of property with a fair market value of $100.00 or less shall be destroyed or sold at public auction. Perishable property which deteriorates, to a fair market value of less than $100.00, shall be destroyed. 
(5) ?Other property with a fair market value of over $100.00. An item of property with a fair market value more than $100.00 shall be sold at public auction or by sealed bid. 
(6) ?Illegal property. Property which cannot be legally possessed shall be destroyed. 
(b) ?Disposal by auction or sealed bid. Whenever any property under this section is sold by public auction or sale by sealed bid, such auction or the awarding of bids shall be preceded by a class 2 notice describing the property and arranging the time and place for the auction or bid submission, such notice shall be published in the official city newspaper. The property auctioned or sold by sealed bid shall be sold in as is condition to the highest bidder. No sale or auction shall occur until the chief of police has determined that the property has no value to any probable investigation or legal proceeding. The department head responsible for the property shall determine the time in which the successful bidder shall remove the property. If the property is not removed within that time, the property shall revert to the city and the amount of the bid be forfeited to the city. Any city official selling property under this section shall maintain for two years an inventory of any property not disposed of by auction or sale by sealed bid and shall include a record of the date and method of disposal, any payment received for the property, and the name and address of the person acquiring the property. 
(c) ?Lost property. Property which is found by persons and delivered to the city police department for the purpose of locating the former owner shall not be considered abandoned or unclaimed under this division until 30 days after mailing to the person finding the property a notice that he may claim ownership of such property. The chief of police shall determine what portion, if any, of the property or its value shall be given the finder. This subsection shall not apply to any city employe finding property in the regular course of his employment. 
(d) ?Payment to city treasury. All sums received from the sale of property under this section shall be paid to the city treasury. 
(Code 1986, § 3-5-2) 
State Law reference— Disposal of abandoned property generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.28. 
Secs. 2-563—2-585. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SURPLUS PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-586. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Surplus city property means that property which is owned by the city, and which has no further usefulness to the city. An item of property shall be considered to have no further usefulness when: 
(1) ?The item or its function has been totally replaced by other city property and no probable future function exists for it; 
(2) ?The city no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased and no other service can reasonably be provided by the item; or 
(3) ?The item is no longer able to reliably or economically perform the work required of it. 
Surplus property as defined in this section shall not include land or buildings, but shall include fixtures and such salvage as may be taken from a building without structural damage when such fixtures and salvage are not part of a demolition contract. Surplus city property shall not include property which is obtained by the city as a result of abandonment or loss by the property's original owner. Surplus city property shall not include items of property which are traded in for newer items. Surplus city property shall not include library materials used by the public library for lending purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 3-5-1(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-587. - Determination of surplus city property. 
(a) ?Whenever an item of city property is determined to be surplus city property on the basis that the city no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased, the council shall determine whether or not the item is surplus city property. 
(b) ?Whenever the fair market value of the item is more than $5,000.00, the council shall determine whether or not the item is surplus city property. 
(c) ?Whenever the fair market value is $5,000.00 or less, the council shall, upon request, determine whether or not the item is surplus city property. 
(Code 1986, § 3-5-1(b)) 
Sec. 2-588. - Disposition. 
(a) ?Whenever the council determines that an item of property is surplus city property, it shall dispose of such property as it determines. 
(b) ?Whenever the fair market value of an item is more than $500.00 and the council has determined, pursuant to section 2-587, that the item is surplus city property, the department head responsible for the items shall dispose of the property by: 
(1) ?Donation to a nonprofit organization within the city or to a governmental agency; 
(2) ?Public auction; or 
(3) ?Sale by sealed bid. 
(c) ?In the event of a public auction or sale by sealed bid, the item will be sold in as is condition to the person submitting the highest bid; provided, however, that a lower bid submitted by a nonprofit organization or governmental agency may be accepted by the council. The department head responsible for the item shall determine the time in which the successful bidder must remove the item. If the item is not removed within that time, the item shall revert to the city and the amount of the bid shall be forfeited to the city. If no bids are received, the item shall be disposed of as directed by the council. 
(d) ?No public auction or awarding of bids shall occur under this division unless a description of the item to be sold and an advance notice of the time and place for such auction or bid submission is first published as a class 2 notice in the official city newspaper. 
(e) ?Whenever the fair market value of an item is $500.00 or less and the council has determined, pursuant to the previous section, that it is surplus city property, the item shall be either disposed of as set forth in subsection (b)(2) of this section or destroyed. 
(Code 1986, § 3-5-1(c)) 
Sec. 2-589. - Determination of fair market values. 
    Whenever this division requires a determination of the fair market value of an item of property, that determination shall be made by the department head responsible for the property, whose decision shall be final. 
(Code 1986, § 3-5-1(d)) 
Sec. 2-590. - Authority to dispose of property. 
(a) ?Except for library materials used by the public library for lending purposes, only the council may dispose of city property which is not surplus city property. 
(b) ?Whenever this division provides for an auction or other disposition of any property, the mayor shall be authorized to hire an auctioneer or take such other action as is necessary to properly dispose of the property; provided, however, that the fees of such auctioneer and all such costs, other than those for city labor and the use of city property, do not exceed the payment received by the city from the auction or sale of the property. 
(Code 1986, § 3-5-1(e)) 
Secs. 2-591—2-620. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FINANCE AND TAXATION[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or salaries for the city, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(2); any appropriation ordinance or resolution saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(4); any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special assessments therefor saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(7); the issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the city of whatever name or description saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(13); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(15); any ordinance regarding the letting of contracts without bids saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(23); any ordinance releasing persons from liability saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(25); taxation, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— City finances generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.12. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-621. - Fiscal year. 
    The calendar year shall be the fiscal year. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.12(1). 
Sec. 2-622. - City finances. 
    The council may levy and provide for the collection of taxes and special assessments; may refund any tax or special assessment paid, or any part thereof, when satisfied that the same was unjust or illegal; and generally may manage the city finances. The council may loan money to any school district located within the city or within which the city is wholly or partially located in such sums as are needed by such district to meet the immediate expenses of operating the schools thereof, and the council of the district may borrow money from such city accordingly and give its note therefor. No such loan shall be made to extend beyond August 30 next following the making thereof or in an amount exceeding one-half of the estimated receipts for such district as certified by the department of education and the local school clerk-treasurer. The rate of interest on any such loan shall be determined by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-2-6(d)) 
Sec. 2-623. - City budget. 
(a) ?Departmental estimates. On or before October 1 of each year, each officer, department, board and committee shall file with the administrator an itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of such officer, department, board or committee during the preceding fiscal year, and a detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of such officer, department, board or committee during such year, and of the conditions and management of such fund; also detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such statements shall be presented in the form prescribed by the administrator and shall be designated as "departmental estimates," and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main division of all departments. 
(b) ?Consideration of estimates. The mayor shall consider such departmental estimates in consultation with the department head, and shall then determine the total amount to be recommended in the budget for such department or activity. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-3(a), (b)) 
Sec. 2-624. - Budget. 
(a) ?Proposed. On or before October 20, the mayor shall prepare and submit to the council a proposed budget presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the city for the ensuing calendar year. The budget shall include the following information: 
(1) ?The expense of conducting each department and activity of the city for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increase and decrease recommended as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
(2) ?An itemization of all anticipated income of the city from sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
(3) ?An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(4) ?Such other information as may be required by the council and by state law. 
(b) ?Copies. The city shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-3(c), (d)) 
Sec. 2-625. - Hearing. 
(a) ?The mayor shall submit to the council at the time the annual budget is submitted the draft of an appropriation ordinance providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. Upon the submission of the proposed appropriation ordinance to the council it shall be deemed to have been regularly introduced therein. 
(b) ?A summary of such budget and notice of the time and place where such budget and detail is available for public inspection and notice of the time and place for holding the public hearing thereon, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the time of such public hearing. 
(c) ?Not less than 15 days after the publication of the proposed budget and the notice of hearing thereon, the public hearing shall be held at the time and place stipulated, at which time any resident or taxpayer of the city shall have an opportunity to be heard on the proposed budget. The budget hearing may be adjourned from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-3(e)) 
Sec. 2-626. - Changes in budget. 
    Upon written recommendation of the finance committee, the council may at any time by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership transfer any portion of an unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer shall be given by publication within ten days thereafter in a newspaper in general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-4) 
Sec. 2-627. - City funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation. 
    No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized by section 2-626. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation, but appropriations may be made by the council, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-5) 
Sec. 2-628. - Public depositories. 
    The council shall designate the public depository or depositories within this state within which city funds shall be deposited, and when the money is deposited in such depository in the name of the city, the administrator shall not be liable for such losses as are defined by state law. The administrator shall invest and the interest arising therefrom shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 62.12(7). 
Sec. 2-629. - Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed. 
    The administrator may invest any city funds not immediately needed, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 66.04(2) and 219.05. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-9) 
Sec. 2-630. - Facsimile signatures. 
    In lieu of the personal signatures of the administrator and mayor, there may be affixed on order checks the facsimile signatures of such persons adopted by them and approved by the council, but the use of the facsimile signature shall not relieve such official from any liability to which he is otherwise subject, including the unauthorized use thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-10) 
Sec. 2-631. - Annual audits. 
    A firm of certified public accountants shall be employed each year by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the council, to conduct a detailed audit of the city's financial transactions and its books, and to assist the administrator in the management of the city's financial affairs, including the water and sewage commission. These auditors shall be employed on a calendar year basis. The books audited shall, include the city financial records of the office of the administrator, and any other books of any boards, commission, officers or employes of the city handling city moneys. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-13) 
Secs. 2-632—2-650. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX ROLL[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Tax roll generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 70.65, 74.03 et seq. 

Sec. 2-651. - Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts. 
(a) ?Aggregate tax stated on roll. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.65(2), the administrator shall, in computing the personal tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of state, county, school and local taxes in a single column in the roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied in a single column opposite the name of the person against whom the tax is levied. 
(b) ?Rates stamped on receipts. The aggregate amount of such taxes shall be combined in a single column on the tax receipt issued by the administrator. The administrator shall cause to be printed or stamped on the tax receipt or personal property bills the separate proportion or rate of taxes levied for state, county, school, local or other purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-1) 
Secs. 2-652—2-670. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Special assessments generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.60. 

Sec. 2-671. - Levy. 
(a) ?The city by resolution of its council may levy and collect special assessments upon property in a limited and determinable area for special benefits conferred upon such property by any municipal work or improvement and may provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost of the work or improvement. 
(b) ?The amount assessed against any property for any work or improvement which does not represent an exercise of the police power shall not exceed the value of the benefits accruing to the property therefrom, and for those representing an exercise of the police power, the assessment shall be upon a reasonable basis as determined by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 66.60(1)(a, b). 
Sec. 2-672. - Resolution and report required. 
(a) ?Prior to making any such special assessments, the council shall declare by preliminary resolution its intention to exercise such powers for a stated municipal purpose. Such resolution shall describe generally the contemplated purpose, the limits of the proposed assessment district, the number of installments in which the special assessments may be paid or that the number of installments will be determined at the hearing required under section 2-675 and direct the proper municipal officer or employe to make a report thereon. Such resolution may limit the proportion of the cost to be assessed. 
(b) ?The report required by subsection (a) of this section shall consist of: 
(1) ?Preliminary or final plans and specifications. 
(2) ?An estimate of the entire cost of the proposed work or improvement. 
(3) ?An estimate, as to each parcel of property affected, of: 
a. ?The assessment of benefits to be levied. 
b. ?The damages to be awarded for property taken or damaged. 
c. ?The net amount of such benefits over damages or the net amount of such damages over benefits. 
(4) ?A statement that the property against which the assessments are proposed is benefited, where the work or improvements constitute an exercise of the police power. In such case the estimates required under subsection (b)(3) of this section shall be replaced by a schedule of the proposed assessments. 
(5) ?A copy of the report when completed shall be filed with the administrator for public inspection. 
(c) ?When the council determines by resolution that the hearing on the assessments be held subsequent to the completion of the work or improvement or the rendering of the service, the report required by Wis. Stats. § 66.60(3), and subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall contain a statement of the final cost of the work, service or improvement in lieu of an estimate of the cost. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-2) 
Sec. 2-673. - Costs that may be paid by special assessment. 
    The cost of any work or improvement to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment on property may include the direct and indirect cost thereof, the damages occasioned thereby, the interest on bonds or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of the assessments, a reasonable charge for the services of the administrative staff of the city and the cost of any architectural, engineering and legal services, and any other item of direct or indirect cost which may reasonably be attributed to the proposed work or improvement. The amount to be assessed against all property for any such proposed work or improvement shall be apportioned among the individual parcels in the manner designated by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-3) 
Sec. 2-674. - Exemptions; deductions. 
(a) ?If any property deemed benefited shall by reason of any provision of law be exempt from assessment therefor, such assessment shall be computed and shall be paid by the city. 
(b) ?A parcel of land against which has been levied a special assessment for the sanitary sewer or water main laid in one of the streets upon which it abuts, shall be entitled to such deduction or exemption as the council determines to be reasonable and just under the circumstances of each case, when a special assessment is levied for the sanitary sewer or water main laid in the other street upon which such corner lot abuts. Under any circumstance the assessment will not be less than the long way of such lot. The council may allow a similar deduction or exemption from special assessments levied for any other public improvement. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-4) 
Sec. 2-675. - Notice of proposed or approved project. 
    On the completion and filing of the report required in section 2-672(b)(5), the administrator shall give notice stating the nature of the proposed or approved work or improvement, the general boundary lines of the proposed assessment district, the place and time at which the report may be inspected and the place and time at which all interested persons, their agents or attorneys may appear before the council or committee thereof and be heard concerning the matters contained in the preliminary resolution and report. Such notice shall be given either by publication in the official city newspaper within the city, and a copy of such notice shall be mailed to each interested person whose post office address is known. The hearing shall commence not less than ten days and not more than 40 days after the publication or posting of such notice. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-5) 
Sec. 2-676. - Council actions after hearing. 
(a) ?After the hearing, the council may approve, disapprove, modify or re-refer the report to the designated officer or employe with such directions as it deems necessary to change the plans and specifications so as to accomplish a fair and equitable assessment. 
(b) ?If an assessment be made against any property and an award of compensation or damage be made in favor of the property, the council shall assess only the difference between such assessment of benefits and the award of compensation or damage. 
(c) ?If the work or improvement has not been previously authorized or approved, the council shall approve the work or improvement and by resolution direct that the same be done and paid for in accordance with the report finally approved. If the work or improvement has been approved by the council or work commenced or completed prior to the filing of the report or prior to the hearing, then the council shall by resolution confirm the report as made or modified and provide for payment in whole or in part by assessment. 
(d) ?The administrator shall publish the final resolutions as required in section 2-675. 
(e) ?After the publication of the final resolution, any work or improvement provided for and not yet authorized, shall be deemed fully authorized and all awards of compensation or damage and all assessments made shall be deemed duly and properly made, subject to the right of appeal by Wis. Stats. § 66.60(12), or any other applicable provision of law. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-6) 
Sec. 2-677. - Combined assessments. 
    If more than a single improvement is undertaken, the council may combine the assessments as a single assessment on each property affected except that the property owner may object to any one or more of such improvements. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-7) 
Sec. 2-678. - Council's power to amend, cancel or confirm special assessment. 
    If after completion or after the receipt of bids, the actual cost of any work or improvement is found to vary materially from the original estimate, or the assessment is void or invalid for any reason, or if the council determines to reconsider an assessment, it is empowered, after giving notice as required in section 2-675 and after a public hearing to amend, cancel or confirm any prior assessment and notice of this amending, canceling or confirming be given by the administrator as provided in section 2-677. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-8) 
Sec. 2-679. - Where cost of improvement is less than assessment. 
    If the cost of the work or improvement is less than the assessment levied, the council, without notice or hearing, shall reduce each assessment proportionately. If the assessment has been paid either in part or in full, the city shall refund the property owner such overpayment. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-9) 
Sec. 2-680. - Appealed assessments payable when due. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(12)(f), it shall be a condition to the maintenance of any appeal that any assessment appealed shall be paid when due and payable and upon default in payment any such appeal shall be dismissed. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-10) 
Sec. 2-681. - Lien on property. 
    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(15), any special assessment levied under this article shall be a lien on the property against which it is levied on behalf of the city. The council shall provide for the collection of such assessments and may establish penalties for payment after the due date. The council shall provide that all assessments not paid by the date specified shall be extended upon the tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property and all proceedings in relation to the collection of such delinquent taxes shall apply to such assessment, except as otherwise provided by statute. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-11) 
Sec. 2-682. - Special charges permissible. 
(a) ?In addition to all other methods provided by law, special charges for current services may be imposed by the council by allocating all or part of the cost of the property served. Such may include snow and ice removal, weed elimination, street sprinkling oiling or tarring, repair of sidewalks or curb and gutter, garbage and refuse disposal, sewer service and tree care or removal. The provision for notice of such charges shall be optional with the council except that in the case of street, sidewalk, curb or gutter repair, 20 days' notice published in the city newspaper, and a copy of such notice mailed to every interested person whose post office address is known, at least ten days before the hearing or proceeding. Such notice shall specify that on a certain date a hearing will be held by the council as to whether the service in question shall be performed. 
(b) ?Such special charges shall not be payable in installments. If not paid within the period fixed by the council, such delinquent charge shall become a lien as provided in section 2-681. 
(c) ?Section 2-672(a) shall not be applicable to proceedings under this section. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-12) 
Sec. 2-683. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a) ?If any assessment or charge levied under this article is invalid because such statutes are found to be unconstitutional, the council may thereafter reassess such assessment or charge pursuant to the provisions of any applicable law. 
(b) ?The council may, without notice or hearing, levy and assess all or any part of the cost of any work or improvement upon the property benefited if notice and hearing is waived in writing by property owners affected. 
(c) ?Notwithstanding any other provision of law, or this or other ordinance or resolution, it is specifically intended and provided by this division that the city may levy special assessments for work or improvement against the property benefited either before or after the approval of the work plans and specifications, contracting for the work or completing the work or improvement. 
(Code 1986, § 2-6-13) 
Secs. 2-684—2-705. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CLAIMS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference— Auditing claims generally, Wis. Stats. § 61.51. 

Sec. 2-706. - Certification. 
    Prior to submission of any account, demand or claim to the council for approval of payment, the administrator shall certify, or cause to be endorsed thereon or on attached papers, that the following conditions have been complied with: 
(1) ?Funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget. 
(2) ?The item or service was duly authorized by the proper official or agency and has been received or rendered in accordance with the purchasing agreement. 
(3) ?The claim is accurate in amount and a proper charge against the treasury. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-8(a)) 
Sec. 2-707. - Finance committee to audit accounts. 
(a) ?No account or demand against the city, except as provided in section 2-708, shall be paid until it has been passed upon by the finance committee and an order drawn on the administrator therefor. Every such account shall be itemized and certified as provided in section 2-706. 
(b) ?After auditing, the finance committee shall cause to be endorsed by the administrator, on each account, the words "allowed" or "disallowed," as the fact is, adding the amount allowed or specifying the items or parts of items disallowed. If the council shall approve the same it shall direct the administrator to issue a city order for the amount of the claim approved. All money paid out of the city treasury shall be paid upon an order signed by the mayor and countersigned by the administrator, except that payments of regular wages or salaries shall be as provided in section 2-708. The minutes of the proceedings of the council, or a statement attached thereto, shall show to whom, and for what purpose, every such account was allowed and the amount. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-8(b)) 
Sec. 2-708. - Payment of regular wages or salaries. 
    Regular wages or salaries of city officers and employes shall be paid by payroll, verified by the proper city official, department head, board or commission and filed with the administrator in time for payment on the regular payday. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-8(c)) 
Sec. 2-709. - Method of incurring claims. 
    All actions of the council appropriating money or creating a charge against the city, other than claims for purchases or work previously authorized by the council, shall only be acted upon at the next regular meeting after introduction, provided that this section may be suspended by affirmative vote of three-fourths of all members of the council. A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded on all appropriations. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-8(d)) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOL BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Alcohol beverages generally, Wis. Stats. § 125.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - State statutes adopted. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125 and §§ 48.344 and 778.25, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendment, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    As used in this chapter the terms "alcoholic beverages," "intoxicating liquors," "sell," "sold," "sale," "restaurant," "club," "retailer," "person," "fermented malt beverages," "wholesalers," "retailers," "operators," and "nonintoxicating beverages" shall have the meanings given them by Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a) ?Forfeitures for violations of Wis. Stats. §§ 125.07(1)—(5) and 125.09(2), adopted by reference in section 6-1 shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the comparable state statute, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses. 
(b) ?Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in subsection (a) of this section, or who shall conduct any activity or make any sale for which a license is required without such license, shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in section 1-13. 
(c) ?Nothing in this section shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by statute. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-30) 
Sec. 6-4. - Outside consumption. 
(a) ?In public areas. 
(1) ?Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve, or offer to sell or serve, or to consume, or to carry or expose to view any open container of any alcoholic beverage upon any street, sidewalk, alley, public parking lot, highway, cemetery, drives or parking areas for business held out to the public, or other public area within the city or on private property without the owner's consent. City-owned parks or recreation areas are exempt from this subsection, except that glass containers are prohibited. 
(2) ?Exceptions. 
a. ?The provisions of this section may be waived by the council for duly authorized events. 
b. ?Any organization which has been issued a temporary class "B" fermented malt beverage picnic license pursuant to this chapter. 
(b) ?Definitions. 
(1) ?As used in this section, the term "alcoholic beverage" shall include all ardent, spirituous, distilled, or vinous liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented, or not, and by whatever name called, as well as all liquors and liquids made by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley malt and hops, with or without unmalted grains or decorticated and degerminated grains or sugar, which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which are fit for use for beverage purposes. 
(2) ?As used in this section, the term "public area" shall be construed to mean any location within the city which is open to access to persons not requiring specific permission of the owner to be at such location including all parking lots serving commercial establishments. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-1) 
Sec. 6-5. - Sale to underage or intoxicated persons. 
(a) ?Sales of alcohol beverages to underage persons. 
(1) ?No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away any fermented malt beverages to any underage person not accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, or procure for, sell, dispense or give away any intoxicating liquor to any underage person. 
(2) ?No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in fermented malt beverages to or with any underage person not accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age or sell, vend, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor to or with any underage person. 
(b) ?Penalties. A person who commits a violation of subsection (a) of this section is subject to a forfeiture of: 
(1) ?Not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a previous violation within 12 months of the violation; or 
(2) ?Not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 if the person has committed a previous violation within 12 months of the violation. 
In addition to the forfeitures provided in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section, a court shall suspend any license issued under chapter 14 to a person violating this section pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.07(1)(b)3. 
(c) ?Sale of alcohol beverages to intoxicated persons. 
(1) ?No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away alcohol beverages to a person who is intoxicated. 
(2) ?No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages to or with a person who is intoxicated. 
(d) ?Penalties. Any person who violates subsection (c) of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days for nonpayment of a forfeiture in addition to suspension or revocation of license. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-2) 
Cross reference— Minors generally, § 54-151 et seq. 
Sec. 6-6. - Solicitation of drinks. 
    Any licensee, permittee or bartender of a retail alcohol beverage establishment covered by a license or permit issued by the city who permits an entertainer or an employe to solicit a drink of any alcohol beverage defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.02(1), or any other drink from a customer on the premises, or any entertainer or employe who solicits such drinks from any customer is deemed in violation of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-9) 
Sec. 6-7. - Closing hours. 
(a) ?Class "B" licensees or permittees generally. No premises for which a class "B" license or permit is issued may remain open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as provided in this subsection and subsection (d) of this section. On Saturday and Sunday, the closing hours shall be between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. On January 1 premises operating under a class "B" license or permit are not required to close. 
(b) ?Sale of fermented malt beverages. Between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. no person may sell fermented malt beverages on class "B" licensed premises in an original unopened package, container or bottle or for consumption away from the premises. 
(c) ?Class "A" premises. Class "A" premises may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but may not sell fermented malt beverages between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(d) ?Hotels and restaurants selling fermented malt beverages. Hotels and restaurants the principal business of which is the furnishing of food and lodging to patrons, bowling centers, indoor horseshoe-pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf clubhouses may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but may not sell fermented malt beverages during the hours specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e) ?Wholesalers. No premises for which a wholesale intoxicating liquor permit has been issued may remain open for the sale of intoxicating liquor between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on Saturday the premises may remain open until 9:00 p.m. 
(f) ?"Class A" retailers. No premises for which a "Class A" license or permit has been issued may remain open for the sale of intoxicating liquor between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(g) ?"Class B" and "Class C" retailers. No premises for which a "Class B" license or permit or a "Class C" license has been issued may remain open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as otherwise provided in this subsection and subsection (j) of this section. On January 1 premises operating under a "Class B" license or permit are not required to close. On Saturday and Sunday, no premises may remain open between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. However, the closing hours for January 1 shall be 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. This subsection does not apply to a "Class B" license issued to a winery under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(am). 
(h) ?Premises licensed for sale of intoxicating liquor for off-premises consumption. Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. no person may sell intoxicating liquor on "Class B" licensed premises in an original unopened package, container or bottle or for consumption away from the premises. This subsection does not apply to a "Class B" license issued to a winery under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(am). 
(i) ?Exception to Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(am). No premises for which a "Class B" license has been issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)(am) may remain open for the sale of intoxicating liquor between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(j) ?Hotels and restaurants selling intoxicating liquor. Hotels and restaurants the principal business of which is the furnishing of food, drinks or lodging to patrons, bowling centers, indoor horseshoe-pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf clubhouses may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but may not sell intoxicating liquor during the closing hours under (g). 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-15; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-9-2012) 
Secs. 6-8—6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Minors generally, § 54-151 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-41. - Required. 
    No person shall vend, sell, deal or traffic in or have in his possession with intent to vend, sell, deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in any quantity whatever, or cause the same to be done, without having procured a license as provided in this article nor without complying with all the provisions of this chapter, and all statutes and regulations applicable thereto, except as provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 125.26, 125.27, 125.28, 125.51—125.65. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-3) 
Sec. 6-42. - Classes of licenses. 
(a) ?Retail "class A" intoxicating liquor license. A retail "class A" intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the administrator under the authority of the council, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors only in original packages or containers, and to be consumed off the premises so licensed. 
(b) ?Retail "class B" intoxicating liquor license. A retail "class B" intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the administrator under the authority of the council, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on the premises so licensed, and not in the original package or container, in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time, and to be consumed off the premises, except that wine may be sold in the original package or otherwise in any other quantity to be consumed off the premises. 
(c) ?Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. A class "A" retailer's fermented malt beverage license, when issued by the administrator under the authority of the council, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages only for consumption away from the premises where sold, and in the original packages, containers or bottles. 
(d) ?Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. A class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license, when issued by the administrator under the authority of the council, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale, fermented malt beverages, either to be consumed upon the premises where sold or away from such premises. The holder may also sell beverages containing less than one-half of a percentum of alcohol by volume, without obtaining a special license to sell such beverages. 
(e) ?Temporary class "B" fermented malt beverage picnic license. 
(1) ?A temporary class "B" picnic license, when issued by the administrator under the authority of the council, as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6), shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic, post meeting, fair or similar gathering. Such license may be issued only to bona fide clubs, state, county or local fairs, associations or agricultural societies, lodges or societies that have been in existence for not less than six months prior to the date of application for such license or to posts of ex-servicemen's organizations now or hereafter established. Such license is valid for dates as approved by the council. 
(2) ?Application for such temporary license shall be signed by the president or corresponding officer of the society making such application and shall be filed with the administrator, together with the appropriate license fee for each day for which the license is sought. The license shall specify the hours and dates of license validity. The application shall be filed a minimum of seven days prior to the meeting of the council at which the application will be considered. Such license shall be valid for no more than four consecutive days. If the application is for a license to be used in a city park, the applicant shall specify the main point of sale facility. 
(f) ?Wholesaler's license. A wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license, when issued by the administrator under the authority of the council, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages only in original packages or containers to retailers or wholesalers, not to be consumed in or about the premises of such wholesaler. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-4) 
Sec. 6-43. - Fees. 
    The fees which shall be set from time to time by the council shall be chargeable for licenses issued by the council as follows: 
(1) ?Retail "class A" intoxicating liquor license; 
(2) ?Retail "class B" intoxicating liquor license; 
(3) ?Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license; 
(4) ?Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license; 
(5) ?Special class "B" fermented malt beverage picnic license; and 
(6) ?Wholesaler's license. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-5) 
Sec. 6-44. - Application. 
(a) ?Contents. Applications for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form prescribed by the state department of revenue and shall be sworn to by the applicant as provided by Wis. Stats. § 887.01, and shall be filed with the administrator not less than 15 days prior to the granting of such license. The premises shall be physically described to include every room and storage space to be covered by the license, including all rooms not separated by a solid wall or joined by connecting entrances. 
(b) ?Oath of applicant. Such application shall be filed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, by the president and secretary, if a corporation. 
(c) ?Partnerships. All applications shall be filed and sworn to by all partners. 
(d) ?Status of limited liability companies and partnerships. Limited liability companies (LLC) and partnerships (LLP) shall be treated as corporations and partnerships, respectively. 
(e) ?Publication. The application shall be published at least three times in the official city newspaper, and the costs of publication shall be paid by the applicant. 
(f) ?Amending application. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact set out in the application of any licensee, such licensee shall file with the issuing authority a notice in writing of such change within ten days after the occurrence thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-6) 
Sec. 6-45. - Qualifications of applicants and premises. 
(a) ?Residence requirements. A retail class "A" or retail class "B" fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor license shall be granted only to persons who are citizens of the United States and of the state. 
(b) ?Applicant to have malt beverage license. No retail class "B" intoxicating liquor license shall be issued to any person who does not have or to whom is not issued a class "B" retailer's license to sell fermented malt beverages. 
(c) ?Right to premises. No applicant will be considered unless he has the right to possession of the premises described in the application for the license period, by lease or by deed. 
(d) ?Age of applicant. No licenses shall be granted to any underage person as defined by statute. 
(e) ?Corporate restrictions. 
(1) ?No license shall be granted to any corporation or LLC which does not comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.04(6), which does not have an agent eligible for a license under this chapter or under state law, or which has more than 50 percent of the stock interest, legal or beneficial, in such corporation held by any person or persons not eligible for a license under this article or under the state law. 
(2) ?Each corporate and LLC applicant shall file with its application for such license a statement by its officers showing the names and addresses of the persons who are stockholders together with the amount of stock held by such person or persons. It shall be the duty of each corporate applicant and licensee to file with the administrator a statement of transfers of stock within 48 hours after such transfer of stock. 
(3) ?Any license issued to a corporation or LLC may be revoked in the manner and under the procedure established in Wis. Stats. § 125.12, when more than 50 percent of the stock interest, legal or beneficial, in such corporation is held by any person or persons not eligible for a license under this article, or under the state law. 
(f) ?Separate licenses. A separate license shall be required for each business premises where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-7) 
Sec. 6-46. - Investigation. 
    The administrator shall notify the chief of police, chief of the fire department, and building inspector of each new application and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the premises, together with such other investigation as shall be necessary to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing sanitation in restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license. These officials shall furnish to the council, in writing, the information derived from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused. No license shall be renewed without a reinspection of the premises and report as originally required. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-8) 
Sec. 6-47. - Approval of application. 
(a) ?In determining the suitability of an applicant, consideration shall be given to the character and financial responsibility of the applicant, the appropriateness of the location and premises proposed, and generally the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed. 
(b) ?No license shall be granted for operation on any premises or with any equipment upon which taxes or assessments or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. 
(c) ?No license shall be issued unless the premises conforms to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the state building code, and the regulations of the state board of health and local board of health applicable to restaurants. The premises must be properly lighted and ventilated, must be equipped with separate sanitary toilet and lavatory facilities equipped with running water for each sex, and must conform to all ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-9) 
Sec. 6-48. - Granting. 
    Opportunity shall be given by the council to any person to be heard for or against the granting of any license. Upon the approval of the applicant by the council, the administrator shall issue to the applicant a license, upon payment by the applicant of the license fee to the city. The fee shall be prorated for the fraction of any year. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-10) 
Sec. 6-49. - Transfer and lapse. 
(a) ?In accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12), a license shall be transferable from one premises to another if such transfer is first approved by the council. An application for transfer shall be made on a form furnished by the administrator. Proceedings for such transfer shall be had in the same form and manner as the original application. The fee for such transfer will be set by the council from time to time. Whenever a license is transferred the administrator shall forthwith notify the state department of revenue of such transfer. 
(b) ?Whenever the agent of a corporate holder of a license, is for any reason, replaced, the licensee shall give the administrator written notice of such replacement, the reasons therefor and the new appointment. Until the next regular meeting or special meeting of the council, the successor agent shall have the authority to perform the functions and be charged with the duties of the original agent. However, such license shall cease to be in effect upon receipt by the administrator of notice of disapproval of the successor agent by the state department of revenue or other officer. The corporation's license shall not be in force after receipt of such notice or after a regular or special meeting or the council until the successor agent or another qualified agent is appointed and approved by the city and the state department of revenue. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-11) 
Sec. 6-50. - Numbering. 
    All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-12) 
Sec. 6-51. - Posting; defacement. 
(a) ?Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article shall immediately post such license and keep the license posted while in force in a conspicuous place in the room or place where alcohol beverages are drawn or removed for service or sale. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to post such license or to be permitted to post it upon premises other than those mentioned in the application or knowingly to deface or destroy such license. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-13) 
Sec. 6-52. - Revocation and suspension; nonrenewal. 
(a) ?Procedure. Whenever the holder of any license under this chapter violates any portion of this chapter, proceedings for the revocation of such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure established by Wis. Stats. § 125.12, and the provisions therein relating to granting a new license shall likewise be applicable. 
(b) ?Automatic revocation. Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall stand revoked without further proceedings upon the conviction of a licensee or employe, agent or representative thereof for a second offense under this section or for a violation of Wis. Stats. chs. 125 or 139, or any other state or federal liquor or fermented malt beverage laws or of any felony. 
(c) ?Nonrenewal of licenses. Before renewal of any license issued under this chapter is refused, the licensee shall be given written notice of any charges or violations against him or the reasons proposed for nonrenewal and a copy of any proposed motion for nonrenewal and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the council. 
(d) ?Abandonment of premises. Any licensee holding a license to sell alcohol beverages who abandons such business shall forfeit any right or preference he may have to the holding of or renewal of such license. Abandonment shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of an alcohol beverage license. The closing of the licensed premises for at least six months shall be prima facie evidence of an abandonment, unless extended by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-18) 
Secs. 6-53—6-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASS "A" AND CLASS "B" AND "CLASS A" AND "CLASS B" LICENSES 

Sec. 6-76. - Conditions. 
    All retail class "A" and "B" and "class A" and "class B" licenses granted under this chapter shall be granted, subject to the following conditions, and all other conditions of this chapter, and subject to all other ordinances and regulations of the city applicable thereto: 
(1) ?Consent to entry. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the city at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the removal from such premises of all things and articles there had in violation of city ordinances or state laws, and consents to the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses. 
(2) ?Employment of minors. No retail class "B" or "class B" licensee shall employ any underage person, as defined in statute, but this shall not apply to hotels and restaurants. Family members may work on the licensed premises but are not permitted to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(3) ?Disorderly conduct. Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises. 
(4) ?Licensed operator on premises. There shall be upon premises operated under a class "B" license, at all times, the licensee or some person who shall have an operator's license and who shall be responsible for the acts of all persons serving as waiters, or in any other manner, any fermented malt beverages to customers. No person other than the licensee shall serve fermented malt beverages in any place operated under a class "B" license unless he possesses an operator's license, who is at the time of such service upon such premises. 
(5) ?Health and sanitation regulations. The rules and regulations of the state board of health governing sanitation in restaurants shall apply to all class "B" or "class B" liquor licenses issued under this chapter. No class "B" or "class B" license shall be issued unless the premises to be licensed conform to such rules and regulations. 
(6) ?Restrictions near schools and churches. No retail class "A" or class "B" license shall be issued for premises the main entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the main entrance of any established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the main entrance of such school, church or hospital to the main entrance to such premises. This subsection shall not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of real property within 300 feet thereof by any school building, hospital building or church building. This subsection applies only to restaurants in which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of their gross receipts. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-14) 
Sec. 6-77. - Restrictions on temporary class "B" fermented malt beverage picnic or special event license. 
(a) ?General conditions. Groups that have been granted a temporary class "B" fermented malt beverage license shall comply with the following conditions of the license: 
(1) ?Licensed operators. There shall be at least one person properly licensed as an operator under the provisions of division 3 on the premises at all times to supervise the service of beverages. 
(2) ?Compliance with laws. Holders of temporary class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses shall fully comply with all provisions of this Code and the statutes. 
(3) ?Suitable facilities. For indoor events, the structure used must have suitable exits and open spaces to accommodate anticipated attendance. It should contain adequate sanitary facilities to accommodate the size of the group. 
(4) ?Posting of license. The temporary class "B" fermented malt beverage license shall be posted in a conspicuous place and shall specify the dates and hours for which the license is issued. 
(5) ?Insurance. The applicant for a temporary class "B" fermented malt beverage license may be required to indemnify, defend and hold the city and its employes and agents harmless against all claims, death of any person or any damage to property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the permit, the applicant may be required to furnish a certificate of comprehensive general liability insurance with the city. The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted the permit. 
(b) ?Regulations concerning the sale or drinking of fermented malt beverages in parks. 
(1) ?All organizations issued a license under section 6-42 shall post in a conspicuous location at the main point of sale facility and at all remote sales facilities, a sufficient number of signs disclosing that no fermented malt beverage shall be served to any underage person or without proper age identification. 
(2) ?All organizations shall install a double fence around the main point of sale facility to control ingress and egress and shall station a licensed operator or police officer at the entrance after 9:00 p.m. for the purpose of checking age identification. 
(3) ?The sale of fermented malt beverages from remote sites, that is, other than the main point of sale facility, shall be prohibited after the hour of 9:00 p.m. 
(4) ?No underage persons shall be allowed to assist in the sale of fermented malt beverages at any point of sale, nor shall they be allowed to loiter or linger in the area of any remote sale facility. 
(5) ?A licensed operator shall be stationed at all points of sale at all times. 
(6) ?No more than six operators' licenses shall be issued in conjunction with the issuance of the temporary class "B" license, unless the council, for good cause shown, elects to issue additional operators' licenses, not to exceed eight in total. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-16) 
Sec. 6-78. - Beer garden licenses required for outdoor consumption at class "B" premises. 
(a) ?Required for outdoor consumption. No licensee shall permit the consumption of alcohol beverages on any part of the licensed premises not enclosed within the building, except under permit granted by the council. The permits are a privilege in which no rights vest and therefore may be revoked by the council with cause, or shall otherwise expire on June 30 of each year. No person shall consume or have in his possession alcohol beverages on any unenclosed part of a licensed premises which is not described in a valid beer garden permit. 
(b) ?Limitations on issuance. No permit shall be issued for a beer garden if any part of the beer garden is within 100 feet of a structure used for residential purposes, except residential uses located in the same structure as the licensed premises. No permit shall be issued for a beer garden if the beer garden area is greater than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the adjoining licensed premises. Each applicant for a beer garden permit shall accurately describe the area intended for use as a beer garden and shall indicate the nature of fencing or other measures intended to provide control over the operation of the beer garden. Every beer garden shall be completely enclosed with a fence or wall not less than six feet in height. No amplified sound or music is permitted outside the enclosed (building) premises. Amplified sound or music is not permitted in the beer garden. There shall be a licensed operator with the beer garden at all times the beer garden is in operation. 
(c) ?Adjoining property owners to be notified of pendency of applications. All property owners within 150 feet of the proposed beer garden shall be notified of the pendency of application for a beer garden permit by first class mail. 
(d) ?State statutes enforced within beer garden. Every permittee under this section shall comply with and enforce all provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125, applicable to class "B" licensed premises, except insofar as such provisions are clearly inapplicable. Violation of the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125 shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the beer garden permit by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-17) 
Secs. 6-79—6-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATORS' LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Operators licenses generally, Wis. Stats. § 125.17. 

Sec. 6-101. - Required. 
    There shall be upon the premises operated under a "class A" or "class B" intoxicating liquor license or class "B" fermented malt beverage license, at all times the licensee, or some other person who shall have an operator's license and who shall be responsible for the acts of all persons serving or selling any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages to customers. No person other than the licensee shall serve or sell fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor in any place operated under the "class A", "class B" or class "B" licenses unless he shall possess an operator's license or unless he shall be under the immediate supervision of the licensee or a person holding an operator's license who shall be upon the premises at the time of such service. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-20) 
Sec. 6-102. - Procedure upon application. 
    The council may issue an operator's license, which license shall be granted only upon application in writing on blanks to be obtained from the administrator only to persons of legal drinking age and older. Operators' licenses shall be operative only within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-21) 
Sec. 6-103. - Duration. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid for a period of one year and shall expire on June 30. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-22) 
Sec. 6-104. - Fee. 
(a) ?The fee for an operator's license shall be set by the council from time to time. 
(b) ?The administrator may issue provisional operator's licenses in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 125.17(5) at a cost set by the council from time to time per license so issued. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-23) 
Sec. 6-105. - Issuance. 
    After the council approves the granting of an operator's license, the administrator shall issue the license. Such licenses shall be issued and numbered in the order they are granted and shall give the applicant's name and address and the date of the expiration of such license. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-24) 
Sec. 6-106. - Display. 
    Each license issued under the provisions of this division shall be posted on the premises whenever the operator dispenses beverages. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-25) 
Sec. 6-107. - Revocation. 
    Violation of any of the terms or provisions of the state law or of this division relating to operator's licenses by any person holding such operator's license shall be cause for revocation of the license. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2-26) 
Secs. 6-108—6-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 6-141. - Presence in places of sale; penalty. 
(a) ?Restrictions. An underage person not accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, may not enter or be on any premises for which a license or permit for the retail sale of alcohol beverages has been issued, for any purpose except the transaction of business pertaining to the licensed premises with or for the licensee or his employe. The business may not be amusement or the purchase, receiving or consumption of edibles or beverages or similar activities which normally constitute activities of a customer of the premises. This subsection does not apply to: 
(1) ?An underage person who is a resident, employe, lodger or boarder on the premises controlled by the proprietor, licensee or permittee of which the licensed premises consists or is a part. 
(2) ?An underage person who enters or is on a "class A" or class "A" premises retail intoxicating liquor premises for the purpose of purchasing items other than alcohol beverages. An underage person so entering the premises may not remain on the premises after the purchase. 
(3) ?Hotels, drugstores, grocery stores, bowling centers, service stations, cars operated by any railroad, regularly established athletic fields, stadiums, or public facilities as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(5)(b)1.d, which are owned by a county or municipality. 
(4) ?Premises in the state fair park, concessions authorized on state-owned premises in the state parks and state forests as defined or designated in Wis. Stats. chs. 27 and 28, and parks owned or operated by agricultural societies. 
(5) ?Ski chalets, golf courses and golf clubhouses and private tennis clubs. 
(6) ?Premises operated under both a class "B" or "class B" license or permit and a restaurant permit where the principal business conducted is that of a restaurant. If the premises are operated under both a class "B" or "class B" license or permit and a restaurant permit, the principal business conducted is presumed to be the sale of alcohol beverages, but the presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence. 
(7) ?Premises operating under both a "class C" license and a restaurant permit. 
(8) ?An underage person who enters or remains on a class "B" or "class B" premises for the purpose of transacting business at an auction or market as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.32(4)(b)1, if the person does not enter or remain in a room where alcohol beverages are sold, possessed or furnished. 
(9) ?An underage person who enters or remains in a room on class "B" or "class B" licensed premises separate from any room where alcohol beverages are sold or served, if no alcohol beverages are furnished or consumed by any person in the room where the underage person is present and the presence of underage persons is authorized under this subdivision. An underage person may enter and remain on class "B" or "class B" premises under this subsection only if the city which issued the class "B" or "class B" license adopts an ordinance permitting underage persons to enter and remain on the premises as provided in this subsection and the police chief issues to the class "B" or "class B" licensee a written authorization permitting underage persons to be present under this subsection on the date specified in the authorization. Before issuing the authorization, the chief shall make a determination that the presence of underage persons on the licensed premises will not endanger their health, welfare or safety or that of other members of the community. The licensee shall obtain a separate authorization for each date on which underage persons will be present on the premises. 
(10) ?A person who is at least 18 years of age and who is working under a contract with the licensee, permittee or corporate agent to provide entertainment for customers on the premises. 
(11) ?An underage person who enters or remains on class "B" or "class B" licensed premises on a date specified by the licensee or permittee during times when no alcohol beverages are consumed, sold or given away. During those times, the licensee, the agent named in the license if the licensee is a corporation or limited liability company or a person who has an operator's license shall be on the premises unless all alcohol beverages are stored in a locked portion of the premises. The licensee shall notify the chief, in advance, of the times underage persons will be allowed on the premises under this subdivision. 
(12) ?An underage person who enters or remains in a dance hall attached to class "B" or "class B" licensed premises if the dance hall is separate from any room where alcohol beverages are sold, if there is a separate entrance to the dance hall and if no alcohol beverages are furnished or consumed by any person in the dance hall where the underage person is present. 
(13) ?An underage person who enters and remains on premises for which a temporary class "B" license is issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6) if the licensee is authorized by the chief to permit underage persons to be on the premises under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6) and if the licensee permits underage persons to be on the premises. 
(b) ?Penalties. A licensee or permittee who directly or indirectly permits an underage person to enter or be on a licensed premises in violation of subsection (a) of this section is subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-3) 
Sec. 6-142. - Violations; penalties. 
(a) ?Any underage person who does any of the following is guilty of a violation: 
(1) ?Procures or attempts to procure alcohol beverages. 
(2) ?Knowingly possesses or consumes intoxicating liquor. 
(3) ?Enters or is on licensed premises in violation of section 6-141(a). 
(4) ?Falsely represents his age for the purpose of receiving alcohol beverages from a licensee or permittee. 
(b) ?Any underage person not accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age who knowingly possesses or consumes fermented malt beverages is guilty of a violation. 
(c) ?Any person violating subsections (a) or (b) of this section is subject to the following penalties: 
(1) ?For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, either a forfeiture of not less than $200.00 nor more than $300.00, suspension of the person's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)2, participation in a supervised work program under subsection (c)(5) of this section or any combination of these penalties. 
(2) ?For a violation committed within 12 months of two previous violations, either a forfeiture of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00, revocation of the person's operating privilege under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)3, participation in a supervised work program under subsection (c)(5) of this section or any combination of these penalties. 
(3) ?For a violation committed within 12 months of three or more previous violations, either a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00, revocation of the person's operating privilege under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(b)3, participation in a supervised work program under subsection (c)(5) of this section or any combination of these penalties. 
(4) ?For purposes of subsections (c)(1) through (c)(5) of this section, all violations arising out of the same incident or occurrence shall be counted as a single violation. 
(5) ?If the court orders a person to participate in a supervised work program under subsections (c)(1) through (c)(5) of this section, the court shall set standards for the program within the budgetary limits established by the county board of supervisors. The program may provide the person with reasonable compensation reflecting the market value of the work performed, or it may consist of uncompensated community service work, and shall be administered by the county department under Wis. Stats. § 46.215 or 46.22 or a community agency approved by the court. 
(d) ?The supervised work program shall be of a constructive nature designed to promote the person's rehabilitation, shall be appropriate to the person's age level and physical ability and shall be combined with counseling from an agency staff member or other qualified person. The program may not conflict with the person's regular attendance at school. The amount of work required shall be reasonably related to the seriousness of the person's offense. 
(e) ?When a court revokes or suspends a person's operating privilege under subsection (c) of this section, the department of transportation may not disclose information concerning or relating to the revocation or suspension to any person other than a court, district attorney, county corporation counsel, city, village or town attorney, law enforcement agency or the person whose operating privilege is revoked or suspended. A person entitled to receive information under this subsection may not disclose the information to any other person or agency. 
(f) ?A person who is under 18 years of age on the date of disposition is subject to Wis. Stats. § 48.344, unless proceedings have been instituted against the person in a court of civil or criminal jurisdiction after dismissal of the citation under Wis. Stats. § 48.344(3). 
(g) ?Subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit an underage person employed by a licensee or permittee from possessing fermented malt beverages during the brewing process or for sale or delivery to customers. 
(h) ?Subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit an underage person employed by a brewery, a winery or a facility for the rectifying or manufacture of intoxicating liquor or the production of fuel alcohol from possessing alcohol beverages during regular working hours and in the course of employment. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-4) 
Sec. 6-143. - Defenses. 
    In determining whether or not a licensee or permittee has violated subsections (1) or (2) of this section, all relevant circumstances surrounding the presence of the underage person or the procuring, selling, dispensing or giving away of alcohol beverages may be considered, including any circumstance under subsections (3) and (4) of this section. In addition, proof of all of the following facts by a seller of alcohol beverages to an underage person is a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this section: 
(1) ?The purchaser falsely represented that he had attained the legal drinking age. 
(2) ?The appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent person would believe that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age. 
(3) ?The sale was made in good faith and in reliance on the representation and appearance of the purchaser in the belief that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age. 
(4) ?The underage person supported the representation under subsection (1) of this section with documentation that he had attained the legal drinking age. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-5(a)) 
Sec. 6-144. - Book kept by licensees and permittees. 
(a) ?Every retail alcohol beverage licensee or permittee may keep a book for the purposes of section 6-143. The licensee or permittee or his employe may require any of the following persons to sign the book: 
(1) ?A person who has shown documentary proof that he has attained the legal drinking age, if the person's age is in question. 
(2) ?A person who alleges that he is the underage person's parent, guardian or spouse and that he has attained the legal drinking age, if the licensee or permittee or his employe suspects that he is not the underage person's parent, guardian or spouse or that he has not attained the legal drinking age. 
(b) ?The book may show the date of the purchase of the alcohol beverages, the identification used in making the purchase or the identification used to establish that a person is an underage person's parent, guardian or spouse and has attained the legal drinking age, the address of the purchaser and the purchaser's signature. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-5(b)) 
Sec. 6-145. - Proof of age. 
(a) ?Definition. In this section, the term "official identification card" means a valid operator's license issued under Wis. Stats. ch. 343 that contains the photograph of the holder, an identification card issued under Wis. Stats. § 343.50 or an identification card issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.08. 
(b) ?Use. No card other than the identification card authorized under this section may be recognized as an official identification card. In place of an official identification card, documentary proof of age may be substituted. 
(c) ?Penalties for falsification of proof of age. No person may make, alter or duplicate an official identification card, provide an official identification card to an underage person or knowingly provide other documentation to an underage person purporting to show that the underage person has attained the legal drinking age. No person may possess an official identification card or other documentation used for proof of age with the intent of providing it to an underage person. Except as provided in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, any person who violates this section may be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not less than ten days nor more than 30 days, or both. 
(d) ?Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section for money or other consideration may be fined not more than $10,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than two years, or both. 
(e) ?Subsections (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to a person who is authorized to make an official identification card under Wis. Stats. ch. 343. 
(f) ?Any underage person who does any of the following is guilty of a violation: 
(1) ?Intentionally carries an official identification card not legally issued to him, an official identification card obtained under false pretenses or an official identification card which has been altered or duplicated to convey false information. 
(2) ?Makes, alters or duplicates an official identification card purporting to show that he has attained the legal drinking age. 
(3) ?Presents false information to an issuing officer in applying for an official identification card. 
(4) ?Intentionally carries an official identification card or other documentation showing that the person has attained the legal drinking age, with knowledge that the official identification card or documentation is false. 
(g) ?Any underage person who violates subsection (f) of this section is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, suspension of the person's operating privilege under Wis. Stats. § 343.30(6)(bm), participation in a supervised work program under subsection (g)(1) of this section, or any combination of these penalties. 
(1) ?If the court orders a person to participate in a supervised work program under this subsection (g), the court shall set standards for the program within the budgetary limits established by the county board of supervisors. The program may provide the person with reasonable compensation reflecting the market value of the work performed, or it may consist of uncompensated community service work, and shall be administered under Wis. Stats. § 46.215 or 46.22 or a community agency approved by the court. 
(2) ?The supervised work program shall be of a constructive nature designed to promote the person's rehabilitation, shall be appropriate to the person's age level and physical ability and shall be combined with counseling from an agency staff member or other qualified person. The program may not conflict with the person's regular attendance at school. The amount of work required shall be reasonably related to the seriousness of the person's offense. 
(h) ?When a court suspends a person's operating privilege under subsection (g) of this section, the department of transportation may not disclose information concerning or relating to the suspension to any person other than a court, district attorney, county corporation counsel, city, village or town attorney, law enforcement agency or the person whose operating privilege is suspended. A person entitled to receive information under this subsection may not disclose the information to any other person or agency. 
(i) ?A person who is under 18 years of age on the date of disposition is subject to Wis. Stats. § 48.344 unless proceedings have been instituted against the person in a court of civil or criminal jurisdiction after dismissal of the citation under Wis. Stats. § 48.344(3). 
(j) ?A law enforcement officer investigating an alleged violation of subsection (f) of this section shall confiscate any official identification card or other documentation that constitutes evidence of the violation. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-6) 
Sec. 6-146. - Possession of alcohol beverages on school grounds. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle owned, rented or consigned to a school. 
    School means a public, parochial or private school which provides an educational program for one or more grades between grades one and 12 and which is commonly known as an elementary school, middle school, junior high school, senior high school or high school. 
    School administrator means the person designated by the governing body of a school as ultimately responsible for the ordinary operations of a school. 
    School premises means premises owned, rented or under the control of a school. 
(b) ?Prohibited acts. Except as provided by subsection (c) of this section no person may possess or consume alcohol beverages: 
(1) ?On school premises; 
(2) ?In a motor vehicle, if a pupil attending the school is in the motor vehicle; or 
(3) ?While participating in a school-sponsored activity. 
(c) ?Permitted acts. Alcohol beverages may be possessed or consumed on school premises, in motor vehicles or by participants in school-sponsored activities if specifically permitted in writing by the school administrator, consistent with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(d) ?Penalty for violation of section. A person who violates this section is subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200.00, except that Wis. Stats. § 48.344, and section 6-142 provide the penalties applicable to underage persons. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-7) 
Sec. 6-147. - Adult permitting or encouraging underage violation. 
(a) ?No adult may knowingly permit or fail to take action to prevent the illegal consumption of alcohol beverages by an underage person on premises owned by the person or under the person's control. This subsection does not apply to alcohol beverages used exclusively as part of a religious service. 
(b) ?No adult may intentionally encourage or contribute to a violation of section 6-142(a), (b). 
(c) ?A person who violates this section is subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a previous violation within 12 months in which event a minimum of $200.00 and not more than $500.00 is imposed. 
(Code 1986, § 9-5-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 125.07(1)(a)3, 4. 
Secs. 6-148—6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PHARMACISTS 

Sec. 6-181. - Permit requirements. 
(a) ?A permit for the sale of intoxicating liquor pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.57 may be granted to a registered pharmacist upon action by the council. A separate application for each premises shall be made to the administrator upon forms provided by him. 
(b) ?Upon the approval of the application by the council, the administrator shall, upon filing by the applicant of a receipt showing the payment to the city of a permit fee set by the council from time to time, issue to the applicant a permit. 
(c) ?Each permit shall be numbered in the order in which issued and shall specifically state the premises for which issued, the fee paid and the name of the licensee. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-1) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 38; keeping of livestock, § 38-3; R-5 agricultural and estate district, § 42-266 et seq.; feeding of food waste to animals, § 66-36. 
State Law reference— Dogs generally, Wis. Stats. § 174.001 et seq.; animals distrained, Wis. Stats. § 172.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture. 
    The following statutes defining offenses against animals are adopted by reference in this section to define offenses against the city, provided the penalty for commission of such offenses under this chapter shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under section 1-13. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated in this section by reference are intended to be made part of this section: 
Wis. Stats. § 951.01 Definitions. Wis. Stats. § 951.015 Construction and application. Wis. Stats. § 951.02 Mistreating animals. Wis. Stats. § 951.03 Dognapping or catnapping. Wis. Stats. § 951.04 Leading animal from motor vehicle. Wis. Stats. § 951.05 Transportation of animals. Wis. Stats. § 951.06 Use of poisonous and controlled substances. Wis. Stats. § 951.07 Use of certain devices prohibited. Wis. Stats. § 951.08 Instigating fights between animals. Wis. Stats. § 951.09 Shooting at caged or staked animals. Wis. Stats. § 951.095 Harassment of police animals. Wis. Stats. § 951.10 Sale of baby rabbits, chicks and other fowl. Wis. Stats. § 951.11 Artificially colored animals; sale. Wis. Stats. § 951.13 Providing proper food and drink to confined animals. Wis. Stats. § 951.14 Providing proper shelter. Wis. Stats. § 951.15 Animals; neglected or abandoned; police powers.  
(Code 1986, § 9-1-1; Ord. No. 92-8, § 1, 5-27-1992) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means mammals, reptiles and birds. 
    At large means to be off the premises of the owner and not under the control of some person, either by leash or otherwise, but a dog or cat within an automobile of its owner, or in an automobile of any other person with the consent of the owner of the dog or cat shall be deemed to be upon the owner's premises. 
    Cat means any feline, regardless of age or sex. 
    Cruel means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or unjustifiable injury or death. 
    Dangerous dog, as used in this chapter, means: 
(1) ?Any dog which, because of its aggressive nature, training or characteristic behavior, is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans or another animal, and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required by this chapter; and 
(2) ?Any dog which, when unprovoked, habitually chases or approaches a person in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack on public or private property. 
No dog shall be declared to be a dangerous dog if the proof of danger concerns an incident where a person was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or in which the dog was protecting its owner from attack by a human being. 
    Dog means any canine, regardless of age or sex. 
    Farm animal means any warm-blooded animal normally raised on farms in the United States and used for food or fiber. 
    Law enforcement officer has that meaning as appears in Wis. Stats. § 967.02(5), and includes a humane officer under Wis. Stats. § 58.07, but does not include a conservation warden appointed under Wis. Stats. § 23.10. 
    Menacing dog, as used in the chapter, means any dog that may pose a threat to any person or animal as determined by any observed or reported behavior of the dog. In making the determination that a dog is or is not menacing, the following evidence shall be considered: 
(1) ?Whether the dog approached any person in a dangerous or terrorizing manner, or in an apparent attitude of attack, without provocation. 
(2) ?Whether the dog has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
(3) ?Whether the dog exhibits any characteristics of aggressive or unpredictable temperamental behavior in the presence of human beings or dogs or other animals. 
(4) ?The manner in which the dog had been maintained by its owner or custodian. 
(5) ?Whether the dog snaps, bites, or manifests a disposition to snap or bite. 
(6) ?The presence or absence of any provocation. 
    Neutered, in describing a dog or cat, means a dog or cat having nonfunctional generative organs. 
    Owner means any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog or cat, and the occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to which it customarily returns daily for a period of ten days is presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog or cat within the meaning of this section. 
    Pet means an animal kept and treated as a pet. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-1; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 6-9-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-3. - Keeping of dogs, cats, fowl and other animals. 
(a) ?Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to own, harbor or keep any dog or cat which: 
(1) ?Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in the city. 
(2) ?Assaults or attacks any person or destroys property. 
(3) ?Is at large within the limits of the city, including, but not limited to city parks, boat landings and ballfields. 
(4) ?Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person or persons. (See section 10-51.) 
(5) ?Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal. 
(6) ?Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten by an animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
(7) ?In the case of a dog, is unlicensed. 
(b) ?Vicious dogs and animals. 
(1) ?No vicious dog shall be allowed off the premises of its owner unless muzzled or on a leash in charge of the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family over 16 years of age. For purposes of enforcing this section, a dog shall be deemed as being of a vicious disposition if, within any 12-month period, it bites two or more persons or inflicts serious injury to one person in unprovoked circumstances off the owner's premises. Any vicious dog which is found off the premises of its owner other than as provided in this section, may be seized by any person, and upon delivery to the proper authorities, may, upon establishment to the satisfaction of a court of competent jurisdiction of the vicious character of the dog, by testimony under oath reduced to writing, be euthanized by the police authorities. 
(2) ?No person shall harbor or permit to remain on his premises any animal that is habitually inclined toward attacking persons or animals, destroying property, barking excessively or making excessive noises or running after automobiles. 
(c) ?Animals running at large. 
(1) ?No person having in his possession or ownership any animal or fowl shall allow the same to run at large within the city, including, but not limited to city parks, boat landings, ballfields (softball, baseball and soccer) and other public places. The owner of any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall keep his animal tied or enclosed in a proper enclosure so as not to allow said animal to interfere with the passing public or neighbors. Any animal running at large unlicensed and required by state law or city ordinance to be licensed shall be seized and impounded by a humane or law enforcement officer. 
(2) ?A dog or cat shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a leash and under control of a person physically able to control it. 
(d) ?Owner's liability for damage caused by dogs; penalties. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 174.02, relating to the owner's liability for damage caused by dogs together with the penalties therein set forth are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section by reference. 
(e) ?Number of dogs and cats. 
(1) ?No more than two dogs, cats or a combination thereof, over the age of five months shall be kept in or upon one residential unit or by one or more persons constituting one residential unit, unless the premises be licensed as a kennel. 
(2) ?No more than two dogs, cats or a combination thereof that are owned by an out-of-town visitor, may be kept at a residential unit for a period not to exceed more than seven consecutive days and also not more than two occurrences per calendar year. 
(f) ?Dangerous and menacing dogs. 
(1) ?Prohibitions and limitations. 
a. ?It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city limits any "dangerous" or "menacing" dog, except in compliance with the requirements set forth in this section. 
b. ?It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep or maintain any dangerous or menacing dog within a multi-family residential dwelling located in the city. 
c. ?The provisions of this chapter regarding dangerous and menacing dogs shall not apply to animals owned by law enforcement agencies and used for law enforcement purposes. 
(2) ?Requirements for keeping of a registered dangerous dog or a menacing dog. Upon the receipt of determination by the chief of police that a dog is dangerous or menacing, the owner may keep the dog within the city only so long as the owner complies with the requirements set forth in this section. The requirements are as follows: 
a. ?While on the owner's property, a menacing dog must be restrained at all times by a leash or chain that is properly located to prevent the animal from approaching any person in a dangerous or terrorizing manner. 
b. ?A menacing dog must be muzzled and restrained at all times in a public place, except when confined completely within a vehicle or cage, by an approved lead or chain not exceeding three feet in length and is under the control of an adult, able-bodied person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person or animal. 
c. ?All owners of dangerous dogs shall, on or before September 1, 2008 and annually thereafter on or before January 1st of each year, register their dog and shall provide a current color photograph of the dog to the city clerk's office and pay a registration fee as determined by resolution of the common council. 
d. ?At the time of registration, each owner of any dangerous dog kept within the city limits shall provide to the city clerk's office proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00 for any acts of property damage or liability incurred by virtue of injury inflicted by such dog. Such insurance shall name the city as co-insured solely for the purpose of notice of cancellation of the policy. The proof of insurance must be presented to the city clerk's office yearly at the time the dog's license is renewed. 
e. ?While on the owner's property, a dangerous dog must be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must have a minimum dimension of five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be imbedded into the ground no less than two feet. The enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the dog. A dangerous dog may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts and buildings. 
f. ?No dangerous dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any other part of a structure that would allow the dog to exit such a building on its own volition, except through a door leading directly to a pen or kennel meeting all the requirements of this section. In addition no dangerous dog shall be kept in a house or structure when the window screens or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
g. ?A dangerous dog, while outside its kennel, pen, or indoor confinement, must be muzzled and restrained at all times by an approved lead or chain not exceeding three feet in length, and must be under the control of an adult, able-bodied person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person or animal. A dangerous dog may also be off the owner's premises if it is confined, muzzled and restrained in accordance with this section. 
h. ?The owner or caretaker of a dangerous or menacing dog shall immediately notify the police department if the dog escapes, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or human being, has died, or has been sold or given away. If the dog has been sold or given away, the owner shall give the city clerk's office the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. 
(3) ?Complaints of dangerous and menacing dogs; processing of complaints. 
a. ?Any person having knowledge which he or she believes constitutes probable cause to believe that another is harboring, keeping, or maintaining a dangerous dog which was not registered with and licensed by the city on or before the effective date of this section, in the city, shall file with the police department a sworn affidavit setting forth the basis on which they believe the animal to be a dangerous dog, the name and address of the owner of the dog, and a description of the dog. The police department shall, upon receipt of such affidavit, inquire of the city clerk: 
1. ?Whether the dog was licensed on the effective date of this section; and 
2. ?Whether the dog is currently registered as a dangerous dog pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
b. ?The police department shall investigate every dog complaint and make a determination as to whether or not such dog is a dangerous or menacing dog as defined in this section. In the event that that the police department makes a determination that such a dog is a dangerous or menacing dog, the police department shall so inform the owner, keeper or harborer of such dog and provide such person with a copy of this section. 
(4) ?Failure to comply. 
a. ?Any owner of a dangerous dog who fails to keep current the dog's license and registration as provided herein must remove the dog from the city and will not be eligible to re-register the dog. The owner of any previously permitted dangerous dog who fails to keep current the dog's license is subject to the penalties applicable to any dog not registered and licensed on the effective date of this section. 
b. ?Whenever any person is charged with harboring a dangerous dog as defined in this chapter, that person shall, to the satisfaction of the police department, remove said dog from the city until the trial of the citation. If the owner fails to remove the dog within 48 hours of the service of the citation, the city police department shall impound the dog until the trial on the citation. 
c. ?If a dangerous dog is not dealt with by the owner pursuant to the requirements of this section, due to such failure on the part of the owner, the police department shall impound the dog and have the dog humanely destroyed. 
d. ?An owner of a dangerous dog who fails to register his or her dog is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 per day. 
e. ?Every day that a violation of this section continues, it shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this chapter shall pay all expenses including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care, and expert testimony fees necessitated by enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-6; Ord. No. 2000-09, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-2000; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 2, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1, 11-9-2015) 
Sec. 10-4. - Dogs and cats on cemeteries. 
    No dog or cat shall be permitted in any public cemetery. Every dog specially trained to lead blind persons shall be exempt from this section. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-8) 
Sec. 10-5. - Duty of owner in case of dog or cat bite. 
    Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog or cat who knows that such dog or cat has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact to the police department of the city and shall keep such dog or cat confined for not less than 14 days or for such period of time as the police department shall direct. The owner or keeper of any such dog or cat shall surrender the dog or cat to a law enforcement or humane officer upon demand for examination. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-9) 
Sec. 10-6. - Animal feces. 
    The owner or person in charge of any dog or other animal shall not permit solid fecal matter of such animal to be deposited on any street, alley, sidewalk, city park, boat landing, ballfield (softball, baseball and soccer), or other public or private property, unless such matter is immediately removed therefrom by said owner or person in charge. This section shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically handicapped. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2000-09, § 3, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 10-7. - Injury to property by animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing an animal, dog or cat to permit such animal, dog or cat to go upon any parkway or private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of such premises, and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-11) 
Sec. 10-8. - Vehicle accidents. 
    The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of a dog, cat or other animal which appears to be a pet, shall immediately notify the police department or an animal control agency whose jurisdiction extends into the city. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-20) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 10-9. - Prohibited and protected animals, fowl, reptiles and insects. 
(a) ?Protected animals. 
(1) ?Possession and sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess with intent to sell or offer for sale, or buy or attempt to buy, within the city any of the following animals, alive or dead, or any part or product thereof: All wild cats of the family felidae, polar bear (thalarctos maritimus), red wolf (canis niger), vicuna (vicugna vicugna), or alligator, caiman or crocodile of the order of crocodilia, gray or timber wolf (canis lupus), sea otter (enhydra lutris), Pacific ridley turtle (lepidochelys olivacea), Atlantic green turtle (chelonia mydas) and Mexican ridley turtle (lepidochelys kempi). 
(2) ?Compliance with federal regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, sell or offer for sale a native or foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird, amphibian or reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on the endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of the Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1969 (Public Law 135, 91st Congress). 
(3) ?Regulating the importation of certain birds. No person shall import or cause to be imported into this city any part of the plumage, skin or dead body of any species of hawk, owl or eagle. This subsection (a)(3) shall not be construed to forbid or restrict the importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any part thereof legally collected for use by the American Indians for ceremonial purposes or in the preservation of their tribal customs and heritage. 
(b) ?Exceptions to subsection (a) of this section. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not be deemed to prevent the importation, possession, purchase or sale of any species by any public agency, institute of higher learning, persons holding federal permits, or by a person holding a scientific collector's permit issued by the secretary of the state department of natural resources, or to any person or organization licensed to present a circus. 
(c) ?Wild animals; prohibition on keeping. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in their possession or under their control within the city any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, insect or reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities. Specifically, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in their possession or under their control within the city any of the following animals, reptiles or insects: 
(1) ?All poisonous animals and reptiles including rear-fang snakes. 
(2) ?Apes: Chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans (Pongo); ans siamangs (Symphalangus). 
(3) ?Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus). 
(4) ?Bears (Ursidae). 
(5) ?Bison (Bison). 
(6) ?Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus). 
(7) ?Crocodilians (Crocodilia), 30 inches in length or more. 
(8) ?Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more. 
(9) ?Coyotes (Canis latrans). 
(10) ?Deer (Cervidae); includes all members of the deer family, for example, white-tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose. 
(11) ?Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta). 
(12) ?Gamecocks and other fighting birds. 
(13) ?Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae). 
(14) ?Hyenas (Hyaenidae). 
(15) ?Jaguars (Panthera onca). 
(16) ?Leopards (Panthera pardus). 
(17) ?Lions (Panthera leo). 
(18) ?Lynxes (Lynx). 
(19) ?Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae). 
(20) ?Ostriches (Struthio). 
(21) ?Piranha fish (Characidae). 
(22) ?Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers. 
(23) ?Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae). 
(24) ?Sharks (class Chondrichthyes). 
(25) ?Snow leopards (Panthera uncia). 
(26) ?Tigers (Panthera tigris). 
(27) ?Wolves (Canis lupus). 
(28) ?Poisonous insects. 
(29) ?Bees, wasps and hornets. 
(30) ?Except in properly zoned districts, horses, mules, ponies, donkeys, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, chickens or any animal raised for fur-bearing purposes, unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in this Code. 
(d) ?Exceptions to subsection (c) of this section. The prohibitions of subsection (c) of this section shall not apply where the creatures are in the care, custody or control of a veterinarian for treatment; agricultural fairs; shows or projects of the 4-H Clubs; a display for judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival, circus or other show; dog or cat shows or trials; public or private educational institutions; licensed pet shops; or zoological gardens if: 
(1) ?Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(2) ?All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors. 
(3) ?Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape. 
(4) ?No person lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-13) 
Sec. 10-10. - Sale of rabbits, chicks or artificially colored animals. 
(a) ?No person may sell, offer for sale, raffle, give as a prize or premium, use as an advertising device or display living chicks, ducklings, other fowl or rabbits that have been dyed or otherwise colored artificially. 
(b) ?No person may sell, offer for sale, barter or give away living chicks, ducklings or other fowl without providing proper brooder facilities for the care of such chicks, ducklings or other fowl during the time they are in such person's care, custody or control. No retailer, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 100.30(2)(e), may sell, offer for sale, barter or give away living baby rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl under two months of age, in any quantity less than six, unless the purpose of selling these animals is for agricultural, wildlife or scientific purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.10. 
Sec. 10-11. - Providing proper food and drink to confined animals. 
(a) ?No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal may refuse or neglect to supply the animal with a sufficient supply of food and water as prescribed in this section. 
(b) ?The food shall be sufficient to maintain all animals in good health. 
(c) ?If potable water is not accessible to the animals at all times, it shall be provided daily and in sufficient quantity for the health of the animal. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.13. 
Sec. 10-12. - Providing proper shelter. 
(a) ?Required. No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal may fail to provide the animal with proper shelter as prescribed in this section. In the case of farm animals, nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing shelter requirements or standards more stringent than normally accepted husbandry practices in the particular county where the animal or shelter is located. 
(b) ?Indoor standards. Minimum indoor standards of shelter shall include: 
(1) ?Ambient temperatures. The ambient temperature shall be compatible with the health of the animal. 
(2) ?Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated by natural or mechanical means to provide for the health of the animals at all times. 
(c) ?Outdoor standards. Minimum outdoor standards of shelter shall include: 
(1) ?Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion of an animal tied or caged outside, sufficient shade by natural or artificial means shall be provided to protect the animal from direct sunlight. As used in this subsection (c)(1), the term "caged" does not include farm fencing used to confine farm animals. 
(2) ?Shelter from inclement weather. 
a. ?Animals generally. Natural or artificial shelter appropriate to the local climatic conditions for the species concerned shall be provided as necessary for the health of the animal. 
b. ?Dogs. If a dog is tied or confined unattended outdoors, under weather conditions which adversely affect the health of the dog, a shelter of suitable size to accommodate the dog shall be provided. 
(d) ?Space standards. Minimum space requirements for both indoor and outdoor enclosures shall include: 
(1) ?Structural strength. The housing facilities shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury and to contain the animals. 
(2) ?Space requirements. Enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns. 
(e) ?Sanitation standards. Minimum standards of sanitation for both indoor and outdoor enclosures shall include periodic cleaning to remove excreta and other waste materials, dirt and trash so as to minimize health hazards. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.14. 
Sec. 10-13. - Neglected or abandoned animals. 
(a) ?Neglected or abandoned animals. 
(1) ?No person may abandon any animal. 
(2) ?Any law enforcement officer may remove, shelter and care for any animal found to be cruelly exposed to the weather; starved or denied adequate water; neglected, abandoned or otherwise treated in a cruel manner; and may deliver such animal to another person to be sheltered, cared for and given medical attention, if necessary. In all cases the owner, if known, shall be immediately notified and such officer, or other person, having possession of the animal shall have a lien thereon for its care, keeping and medical attention and the expense of notice. 
(3) ?If the owner or custodian is unknown and cannot with reasonable effort be ascertained, or does not within five days after notice redeem the animal by paying the expenses incurred, it may be treated as a stray and dealt with as such. 
(4) ?Whenever in the opinion of any such officer an animal is hopelessly injured or diseased so as to be beyond the probability of recovery it shall be lawful for such officer to euthanize such animal, and the owner thereof shall not recover damages for the killing of such animal unless he shall prove that such euthanization was unwarranted. 
(5) ?Wis. Stats. § 951.16, investigation of cruelty complaints, and Wis. Stats. § 951.17, reimbursement for expenses, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(b) ?Injured animals. No person who owns, harbors or keeps any animal shall fail to provide proper medical attention to such animal when and if such animal becomes sick or injured. If the owner of such animal cannot be located, the city or any animal control agency with whom the city has an agreement or contract shall have the authority to take custody of such animal for the purpose of providing medical treatment, and the owner thereof shall reimburse the person or organization for the costs of such treatment. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.15. 
Sec. 10-14. - Cruelty to animals and birds. 
    No person except a police officer or health or humane officer in the pursuit of his duties, shall within the city shoot or kill or commit an act of cruelty to any animal or bird or disturb any bird's nests or bird's eggs. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-18(a)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.02. 
Sec. 10-15. - Leading animal from motor vehicle. 
    No person shall lead any animal upon a city street from a motor vehicle or from a trailer or semitrailer drawn by a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-18(b)) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.04. 
Sec. 10-16. - Use of poisonous and controlled substances. 
    No person may expose any pet animal owned by another to any known poisonous substance or controlled substance listed in Wis. Stats. § 161.14, whether mixed with meat or other food or not, where it is reasonable to anticipate the substance may be eaten by such animal; or for the purpose of harming the animal. This section shall not apply to poison used on one's own premises and designed for the purpose of rodent and pest extermination, nor the use of a controlled substance used in accepted veterinarian practice or in research by persons or organizations regularly engaged in such research. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-18(c)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.06. 
Sec. 10-17. - Use of certain devices. 
    No person may, directly or indirectly, or by aiding, abetting or permitting the doing thereof either put, place, fasten, use or fix upon or to any animal used or readied for use for a work purpose or for use in an exhibition, competition, rodeo, circus or other performance, any of the following devices: a bristle bur, tack bur or like device; or a poling device used to train a horse to jump which is charged with electricity or to which have been affixed nails, tacks or other sharp points. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-18(d)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.07. 
Sec. 10-18. - Instigating fights between animals. 
(a) ?No person may instigate, promote, aid or abet as a principal, agent, employe or spectator, or participate in the earnings from, or intentionally maintain or allow any place to be used for a cockfight, a dogfight, bullfight or any other fight between the same or different kinds of animals or between an animal and a person. This section does not prohibit events or exhibitions commonly featured at rodeos or bloodless bullfights. 
(b) ?No person may own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that the animal be engaged in an exhibition of fighting. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-18(e)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.08. 
Sec. 10-19. - Shooting at caged or staked animals. 
    No person may instigate, promote, aid or abet as a principal, agent, employe, participant or spectator, or participate in the earnings from or intentionally maintain or allow any place to be used for the shooting, killing or wounding with a firearm or any deadly weapon, any animal that is tied, staked out, caged or otherwise intentionally confined in a manmade enclosure, regardless of size. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-18(f)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.09. 
Secs. 10-20—10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-51. - Barking dogs or crying cats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. A dog or cat is considered to be in violation of this section when two formal, written complaints are filed with the police department within a four-week period. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-12) 
Sec. 10-52. - Dognapping and catnapping. 
    No person may take the dog or cat of another from one place to another without the owner's consent or cause such a dog or cat to be confined or carried out of the city or held for any purpose without the owner's consent. This section does not apply to law enforcement officers or humane society agents engaged in the exercise of their official duties, or as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 951.03. 
Secs. 10-53—10-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOG LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dog license taxes generally, Wis. Stats. § 174.05. 

Sec. 10-76. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to own, harbor or keep any dog more than five months of age after July 1 of the license year without complying with the provisions of this division relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of the dog. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-1(a)) 
Sec. 10-77. - Issuance of dog, kennel and cat licenses. 
(a) ?Dog licenses. 
(1) ?It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to own, harbor or keep any dog more than five months of age without complying with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 174.05 et seq., relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of such dogs. 
(2) ?The owner of any dog more than five months of age on January 1 of any year, or five months of age within the license year, shall annually, or on or before the date the dog becomes five months of age, pay a license tax and obtain a license. 
(3) ?The minimum license tax under this section shall be per Wis. Stats. § 174.05. These amounts shall be reduced by one-half if the animal became five months of age after July 1 during the license year. The license year shall commence January 1 and end December 31. 
(4) ?Upon payment of the required license tax and upon presentation of evidence that the dog is currently immunized against rabies, as required by section 10-101, the administrator shall complete and issue to the owner a license for such dog containing all information required by state law. The administrator shall also deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the license, the name of the county in which issued and the license year. 
(5) ?The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar and the collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog for which the license is issued at all times. 
(6) ?The fact that a dog is without a tag attached to the dog by means of a collar shall be presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed. Any city police or humane officer shall seize, impound or restrain any dog for which a dog license is required which is found without such tag attached. 
(7) ?Notwithstanding the foregoing, every dog specifically trained to lead blind or deaf persons is exempt from dog license tax and every person owning such a dog shall receive annually a free dog license from the administrator upon application therefor. 
(b) ?Kennel licenses. 
(1) ?Any person who keeps or operates a kennel may, instead of the license tax for each dog required by this article, apply for a kennel license for the keeping or operating of the kennel. Such person shall pay for the license year a license tax per Wis. Stats. § 174.053. Upon payment of the required kennel license tax and, if required by the council, upon presentation of evidence that all dogs over five months of age are currently immunized against rabies, the administrator shall issue the kennel license and a number of tags equal to the number of dogs authorized to be kept in the kennel. 
(2) ?The owner or keeper of a kennel shall keep at all times a kennel license tag attached to the collar of each dog over five months old kept by the owner or keeper under a kennel license but this subsection does not apply to a show dog during competition, to a dog securely confined indoors or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. These tags may be transferred from one dog to another within the kennel whenever any dog is removed from the kennel. The rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag shall remain attached to the dog for which it is issued at all times but this subsection does not apply to a show dog during competition, to a dog securely confined indoors or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. No dog bearing a kennel tag shall be permitted to stray or to be taken anywhere outside the limits of the kennel unless the dog is in leash or temporarily for the purposes of hunting, breeding, trial, training or competition. 
(c) ?Cat licenses. 
(1) ?It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to own, harbor or keep any cat more than five months of age without complying with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 59.79(12), relating to cat licensing. 
(2) ?The owner of any cat more than five months of age on January 1 of any year, or five months of age within the license year, shall annually, or on or before the date the cat becomes five months of age, pay a license tax and obtain a license. 
(3) ?The license tax shall be set by resolution of the common council. These amounts shall be reduced by one-half if the animal became five months of age after July 1 during the license year. The license year shall commence January 1 and end December 31. 
(4) ?Upon payment of the required license tax and upon presentation of evidence that the cat is currently immunized against rabies, as required by section 10-101, the administrator or their designee shall complete and issue to the owner a license for such cat containing all information required by state law. The administrator or their designee shall also deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the license, the name of the county in which issued and the license year. 
(5) ?The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar and the collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the cat for which the license is issued at all times. 
(6) ?The fact that a cat is without a tag attached to the cat by means of a collar shall be presumptive evidence that the cat is unlicensed. Any city police or humane officer shall seize, impound or restrain any cat for which a cat license is required which is found without such tag attached. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-3; Ord. No. 2006-09, §§ 1, 2, 11-27-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 174.053. 
Sec. 10-78. - Late fees. 
    The administrator shall assess and collect a late fee in an amount set from time to time by the council from every owner of a dog five months of age or over, if the owner failed to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year, or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog reached licensable age. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 174.05(5). 
Secs. 10-79—10-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RABIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Rabies control generally, Wis. Stats. § 95.21. 

Sec. 10-101. - Vaccination. 
(a) ?Required. The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian within 30 days after the dog or cat reaches four months of age and revaccinated within one year after the initial vaccination. If the owner obtains the dog or cat or brings the dog or cat into the city after the dog or cat has reached four months of age, the owner shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies within 30 days after the dog or cat is brought into the city unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies vaccination. The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat revaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian before the date that the immunization expires as stated on the certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within three years after the previous vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall meet the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 95.21(2). 
(b) ?Issuance of certificate. A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a certificate of rabies vaccination bearing a serial number and in the form approved by the department stating the owner's name and address; the name, sex, spayed or unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and color of the dog or cat; the date of the vaccination; the type of rabies vaccine administered and the manufacturer's serial number; the date that the immunization expires as specified for that type of vaccine by the center for disease control of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; and the city where the dog or cat is required to be licensed. 
(c) ?Copies of certificate. The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each certificate of rabies vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose until the date that the immunization expires or until the dog or cat is revaccinated, whichever occurs first. 
(d) ?Tag. After issuing the certificate of rabies vaccination, the veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the certificate, the year the vaccination was given and the name, address and telephone number of the veterinarian. 
(e) ?Tag to be attached. The owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or a substitute tag to a collar and a collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat at all times, but this subsection does not apply to a dog or cat during competition or training, to a dog while hunting, to a dog securely confined indoors or to a dog or cat securely confined in a fenced area. The substitute tag shall be of a durable material and contain the same information as the rabies vaccination tag. The requirements of this subsection do not apply to a dog or cat which is not required to be vaccinated under subsection (a) of this section. 
(f) ?Duplicate tag. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination tag with a new serial number to an owner in place of the original tag upon presentation of the certificate of rabies vaccination. The veterinarian shall then indicate the new tag number on the certificate and keep a record in the file. 
(g) ?Cost. The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost associated with the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and the delivery of a rabies vaccination tag. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-2; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 95.21(1), (2). 
Sec. 10-102. - Quarantine. 
(a) ?Dogs and cats confined. If a district is quarantined for rabies, all dogs and cats within the city shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or muzzled. Any dog or cat not confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is declared a public nuisance and may be impounded. All officers shall cooperate in the enforcement of the quarantine. The administrator shall promptly post, in at least three public places in the city, notices of quarantine. 
(b) ?Exemption of vaccinated dog or cat. A dog or cat which is immunized currently against rabies, as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence is exempt from the city quarantine provisions of subsection (a) of this section if a rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag is attached to the dog's or cat's collar. 
(c) ?Quarantine or sacrifice of an animal suspected of biting a person or being infected or exposed to rabies. 
(1) ?Quarantine or sacrifice of dog or cat. An officer shall order a dog or cat quarantined if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person, is infected with rabies or has been in contact with a rabid animal. If a quarantine cannot be imposed because the dog or cat cannot be captured, the officer may kill the animal. The officer may kill a dog or cat only as a last resort or if the owner agrees. The officer shall attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. 
(2) ?Sacrifice of other animals. An officer may order killed or may kill an animal other than a dog or cat if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person or is infected with rabies. 
(d) ?Quarantine of dog or cat. 
(1) ?Delivery to isolation facility or quarantine on premises of owner. An officer who orders a dog or cat to be quarantined shall deliver the animal or shall order the animal delivered to an isolation facility as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours after the original order is issued or the officer may order the animal to be quarantined on the premises of the owner if the animal is immunized currently against rabies as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence. 
(2) ?Health risk to humans. If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the animal bit a person, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal under strict isolation under the supervision of a veterinarian for at least ten days after the incident occurred. In this subsection (d)(2), the term "supervision of a veterinarian" includes, at a minimum, examination of the animal on the first day of isolation, on the last day of isolation and on one intervening day. If the observation period is not extended and if the veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat has not exhibited any signs of rabies, the animal may be released from quarantine at the end of the observation period. 
(3) ?Risk to animal health. 
a. ?If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid animal and if the dog or cat is not currently immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal leashed or confined for 180 days. The owner shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies between 155 and 165 days after the exposure to a rabid animal. 
b. ?If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid animal, but if the dog or cat is immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal leashed or confined for 60 days. The owner shall have the animal revaccinated against rabies as soon as possible after exposure to a rabid animal. 
(4) ?Sacrifice of a dog or cat exhibiting symptoms of rabies. If a veterinarian determines that a dog or cat exhibits symptoms of rabies during the original or extended observation period, the veterinarian shall notify the owner and the officer who ordered the animal quarantined, and the officer or veterinarian shall kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head. If the dog or cat is suspected to have bitten a person, the veterinarian shall notify the person or the person's physician. 
(e) ?Delivery of carcass; preparation; examination by laboratory of hygiene. An officer who kills an animal shall deliver the carcass to a veterinarian or local health department. The veterinarian or local health department shall prepare the carcass, properly prepare and package the head of the animal in a manner to minimize deterioration, arrange for delivery by the most expeditious means feasible of the head of the animal to the state laboratory of hygiene and dispose of or arrange for the disposal of the remainder of the carcass in a manner which minimizes the risk or exposure to any rabies virus. The state laboratory of hygiene shall examine the specimen and determine if the animal was infected with rabies. The state laboratory of hygiene shall notify the department, the veterinarian or local health department which prepared the carcass and, if the animal is suspected to have bitten a person, that person or that person's physician. 
(f) ?Cooperation of veterinarian. Any practicing veterinarian who is requested to be involved in the rabies control program by an officer is encouraged to cooperate in a professional capacity with the department, the state laboratory of hygiene, the local health department, the officer involved and, if the animal is suspected to have bitten a person, the person's physician. 
(g) ?Responsibility for quarantine and laboratory expenses. The owner of an animal is responsible for any expenses incurred in connection with keeping the animal in an isolation facility, supervision and examination of the animal by a veterinarian, preparation of the carcass for laboratory examination and the fee for the laboratory examination. If the owner is unknown, the county is responsible for these expenses. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 95.21(3)—(6). 
Secs. 10-103—10-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Impoundment generally, Wis. Stats. § 174.046. 

Sec. 10-136. - Animal control agency established; authority. 
(a) ?The city may contract with or enter into an agreement with such persons, organization or corporation to provide for the operation of an animal shelter, impoundment of stray animals, confinement of certain animals, disposition of impounded animals, and for assisting in the administration of rabies vaccination programs. 
(b) ?The city delegates to any such animal control agency the authority to act pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-7(a)) 
Sec. 10-137. - Procedures. 
    In addition to any penalty provided for a violation of this chapter, any police or humane officer may impound any dog, cat or other animal which habitually pursues any vehicle upon any street, alley or highway of this city; assaults or attacks any person; is at large within the city, habitually barks, cries or howls, kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal; or is infected with rabies. In order for an animal to be impounded, the impounding officer must see or hear the violation of this article or have in his possession a signed statement of a complaining witness made under oath alleging the facts regarding the violation and containing an agreement to reimburse the city for any damages it sustains for improper or illegal seizure. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-7(b)) 
Sec. 10-138. - Claiming animal; disposal of unclaimed animals. 
(a) ?Impoundment of animals. After seizure of animals under this article by a law enforcement or humane officer, the animal shall be impounded. The officer shall notify the owner personally or through the U.S. mail, if such owner be known to the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort, but if such owner be unknown or unascertainable, the officer shall post written notice in three public places in the city, giving a description of the animal, stating where it is impounded and the conditions for its release, after the officer has taken such animal into his possession. If within seven days after such notice, the owner does not claim such animal, the officer may dispose of the animal in a proper and humane manner; provided, however, that if an animal, before being impounded, has bitten a person, the animal shall be retained in the animal shelter for 14 days for observation purposes. Within such times the owner may reclaim the animal upon payment of a fee set by the council from time to time, plus an additional daily maintenance fee for each day it remained in the animal shelter. No animal shall be released from the pound without being properly licensed if so required by state law. 
(b) ?Sale of impounded animals. If the owner does not reclaim the animal within seven days, the animal warden may sell the animal to any willing buyer. 
(c) ?City not liable for impounding animals. The city and/or its animal control agency shall not be liable for the death of any animal which has been impounded or disposed of pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1-7(c)) 
Sec. 10-139. - Payment of costs. 
    The owner of any animal impounded, confined, or destroyed pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be responsible for all costs of such confinement, impoundment, or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-03, § 3, 6-9-2008) 
Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcohol beverages, ch. 6; emergency services, ch. 30; B-1 neighborhood shopping district, § 42-291 et seq.; B-2 community service district, § 42-419 et seq.; B-3 general commercial district, § 42-441 et seq.; B-4 central business district, § 42-466 et seq.; M-1 limited industrial district, § 42-491 et seq.; M-2 general industrial district, § 42-521 et seq.; I-B interchange business district, § 42-553 et seq.; I-M interchange industrial district, § 42-554; IP-B industrial park business, § 42-636 et seq.; IP-M industrial park manufacturing, § 42-656 et seq.; performance standards for industrial development, § 42-736 et seq.; bed and breakfast establishments, § 42-822; sign regulations for business districts, § 42-982; sign regulations for industrial districts, § 42-983; sign regulations for interchange districts, § 42-984; retail theft, § 54-78; nudity and nude entertainment, § 54-116 et seq.; taxation, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Escorts and escort services, § 14-461 et seq.; massage and sauna establishments, § 14-566 et seq.; nudity and nude entertainment, § 54-116 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment which has a facility or facilities including, but not limited to, booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, for the presentation of adult entertainment, including adult oriented films, movies or live performances for observation by patrons therein, or which, as part of its regular and substantial course of conduct, offers for sale, rent, trade, lease, inspection or viewing books, films, video cassettes, magazines or other periodicals, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as defined in this section. 
    Adult cabaret means a cabaret which features male or female dancers, impersonators or similar entertainers. 
    Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities, or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, appearing unclothed, or the removal of articles of clothing to reveal specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult-oriented establishment means, but is not limited to, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult minimotion picture establishments or adult cabarets, and further means any premises to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, whether or not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for profit, direct or indirect. An adult-oriented establishment further includes, without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import. An adult-oriented establishment further includes, without being limited to, any tavern, establishment, bar or premises licensed to sell alcohol or fermented malt beverages, that exhibits, displays, advertises or provides adult entertainment as a part of its business to patrons of the business and including an adult cabaret. 
    Booth, room or cubicle means such enclosures as are specifically offered to the public or members of an adult-oriented establishment for hire or for a fee as part of a business operated on the premises which offers as part of its business the entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure; which shall include, without limitation, such enclosures wherein the entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but a fee is not charged for mere access to the enclosure. However, the terms "booth," "room" or "cubicle" does not mean such enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any persons other than employes; nor shall this definition apply to hotels, motels or other similar establishments licensed by the state pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 50.01 et seq. 
    Church means a building, whether situated within the city or not, in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
    Customer means any person who: 
(1) ?Is allowed to enter an adult-oriented business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2) ?Enters an adult oriented business and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3) ?Is a member of and on the premises of an adult-oriented business operating as a private club. 
    Day care center means a facility licensed by the state, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 48.65, whether situated within the city or not. 
    Employe means any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult-oriented establishment. 
    Entertainer means any person who provides entertainment within an adult-oriented establishment, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an employe or independent contractor. 
    Operator means any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment. 
    Residential means pertaining to the use of land, whether situated within the city or not, for premises such as homes, townhouses, duplexes, condominiums, apartments and manufactured homes, which contain habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein. A premises which is designed primarily for living, sleeping, working and eating therein shall be deemed to be residential in character unless it is actually occupied and used exclusively for other purposes. Hotels, motels, boardinghouses, nursing homes and hospitals shall not be considered to be residential. 
    School means a building, whether situated within the city or not, where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, together with the playgrounds, stadia and other structures or grounds used in connection therewith. The term is limited to: 
(1) ?Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education in which any regular kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught; and 
(2) ?Special educational facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes in kindergarten or any of grades one through 12. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1) ?Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals and pubic region; and 
(2) ?Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means simulated or actual: 
(1) ?Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2) ?Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus; and 
(3) ?Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
    Substantial, as used in various definitions shall mean 50 percent or more of a business, stock in trade, display space, floor space or retail sales in any one month during the license year. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-32. - Penalties and prosecution. 
(a) ?Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this article shall forfeit a definite sum of not more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, by imprisonment until payment of the forfeiture and costs, but not in excess of the number of days set forth in Wis. Stats. § 800.095(4). In addition to the monetary penalty imposed, violation of this section may further result in the suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of any license or permit issued under this article. 
(b) ?Each violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing more than one day shall be considered a separate offense. 
Secs. 14-33—14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 14-51. - Display. 
(a) ?The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult-oriented establishment. 
(b) ?The permit shall be carried by an employe upon his person and shall be displayed upon request of any member of the police department or any person designated by the common council. 
Sec. 14-52. - Renewal. 
(a) ?Every license issued pursuant to this article shall terminate on June 30 unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following license year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the administrator. The application for renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires. The application for renewal shall be filed with and dated by the administrator. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the administrator to the city police department, building inspector and to the operator. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the administrator and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license. The application shall be considered pursuant to the procedures contained in this article. It is not guaranteed that operators filing late applications will receive a decision on their application prior to expiration of the license year. 
(b) ?A license renewal fee set from time to time by the council shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty set from time to time by the council shall be assessed against any applicant who filed for a renewal less than 60 days before the license expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the total license renewal fees collected shall be returned. 
(c) ?If the police department is aware of any information bearing on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the administrator. 
(d) ?Every permit issued pursuant to this section shall terminate on June 30 unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before an employe is allowed to continue employment in an adult-oriented establishment. Any employe desiring to renew a permit shall make application to the administrator. The application for renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the permit expires. The application for renewal shall be filed with and dated by the administrator. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly by the administrator to the police department and to the employe. The application shall be upon a form provided by the administrator and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for a new permit. The application shall otherwise be considered pursuant to the provisions of this article. It is not guaranteed that employes filing late applications will receive a decision on their application prior to expiration of the permit year. 
(e) ?A permit renewal fee set from time to time by the council shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty set from time to time by the council shall be assessed against any applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days before the permit expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the total permit renewal fees collected shall be returned. 
(f) ?If the police department is aware of any information bearing on the employe's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the administrator. 
Sec. 14-53. - Transfer. 
(a) ?A license is personal to the owner and operator designated in the application, provided it may be transferred pursuant to this section. A transfer application must be filed by the tenth day next following any change of the owner or operator designated on the application. If a transfer application is not timely filed, then the license shall be invalid for any purpose relating to the operation of the adult-oriented business, and any transfer shall require the filing of an original application and be subject to the regulations applicable thereto. 
(b) ?The administrator shall prescribe a form on which license transfer applications shall be made. The form shall include a statement under oath that the original application remains correct as previously submitted in all respects except those that are amended by the transfer application. The transfer application shall contain a statement under oath that the individual signing the transfer application has personal knowledge of the information contained therein and that the information is true and correct and shall not be complete unless accompanied by a nonrefundable transfer fee set from time to time by the council. Transfer applications shall be filed in the same place and at the same time as original applications and the fee shall be payable in the same manner as for original applications. 
(c) ?Transfer applications shall be reviewed, issued and be subject to appeal in the same manner as original applications and they shall be issued for the remaining term of the license to be transferred. 
(d) ?Any transfer of an adult-oriented establishment, other than as provided in this section, from the licensed premises to any other premises shall cause such license to lapse and become void. A license which has lapsed and become void shall be subject to revocation under the provisions of this article. 
(e) ?Permits shall not be transferable. 
Sec. 14-54. - Discontinuation of operation. 
    Any discontinuation in the operation of the adult-oriented business for a period of 12 months shall also cause the license to lapse and become void. A license holder whose license has lapsed and become void shall thereafter be subject to applicable provisions to this article. 
Sec. 14-55. - Revocation, suspension and nonrenewal. 
(a) ?A license or permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1) ?Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material facts were omitted from any application. 
(2) ?The operator, entertainer or any employe of the operator, violates any provision of this article or any rule or regulation adopted by the common council pursuant to this article; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employe or customer, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the common council shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge. 
(3) ?The operator or employe becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit. 
(4) ?An operator employs an employe who does not have a permit or provides space on the premises, whether by lease or otherwise, to an independent contractor who performs or works as an entertainer without a permit. 
(5) ?Any cost or fee required to be paid by this section is not paid. 
(6) ?Any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage, narcotic or controlled substance is served or consumed on the premises of the adult-oriented establishment. 
(7) ?Any operator, employe or entertainer sells, furnishes, gives or displays, or causes to be sold, furnished, given or displayed to any minor, any adult-oriented entertainment or adult-oriented material. 
(b) ?The common council, upon receipt of information that provides a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article has occurred, shall serve written notice of such violations on the operator or employe. Such written notice shall include specific charges and shall provide the operator or employe with notice that revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of the license or permit will occur unless a written request for a review of the common council's decision is made to the common council within 30 days after service of such notice to the operator or employe. Unless otherwise extended by an agreement with the aggrieved party, within 15 days of receipt of a request for review, the common council shall conduct a hearing pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 68.11, at which time the operator or employe may present evidence bearing upon the question. The appellant shall be provided with written notice of such hearing by mail or personal service at least ten days before such hearing. A final determination shall be made by the common council pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 68.12. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to abridge the authority or responsibilities of the police department to enforce this section or to issue any citations or complaints for violations of this, or any other, ordinance, county, state or federal law. 
(c) ?The transfer of a license or permit or any interest in a license or permit without approval of the common council as set forth in section 14-53 shall automatically and immediately revoke the license or permit. 
(d) ?Any operator or employe whose license or permit is revoked and who seeks to obtain a license or permit under this section must apply for a license or permit according to the application provisions set forth in this article and must meet the standards for the issuance of a license or permit as set forth in this article. No location or premises for which a license has been revoked shall be used as an adult-oriented establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the license. No employe whose permit has been revoked shall be eligible for a permit for six months from the date of revocation. 
Secs. 14-56—14-75. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 14-76. - Required. 
(a) ?Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, from and after the effective date of this article, no adult-oriented establishment shall be operated or maintained in the city without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the city. 
(b) ?A license may be issued for only one adult-oriented establishment located at a fixed and certain place per application filed. Any person, partnership or corporation which desires to operate more than one adult-oriented establishment must have a license for each. 
(c) ?No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person, partnership or corporation except as set forth in section 14-53. 
(d) ?It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, employe or operator to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service directly related to, the operation of any adult-oriented establishment which does not have a valid license pursuant to this article. 
(e) ?Nothing in this article shall be construed as to permit material or performances prohibited by Wis. Stats. § 944.21. 
Sec. 14-77. - Application. 
(a) ?Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license shall make application to the administrator. The application shall be filed with and dated by the administrator. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly by the administrator to the police department, building inspector and to the applicant. 
(b) ?The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the administrator. An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information under oath: 
(1) ?The names (including all aliases), addresses and dates of birth of the applicant and any partner or limited partner in a partnership applicant; and any shareholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of a corporate applicant and each corporate officer and director. 
(2) ?Written proof that any person required to be named under subsection (b)(1) of this section is at least 18 years of age. 
(3) ?The exact nature of the adult use to be conducted and the proposed address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated. 
(4) ?Whether any person required to be named under subsection (b)(1) of this section is currently operating, or has previously operated, a business in this or any other county, city or state under an adult-oriented establishment license or similar business license or permit; whether the applicant has ever had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name under which the applicant operated a business that was subject to the suspension or revocation. 
(5) ?If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation and the name and address of the registered agent. 
(6) ?Proof of ownership or proof of a lease or other legally enforceable right to possess and use the premises where the adult-oriented business is to be located. 
(c) ?Within 60 days of receiving an application for a license, the common council shall grant or deny the license or hold the application for an additional 30 days for further investigation. The administrator shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted, denied or held for further investigation. Such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation, the common council shall grant or deny the permit and the administrator shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application is granted or denied. 
(d) ?Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the administrator shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action, and that the applicant has the right to request that the common council review said determination pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 68.11. 
(e) ?Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application, or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this section shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof. 
Sec. 14-78. - Standards for issuance. 
(a) ?To receive a license to operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant must meet the following standards: 
(1) ?If the applicant is an individual: 
a. ?The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age. 
b. ?The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this article within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c. ?Subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, the applicant shall not have been convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other offense of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application, unless the person has been duly pardoned. 
(2) ?If the applicant is a corporation: 
a. ?All officers, directors, shareholders and agents required to be named under subsection (3)(b) shall be at least 18 years of age. 
b. ?No officer, director or shareholder required to be named under subsection (3)(b) shall have been found to have previously violated this article within five years immediately preceding the date of this application. 
c. ?Subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, no officer, director, shareholder or agent required to be named under subsection (3)(b) shall have been convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other offense of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application unless the person has been duly pardoned. 
(3) ?If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest: 
a. ?All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of age. 
b. ?No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have violated any provision of this section within five years immediately preceding the date of this application. 
c. ?Subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, no person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other offense of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application, unless the person has been duly pardoned. 
(b) ?Prior to granting the license, the council shall determine whether the applicant complies with Wis. Stats. § 9.28(13), or is exempt or excluded under Wis. Stats. § 9.28(18), and has substantially complied with all building, zoning, plumbing, electrical, fire and health codes. 
Secs. 14-79—14-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Permit 

Sec. 14-101. - Required. 
    In addition to the license requirements previously set forth for owners and operators of adult-oriented establishments, no person shall be an employe or entertainer in an adult-oriented establishment without first obtaining a valid permit issued by the administrator under authority of the common council. 
Sec. 14-102. - Application. 
(a) ?Any person desiring to secure a permit shall make application to the administrator. The application shall be filed with and dated by the administrator. A copy of the application shall be distributed to the city police department and to the applicant. 
(b) ?The application for a permit shall be upon a form provided by the administrator. An application shall furnish the following information under oath: 
(1) ?Name (including all aliases), age and address. 
(2) ?Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(3) ?Whether the applicant, while previously operating or working for a business in this or any other municipality or state under an adult-oriented establishment license or similar business license or permit, has ever had such a license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name for whom applicant was employed or associated at the time of such suspension or revocation. 
(c) ?Within 60 days of receiving an application for a permit, the common council shall grant or deny the permit or hold the application for an additional 30 days for further investigation. The administrator shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted, denied or held for further investigation. Such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation, the common council shall grant or deny the permit and the administrator shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application is granted or denied. 
(d) ?Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the administrator shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action, and that the applicant has the right to request that the common council review such determination, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 68.11. 
(e) ?Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application, or his refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding such application or his refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this section shall constitute an admission by the applicant treat he is ineligible for such permit and shall be grounds for denial thereof. 
Sec. 14-103. - Standards for issuance. 
    To receive a permit as an employe for an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant must meet the following standards: 
(1) ?The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age. 
(2) ?The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this section within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(3) ?Subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, the applicant shall not have been convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other offense of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application unless the applicant has been duly pardoned. 
Sec. 14-104. - Fees. 
(a) ?A license fee set by the council from time to time shall be submitted with the application for a license. If the application is denied, one-half of the fee shall be returned. 
(b) ?A permit fee set by the council from time to time shall be submitted with the application for a permit. If the application is denied, one-half of the fee shall be returned. 
Secs. 14-105—14-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-126. - Location. 
(a) ?An adult-oriented establishment and adult cabaret may be located in the M-1 district as defined in article II of chapter 42 of this Code. 
(b) ?No adult-oriented establishment or adult cabaret shall be located: 
(1) ?Within a residential district as defined in article II of chapter 42 of this Code. 
(2) ?Within 500 feet of an existing adult-oriented establishment. 
(3) ?Within 500 feet of any residential area. 
(4) ?Within 500 feet of any preexisting school, church or day care center. 
(5) ?Within 500 feet of any preexisting establishment licensed to sell or dispense fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor. 
(c) ?For purposes of this section, distances are to be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property line of the adult-oriented establishment, to the nearest property line of another adult-oriented establishment, school, place of worship or residential district or establishment selling or dispensing fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor. 
Sec. 14-127. - Hours of operation. 
(a) ?No adult-oriented establishment shall be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, or between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(b) ?All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by the police department, the building inspector and the county health department. 
Sec. 14-128. - Physical layout. 
    Any adult-oriented establishment having available for customers, patrons or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1) ?Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented establishment and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices. 
(2) ?Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a. ?Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b. ?Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying the same. 
c. ?All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d. ?The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured easily cleanable. 
e. ?The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3) ?Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth. 
Sec. 14-129. - Responsibility of the operator. 
(a) ?The operator shall maintain a register of all employes, showing the name and aliases used by the employe, home address, age, birth date, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, telephone numbers, date of employment and termination, and duties of each employe and such other information as may be required by the common council. The information on each employe shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of one year following termination of the employe and shall be made immediately available for inspection upon demand of a member of the police department at all reasonable times. 
(b) ?Every act or omission by an employe constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employe's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(c) ?Any act or omission of any employe constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's permit shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(d) ?There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the common areas of each adult-oriented establishment a list of any and all entertainment provided on the premises. Such list shall further indicate the specific fee or charge in dollar amounts for each entertainment listed. Viewing adult-oriented motion pictures shall be considered as entertainment. The operator shall make the list available immediately upon demand of the police department at all reasonable times. 
(e) ?No employe of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult-oriented establishment or to allow any minor to view adult entertainment. 
(f) ?The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(g) ?The operator shall maintain at least ten footcandles of light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles; provided, however, that at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of illumination in such aisles, as measured from the floor. 
(h) ?The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this article. 
(i) ?View from street. No adult-oriented establishment shall be situated in such manner as to allow public view of either its stock in trade or adult entertainment from outside of the establishment. 
Sec. 14-130. - Administrative procedure and review. 
    Wis. Stats. ch. 68 shall govern the administrative procedure and review concerning the granting, denial, renewal or nonrenewal of a license or permit. A request for an initial determination made by an aggrieved person pursuant to the provisions contained in Wis. Stats. § 68.08, and shall be made to the administrator. An administrative appeal pursuant to the provisions contained in Wis. Stats. § 68.10, may be made by an aggrieved person to the common council and a hearing shall be held by the common council pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 68.11. Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek judicial review pursuant to the provisions contained in Wis. Stats. § 68.13. 
Sec. 14-131. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a) ?All private schools and public schools, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 115, located within the city are exempt from obtaining a permit under this article when instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum. 
(b) ?Licensed medical care facilities and the county health department are exempt from obtaining a permit, when engaged in the providing of medical care or sex education. 
(c) ?Any establishment holding a class "B" fermented malt beverage license or class "B" intoxicating liquor license, is ineligible to obtain a permit to conduct an adult-oriented establishment but may obtain an entertainment license pursuant to provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 14-132. - Enforcement. 
    The police department shall have the authority to enter any adult-oriented establishment at all reasonable times to inspect the premises and enforce this article. 
Secs. 14-133—14-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 46. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-161. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar, fire and holdup alarm systems, alarm business and alarm users. Both society in general and public safety in particular will be aided by providing a useful and usable system of private security which properly balances quick response by law enforcement with minimization of law enforcement time spent on alarms which are false or otherwise not the intended function of private security systems. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-2) 
Sec. 14-162. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm business means any business in which the owners or employes engage in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling or servicing alarm systems. 
    Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices or single device such as a solid-state unit which plugs directly into 110-volt AC line or otherwise receives electrical energy arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the police department is expected to respond. In this article, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic holdup alarm system," "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarm systems," and "manual holdup alarm systems" as those terms are defined in this section, and fire alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity or any other condition directly related to the detection of fire. Excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this article are alarm systems used to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located, of an attempted, unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt, or fire. 
    Annunciator means the instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line through which both visual and audible signals show when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated, or which, in the event of malfunction, may also indicate line trouble. 
    Answering service means a telephone answering service providing among its services the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained employes, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the dispatch center of the police department or the county sheriff's department. 
    Automatic dialing device means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
    Automatic holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber. 
    Burglar alarm system means an alarm system which signals an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
    Central station means an office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits. 
    Direct connect means an alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to the police department or the county sheriff's department dispatch center. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or of his employes or agents or other undetermined cause. False alarm does not include alarms caused by tornadoes, or other violent climatic conditions. 
    Interconnect means to connect an alarm system to a voice grade telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
    Manual holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an observer thereof. 
    Primary trunk line means a telephone line leading directly into the dispatch center of the police department or county sheriff's department that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis and which is identified as such by a specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone directory, or numbers in sequence therewith. 
    Subscriber means a person who buys or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm system. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-163. - False alarms. 
(a) ?Administrative charges. Any person, business, corporation or other entity, having a permissible alarm system with alarm devices at one or more locations in accordance with this article shall pay to the city a charge for false alarms responded to by the police or fire department according to a schedule set from time to time by the council for each calendar year for each location connected, separate accounts to be kept for false alarms as to criminal activity and false alarms for fire or other emergencies. This subsection is intended to impose strict liability on the person, business, corporation or other entity responsible for alarm connection to either the police alarm panel or to alarm receiving firms to which the police or fire department have responded and shall be applied regardless of the cause of the false alarm excepting those alarms excluded from the definition of "false alarm." Failure to pay such administrative charges in and of itself shall constitute a violation of this section, and such charges shall be collectible as a forfeiture upon prosecution and conviction thereof together with any additional forfeitures which may be imposed under the next subsection (b) of this section for violation of this section for allowing or maintaining conditions or acts violative of the intent of this section of eliminating and minimizing the occurrence of false alarms, together with costs of prosecution. 
(b) ?Other violations. Any person, corporation or other entity violating this article in any manner, other than for the collection of unpaid administrative charges treated in subsection (a) of this section, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00, together with costs of prosecution. 
(c) ?Default of payment for forfeiture and/or costs. On default of payment of forfeiture and/or costs under the immediately preceding subsections (a) and/or (b) of this section, such person or responsible officer of the violating corporation or other entity shall be confined in the county jail until the same is paid but not to exceed a length of time specified by the court which length of time shall not exceed six months. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-9(c)—(e)) 
Sec. 14-164. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a) ?Any person who shall violate any section of this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-13. 
(b) ?When any premises located in the city is owned, leased or occupied by two or more persons as joint tenants, tenants in common, joint lessees, or in any other manner, each person shall see that the provisions of this article are complied with, and each person may be subjected to a penalty on violation of this section. 
(c) ?In addition to a forfeiture, any person using a private alarm system whose false alarm requires a response to the premises by police department or city personnel shall be subject to payment of false alarm fees as provided in section 14-170. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-14) 
Sec. 14-165. - Administrative rules. 
    The chief of police shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this article. Such rules shall require the approval of the common council and shall be open to inspection by the public. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-4) 
Sec. 14-166. - Automatic dialing devices. 
    No person shall interconnect any automatic dialing device to a police department primary trunk line. No person shall permit such devices, which were installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, to remain interconnected from any property owned or controlled by that person. Such devices may be connected to a central station or an answering service. Relaying messages so received to the police department or the county sheriff's department shall only be done person to person on the telephone line. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-5) 
Sec. 14-167. - Direct connections to the police department. 
    Direct connections to the police department are prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-6) 
Sec. 14-168. - Testing. 
(a) ?No alarm business or alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages to the police department shall be tested or demonstrated without prior notification of the police department dispatcher or the county sheriff's department dispatcher. Alarm business or alarm system owners or lessors will be advised on proper test procedure. 
(b) ?No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the police department or the county sheriff's department will be tested to determine the police department's or county sheriff's department's response without first notifying the appropriate authority. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-7) 
Sec. 14-169. - Notification. 
    When the service provided by an alarm business to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason by the alarm business, or the alarm business becomes aware of such disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscribers by telephone that protection is no longer being provided. If, however, the alarm business has written instructions from its subscriber not to make such notification by telephone during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with such instructions. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-8) 
Sec. 14-170. - Fee for answering alarms. 
(a) ?Generally. Each false alarm requires response of public safety personnel, involves unnecessary expense to the city, increases the risk of injury to persons or damage to property and dilutes the overall public safety protection to the city. Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance and must be abated. 
(b) ?Intentional. No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a burglar/fire alarm device knowing that no criminal activity, fire or other emergency exists. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-9) 
Sec. 14-171. - Termination of direct connection. 
    The chief of police is authorized to require that the owner or lessee of any alarm system directly connected to the department or primary trunk lines shall disconnect such device within 30 days after passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-10) 
Sec. 14-172. - City liability. 
    The city shall be under no duty or obligation to a subscriber or to any other person concerning any provision of this article including, but not limited to, any defects in an alarm system or any delays in transmission or response to any alarm; however, this in no way shall be construed that it is not the proper function of law enforcement to respond to alarms. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-11) 
Secs. 14-173—14-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 14-196. - Required. 
    A permit is required for each private alarm system on premises within the city. There shall be a permit fee as set by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-12(a)) 
Sec. 14-197. - Interior alarms. 
    A permit under this article is not required for an alarm system which gives a signal, visual or audible or both, solely within the interior of the building in which it is located. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-12(b)) 
Sec. 14-198. - Issuing authority. 
    The issuing authority for permits shall be the chief of police. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-12(c)) 
Sec. 14-199. - Application. 
    Applications for permits required under this article shall be filed with the chief of police. The chief of police shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. The chief of police shall deny a permit if the alarm system for which it is sought does not comply with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-12(d)) 
Sec. 14-200. - Appeal. 
    Any person required by this article to have a permit who has been denied such a permit by the chief of police shall have a right to appeal that decision to the common council. The procedure for this appeal shall be as set forth in section 14-201. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-12(e)) 
Sec. 14-201. - Revocation. 
(a) ?Hearing. Before a permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked, a hearing shall be held before the chief of police. Notice setting forth the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be sent by mail or delivered to the permittee at the address shown on the permit application not less than seven days prior to the hearing. 
(b) ?Grounds. The chief of police may revoke a permit on the following grounds: 
(1) ?The application for a permit contains a false statement of a material fact. 
(2) ?A licensee has repeatedly failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(3) ?An alarm system repeatedly actuates false alarms. 
(c) ?Appeals. Any permittee may appeal the decision of the chief of police by filing a written notice of appeal with the administrator within ten days after the decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the common council within 30 days after filing the appeal. The common council may affirm, amend or reverse the decision or take other action deemed appropriate. An appeal timely taken suspends the revocation until the council gives its decision. The administrator shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant by certified mail or personal delivery not less than seven days before the hearing. In conducting the hearing, the common council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Code 1986, § 3-6-13) 
Secs. 14-202—14-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Nudity and nude entertainment, § 54-116 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-231. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement enterprise means a place where amusement, entertainment or recreational activities are furnished for profit except for premises licensed as bowling alleys, pool halls, dancehalls, roller skating rinks, or retail class "B" establishments. Any amusement enterprise claiming to be nonprofit shall have the affirmative duty of establishing such status to the city attorney upon demand by the city attorney for proof of such status, and there shall be no operation of an amusement establishment during the period that such nonprofit status is being verified by the city attorney. Nonprofit shall mean recognized as tax exempt by local, state and federal governments. Each day of operation of an amusement enterprise contrary to the terms of this article shall be deemed a separate violation thereof. 
    Amusement, entertainment or recreational activities means pool tables, games of chance or skill, rides, pinball machine and mechanical games and amusements, where there are three, or a combination of three thereof, on the premises. 
(Code 1986, § 7-5-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-232. - Amusement enterprise premises regulations. 
    The premises to be used for an amusement enterprise shall: 
(1) ?Be located solely and entirely on the street level and have open windows clearly within view of the street. 
(2) ?Have two easily available, marked and useful exits to the outside. 
(3) ?During hours of operation, no entrances or exits shall be locked. 
(4) ?Have separate, clean, adequate and immediately accessible washrooms and toilets for each sex on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1986, § 7-5-2) 
Sec. 14-233. - Regulation of amusement enterprises. 
(a) ?No licensee, agent, supervisor or employe licensee shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to remain on the premises between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday, unless such minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. No licensee, agent, supervisor or employe of licensee shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to be present on the premises between the hour of 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on school days, which is any day on which classes are scheduled to be held by Mosinee School District. 
(b) ?While open for business, all amusement enterprises shall be under the direct supervision of either the licensee, agent for corporate licensee or licensed supervisor. 
(c) ?The holding of this license does not negate the requirement to hold other licenses which may be applicable. 
(d) ?No gambling shall be permitted on the premises. 
(e) ?No alcoholic or fermented malt beverage shall be allowed on or permitted to be brought into the premises. 
(f) ?No person who is obviously under any degree of intoxication shall be allowed on the premises. 
(g) ?No person shall be permitted to conduct himself in a disorderly manner on the premises and the licensee shall obey any reasonable written order of the police department to prevent such disorderly conduct. 
(h) ?There shall be no pictures, movies, exhibits or reading material on the premises which are obscene, lewd, lascivious or indecent. 
(i) ?Frequenters of the premises shall not be permitted to congregate within ten feet of the entrances and exits of such building, either within or without the building, or congregate on the public walks and thoroughfares adjacent to such premises. 
(j) ?There shall be no use of drugs or marijuana on the premises and anyone under the influence thereof shall be ejected forthwith. 
(k) ?The violation of the license holder of city, county, state or federal laws, rules and regulations or the knowledgeable permitting of others to violate such laws, rules or regulations shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 7-5-4) 
Secs. 14-234—14-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 14-256. - Enterprise license. 
(a) ?Required. No person, party, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain an amusement enterprise without first obtaining from the common council a license so to do. If the applicant is a firm, corporation or other than a person, it shall in its application appoint an agent to be approved by the council and who shall have all the qualifications of a person seeking a license. The fee for such license shall be as set from time to time by the council. Each license shall expire on June 30 following its issuance. Licensees must be 18 years of age or older and of good character. 
(b) ?Application. Application for such a license shall be in writing accompanied by the fee and be delivered to the administrator. Such application shall designate and locate the premises to be used, in such a manner so that all areas and rooms to encompass the licensed premises are clearly defined. 
(c) ?Inspection and recommendation. Upon receipt of any application the administrator shall send copies thereof to the inspection department, department of health and police department. The inspection department and department of health, either jointly or severally, within ten days of receiving such copies, make a report in writing as to whether the premises meet the requirements in section 14-232 with any other pertinent information. The police department shall, within ten days, report in writing as to whether the applicant or agent meets the qualifications for a license and list any convictions for violation of any law or ordinance, which bear a relationship to the responsibilities of licensees. Such reports shall be delivered to the administrator who in turn shall deliver them and the application to the committee on finance. Such committee shall recommend to the council either the granting or denial of the application. 
(Code 1986, § 7-5-3(a)) 
Sec. 14-257. - Supervisor license. 
(a) ?Required. No person, other than the licensee (or agent of a corporate licensee), shall assume or be permitted to assume the charge or any supervision of an amusement enterprise without a license from the council so to do. The fee for such a license shall be as set by the council from time to time and shall expire on June 30 following its issuance. No person shall be so licensed unless he is at least 18 years of age and be of good character. A licensed supervisor shall not be required on the premises when less than 50 percent of the net revenue of an amusement enterprise is derived from activities defined in section 14-231. 
(b) ?Application. Application for a supervisor license shall be in writing, accompanied by the fee and be delivered to the administrator. Such application shall list any conviction for the violation of any law or ordinance. 
(c) ?Inspection and recommendation. Upon receipt of any such application the administrator shall deliver a copy thereof to the police department who shall deliver within ten days to the administrator its report thereon together with a list of convictions, if any, which bear a relationship to the responsibilities of licensees, and other information helpful to the council. The administrator shall transmit such report and application to the committee on finance who shall recommend either the granting or denial of the application. 
(Code 1986, § 7-5-3(b)) 
Sec. 14-258. - Revocation and suspension. 
    For just cause and after public hearing, the common council may suspend or revoke any license mentioned in this article. The administrator shall by registered mail give notice to the licensee of the time and place of such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a statement of the complaint made against such licensee. 
(Code 1986, § 7-5-3(c)) 
Secs. 14-259—14-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BLASTING AND ROCK CRUSHING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-291. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Blasting means a method of loosening, moving or shattering masses of solid matter by use of explosive compounds to prepare stone for crushing, or to prepare stone for building and/or ornamental use. 
    Person means any individual, partner, corporation, LLL, LLP, company, trustee or association, together with the respective servants, agents and employes thereof. 
    Rock crusher means any device, machine, apparatus or equipment used either individually or in conjunction with any other device, machine, apparatus or equipment for the purpose of crushing, grinding, breaking or pulverizing rock or stone. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-292. - Penalty for violation of article; enforcement. 
(a) ?Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-13. However, upon conviction for the violation of any of the provisions of this article by the holder of a permit issued under this article, and in addition to the forfeiture provided, such permit shall thereupon be cancelled, revoked, rescinded and terminated. 
(b) ?Before renewal of any license issued under this article is refused or any license is revoked, cancelled, rescinded or terminated, the licensee shall be given written notice of any charges or violations against him or the reasons proposed for nonrenewal or revocation and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(g), (h)) 
Sec. 14-293. - Operation. 
    No person within the city shall operate a rock crusher or do blasting to prepare stone for crushing or building and/or ornamental use, in such a manner so that any dust, dirt or vibration from such operation shall, in any way, damage or injure any person or property within the city. All blasting within the city shall be performed according to the requirements of Wis. Adm. Code, Ch. Ind. 5, Explosives and Blasting Agents, and all subsequent amendments thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(b)) 
Sec. 14-294. - Blasting procedures and controls. 
(a) ?Energy ratio. The allowable vibration of any blast at the nearest occupied or used building off the subject premises, shall not exceed an energy ratio of 0.5 or resultant particle velocity of 1.35 inches per second based on the following formula: 
Energy ratio = 0.5 = 10.823 f 2 A 2 where: f = frequency in cycles per second, A = amplitude or displacement in inches. 
Energy ratio = .274 V 2 (V = resultant particle velocity expressed in inches per second) 
(b) ?Measurement of blasts. The operator of the quarry operation, when requested to do so by the city engineer, shall measure and submit data to substantiate compliance with the above formula and the operator of the quarry operation, when requested to do so by the city engineer, shall measure air blast. This verification shall be performed by a seismological engineering firm acceptable to the city or by the city engineer. Instrumentation shall be by seismograph similar to VME Seismolog Model "B" and approved seismograph sound measuring equipment or approved equivalents. All expenses for these tests shall be paid by the quarry operator. 
(c) ?Blasting log. A log in duplicate shall be kept of each blast on forms similar to the one on file with the administrator. The original copy of this blasting log shall be filed with the administrator within 48 hours after the blast, and a copy shall be kept on file at the quarry office. 
(d) ?Cover material. Operators of quarries for building and/or ornamental stone removal shall cover Primacord, other detonating cord or surface laid blasting devices with at least one foot of dirt or other suitable cover material. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(e)) 
Secs. 14-295—14-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 14-316. - Required. 
    No person within the city shall operate a rock crusher or perform blasting to prepare stone for crushing or building and/or ornamental use who does not possess a proper permit therefor from the city. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(c)(1)) 
Sec. 14-317. - Applications. 
    All applications for permits under this article shall be made in writing upon the written form provided by the city and distributed by the administrator. All applications for permits under this article shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the administrator at least 60 days prior to the licensing period. The administrator shall immediately refer all applications for permits hereunder to the common council. The administrator shall issue a permit under this article only after first receiving the approval of the common council, the duly executed certified check for the permit fee as provided in section 14-321, and the submittal of the plan of operation, if required, as approved by the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(c)(2)) 
Sec. 14-318. - Certified check. 
    Each application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check in the sum of the required permit fee as provided in section 14-321, or a renewal thereof, the same to be payable to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(c)(3)) 
Sec. 14-319. - Plan of operation. 
    Each application to operate a rock crusher under this article or a renewal, shall be accompanied by a plan of operation which shall include: methods of screening from adjacent properties, hours of operation, hours of blasting and operation of rock crusher, dust and noise control, blasting procedures, location and height of stock piles, whether a rock crusher will be needed and how often, water supply, drainagecourse, maximum depth, legal description of property in question and other information the common council deems pertinent to the proposed operation. Such plan of operation shall be approved by the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(c)(4)) 
Sec. 14-320. - Renewals. 
    All requests for renewals of permits under this article shall be made at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the permit and must comply with all requirements of sections 14-316—14-319. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(d)) 
Sec. 14-321. - Fee. 
    The permit fees for any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be as set forth by the council from time to time. No permit fee shall be prorated. All permits issued under this article shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13-1(f)) 
Secs. 14-322—14-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CIGARETTES, CIGARETTE PAPERS AND WRAPPERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license, Wis. Stats. § 134.65. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-351—14-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-371. - Required. 
    No person shall in any manner, directly or indirectly, upon any premises, or by any device sell, exchange, barter, dispose of, or give away, or keep for sale any cigarette, cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers, or any substitute therefor, without first obtaining a license as provided in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-2(a)) 
Sec. 14-372. - Application; fee. 
    Every person desiring a license under this article shall file with the administrator a written application therefor, stating the name of the person and the place for which such license is desired. Each license shall be filed by the administrator and shall name the licensee and the place wherein he is authorized to conduct such business, and the license shall not be delivered until the applicant shall pay to the administrator a license fee set by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-2(b)) 
Sec. 14-373. - Issuance and term. 
    Licenses for the sale, exchange, barter, disposition of, or giving away or keeping for sale of cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers or any substitute therefor shall be issued by the administrator. Each license shall be issued on July 1 in each year, or thereafter whenever applied for, and shall continue in force from date of issuance until the succeeding June 30, unless sooner revoked for any violation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-2(c)) 
Secs. 14-374—14-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DAY CARE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Day care centers generally, Wis. Stats. § 48.65. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-401. - Board of health to supervise. 
    All day care centers or nurseries in the city shall be under the supervision of the board of health and shall meet all rules and regulations of the state department of health and social services, family services division as to licensing, inspection and any administrative criteria and rules of that department. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10-1(a)) 
Sec. 14-402. - State regulations adopted. 
    No day care center or nursery school shall be operated within the city unless the facilities thereof are in compliance with the provisions of Wis. Adm. Code ILHL ch. 60 et seq., HSS ch. 45, which is hereby adopted and incorporated in this section reference with the same effect as if it were fully set forth in this section. A copy of such regulations, as from time to time amended, shall be kept permanently on file in the office of the administrator. The owner, lessor, lessee, operator and person in charge of any day care center or nursery school shall be mutually and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10-1(b)) 
Sec. 14-403. - Inspections. 
    The board of health and building inspector shall inspect any premises licensed by the state to determine whether the premises conform with the building code and health and safety requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10-1(c)) 
Sec. 14-404. - Fence required. 
    To ensure the safety of those children who are cared for at a day care center, all such centers which are not located on a corner lot shall have all or an adequate portion of the rear yard fenced so as to help ensure the safety of the children while playing outside. Centers located on corner lots shall maintain such a fenced area in a side yard. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10-3) 
Secs. 14-405—14-425. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING 

Sec. 14-426. - State license required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of day care center or nursery operator within the city who does not hold a valid day care center operator's license issued by the state department of health and social services. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10-2(a)) 
Sec. 14-427. - City licensing. 
(a) ?Every facility licensed as a day care center or a nursery school by the state shall apply for a license to the health department on May 1, beginning May 1, 1978. Such application shall be filed at least 60 days before May 1, so that inspection by the health officer and the building inspector can be completed and license issued to the operator of the day care center or nursery school. 
(b) ?The city license shall be in addition to the state license and shall be granted to each operator after an inspection by the health officer and the building inspector. No license shall be granted unless the operator of the premises has conformed with all city and state regulations applicable thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10-2(b)) 
Sec. 14-428. - Revocation; fees. 
    Every city license issued under this article may be revoked by the health nurse in case of any violation of the building code or health and safety regulations as found by inspection. Such license revocation notice shall be given to the operator and hearing provided upon notice. The license fee for every licensed facility shall be set by the council from time to time, payable May 1 when such license is issued. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10-2(c)) 
Secs. 14-429—14-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ESCORTS AND ESCORT SERVICES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Adult-oriented establishments, § 14-31 et seq.; massage and sauna establishments, § 14-566 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-461. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Escort means any person who, for a fee, commission, salary, hire, profit, payment or other monetary considerations accompanies or offers to accompany another person to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement or consorts with another person about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
    Escort service means service provided by any person who, for a fee, commission, salary, hire, profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons, who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
    Person means any natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation or association, excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision thereof. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-462. - Exemptions. 
    This article does not apply to businesses, agencies and persons licensed by the State of Wisconsin or the city, pursuant to a specific statute or other ordinance, and employes employed by a business so licensed, and which perform an escort or an escort service function, as a service merely incidental to the primary function of such profession, employment or business, and which do not hold themselves out of the public as an escort or an escort service. 
Sec. 14-463. - Prohibited practices. 
(a) ?No person who conducts, manages or operates an escort service may allow or permit any person to work as an escort for such escort service unless the person so employed has a valid escort permit issued by the city. 
(b) ?No escort may work for any person who conducts, manages or operates an escort service unless the person for whom he works has a valid escort service license issued by the city. 
(c) ?No escort service may operate other than from a fixed location identified in the application filed with the administrator's office. 
(d) ?No person granted an escort service license under this article may operate under any name or conduct an escort service business under any designation of any location not specified in the license issued by the city. 
(e) ?No escort service may conduct any business without maintaining on its premises a daily register containing the name of each escort currently employed or otherwise working for the escort service on the date in question, a duplicate of the escort license certificate provided under section 14-531, and the actual hours of employment of each escort for each day. The daily register shall be available during all business hours for inspection by law enforcement personnel. 
(f) ?No person licensed as an escort or escort service may in any manner advertise its services as licensed by the city. 
Sec. 14-464. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a) ?Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture or not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default of payment, be imprisoned in the county jail until the costs are paid, but not to exceed the number of days set forth in Wis. Stats. § 800.095(4). 
(b) ?Each violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing more than one day shall be considered a separate offense. 
Secs. 14-465—14-485. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 14-486. - Restrictions on corporate licenses. 
    Any corporation holding an escort service license under this article shall report to the administrator, in writing, within 15 days of the event described in this section, any of the following: 
(1) ?Any change of officers of the corporation; and 
(2) ?Any change in the membership of the board of directors of a corporation. 
Sec. 14-487. - Sale or transfer. 
    Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in an escort service, the license shall be void. Any person desiring to continue to operate an escort service following sale or transfer shall apply for a license. 
Sec. 14-488. - Escort service responsibility. 
    Each person obtaining an escort service license from the city shall be responsible for the acts of the escorts, employed or working with the escort service, regardless of whether the escorts are employes, agents or independent contractors. An escort service licensed by the city shall be subject to all of the penalties under this article to which an escort would be subject, if an escort violated this article, including suspension or revocation of the escort service's license. 
Sec. 14-489. - Renewal. 
    All applications for the renewal of escort permits or escort service licenses issued by the city shall be filed with the administrator's office, on a form to be provided by the administrator, no later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the license or permit. Applications to renew licenses or permits previously issued under this article shall disclose whether there has been any change in any answer or information supplied to the administrator's office in connection with the original application. Applications to renew permits or licenses shall be processed by the city in the same fashion as new application. 
Sec. 14-490. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a) ?An escort service license or an escort permit may be suspended or revoked after notice and hearing before the common council to determine if grounds for such suspension or revocation exist. Notice of the hearing shall be in writing and may be served by certified mail addressed to the licensee or permittee at the current address of the licensee or permittee on file with the administrator's office. The notice shall be served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the licensee or permittee and shall designate the time and place where the hearing will be held. 
(b) ?Any escort service license or escort permit may be suspended for not more than 90 days or revoked by the common council for a violation of any of the provisions of this article or for any of the grounds that would warrant the denial of the original application for a license or permit. 
Secs. 14-491—14-510. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Escort License 

Sec. 14-511. - Required. 
    No person may engage in, conduct or carry on or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, the operation of an escort service within the city without first having a valid escort service license issued under this article. 
Sec. 14-512. - Application. 
(a) ?Filing fee. Any person desiring to obtain an escort service license shall pay a fee set from time to time by the council to defray the costs of administration and investigation of the application. Such fee shall be paid at the time of application and is not refundable. 
(b) ?Application. Any person desiring an escort service license shall file a written application with the administrator on a form to be provided by the administrator. The information provided to the administrator shall be provided under oath. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as set forth in its articles of incorporation, together with the date and state of incorporation, the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors and each stockholder holding ten percent or more of the stock or beneficial ownership of the corporation. The application shall also be verified by an officer of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners, and the application shall be verified by each partner. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply to the corporate partner. If the applicant is neither a corporation nor a partnership, the application shall set forth the true, full name and residence address of the applicant and be verified by the applicant. The application shall also include any other name by which the applicant has been known during the previous five years. The application for an escort service license shall set forth the proposed place of business of the escort service by business address, including suite number, and not by post office box, and shall contain a description of the nature and scope of the proposed business operation. In addition, the following information shall be furnished concerning the applicant, if an individual, and concerning each stockholder holding ten percent or more of the stock or beneficial ownership of the corporation, each officer and director, if the applicant is a corporation, and concerning each partner, including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership: 
(1) ?The previous residence addresses, if any, for a period of three years immediately prior to the date of application and dates of such residence. 
(2) ?The date of birth. 
(3) ?The business, occupation or employment history for three years immediately preceding the date of application including, but not limited to, whether such person previously operated under any permit or license in another city in this or another state and whether any such permit or license had ever been suspended or revoked. 
(4) ?All convictions in any state or federal court within the past ten years, including municipal ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, with a brief statement of the nature of the convictions and the jurisdiction in which the convictions occurred. 
(5) ?All pending criminal charges in any state or federal court, with a brief statement of the nature of the pending charges and the jurisdiction in which the charges are pending. 
(6) ?The name of persons who will have custody of the business records at the business location. 
(7) ?The name and address of the person who will be the agent for service of process. 
(c) ?Investigation. Applications for an escort service license shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be made and report the findings of the investigation to the common council. Applicants shall cooperate with any investigation conducted under this section. 
(d) ?Granting of licenses. Within 60 days of the receipt of an application for an escort service license, the common council shall either grant or deny a license. If there is a possibility that an application will be denied, the common council shall, after notice to the applicant, conduct a hearing. The common council shall grant an escort service license if, it finds that: 
(1) ?The required fee has been paid. 
(2) ?The application conforms in all respects to this subdivision. 
(3) ?The applicant has not knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for an escort service license. 
(4) ?The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5) ?The escort service, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building and zoning regulations. 
(6) ?The applicant has not had an escort service license or permit or other similar license or permit revoked or suspended in this state or any other state within three years prior to the date of application. 
(7) ?The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding ten percent or more of the stock or beneficial ownership of the corporation, and any officers, agent or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership does not, at the time of application, have pending any criminal charge for, or within five years prior to the date of application has not been convicted of, any offense involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, robbery, the use or threatened use of force or violence upon the person or another, or sexual immorality under Wis. Stats. § 944.01 et seq., as amended, or other offenses subject to Wis. Stats. § 111.335, as amended. 
(8) ?The applicant, if a corporation, is licensed to do business and is in good standing in the state. 
Secs. 14-513—14-530. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Escort Permit 

Sec. 14-531. - Required. 
    No person may work or perform services as an escort in the city, either individually or while working for an escort service, unless the person has first obtained a valid escort permit issued under this article. 
Sec. 14-532. - Application. 
(a) ?Filing fee. Any person desiring to obtain an escort permit shall pay to the city a fee set forth from time to time by the council to defray the costs of administration and investigation of the application. Such fee shall be paid at the time of application and is not refundable. 
(b) ?Application. Any person desiring an escort permit shall file a written application with the administrator on a form to be provided by the administrator. The application shall be verified by the applicant and the information provided to the administrator will be provided under oath. Any applicant for an escort permit shall furnish all information required by section 14-512(b), as well as a description of the applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair. The applicant shall provide two passport size color photographs at least one inch by one inch taken within three months of the date of application. In addition, the applicant shall identify, by name and address, the escort service at which the applicant is currently working, if any, or at which the applicant expects to be employed. 
(c) ?Investigation. Applicants for an escort permit shall be referred to the chief of police who shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and report the findings of the investigation to the common council. Applicants shall cooperate with any investigation conducted under this subdivision. 
(d) ?Granting of permit. Within 60 days of the receipt of an application for an escort permit, the common council shall either grant or deny the applicant an escort permit. If there is a possibility that an application will be denied, the common council shall, after notice to the applicant, conduct a hearing. The common council shall grant an escort license if it finds that: 
(1) ?The required fee has been paid. 
(2) ?The application conforms in all respects to this subdivision. 
(3) ?The applicant has not knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for an escort permit. 
(4) ?The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5) ?The applicant has not had an escort license or permit or other similar license or permit revoked or suspended in this state or any other state within three years prior to the date of application. 
(6) ?The applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(7) ?The applicant does not, at the time of application, have pending any criminal charge for, or within five years prior to the date of application has not been convicted of, any offense involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, robbery, the use or threatened use of force or violence upon the person of another, or sexual immorality under Wis. Stats. § 944.01 et seq., as amended, or other offenses subject to Wis. Stats. § 111.335, as amended. 
Sec. 14-533. - Issuance and display. 
(a) ?The administrator shall issue an escort permit on which there shall be the person's true first name, surname and middle initial, if any, the picture of the applicant, the permit number and the expiration date of the permit. The permit shall be in such form as to avoid alteration. 
(b) ?The certificate shall be carried on the person of the escort and shall be exhibited to any person, including law enforcement personnel, requesting to see it at any time while the person is engaged in acting as an escort. 
Secs. 14-534—14-565. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MASSAGE AND SAUNA ESTABLISHMENTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Adult-oriented establishments, § 14-31 et seq.; escorts and escort services, § 14-461 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-566. - Purpose of article. 
    The primary purpose of this article is to prevent a massage operator or business from using what appears to be a legitimate business as a subterfuge for prostitution or other illicit sexual activity. The secondary purpose of this article is to impose minimal health and sanitary requirements on massage activities and saunas. The issuance of a license under this article is not intended to be, nor should it be construed as, an approval by the city of the ability, skill or qualifications of the licensee to practice the art of massage. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-1; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-1) 
Sec. 14-567. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Massage means any method of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, bathing, touching, binding, painting, irritating or stimulation of external parts of the body with hands or with the aid of any manual, mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptic oils, powder, cremes, lotions, soap, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
    Massage establishment means a place of business wherein private massage is practiced, used or made available. 
    Massage room means the area where private massage is performed. 
    Massage technician means a person who practices, administers or uses or offers to practice, administer or use massage for a consideration. 
    Patron means any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he will pay money or give consideration therefor. 
    Person means any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, LLC, LLP or any combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
    Recognized school means any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage technicians, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 200 hours to be given in not less than three calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such course of study or learning. Such school must show current membership in good standing in the American Massage and Therapy Association or other recognized professional massage organizations. Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring actual attendance of class shall not be deemed a recognized school. 
    Sauna means a steam bath or heated bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent. 
    Sexual or genital parts means and includes the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
    Waiting area means an area adjacent to the main entrance that is separate from any area where massages are given. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-3; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-568. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-11; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-11) 
Sec. 14-569. - Prohibited acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person or other legal entity to suffer, cause or permit the operation of a sauna or massage establishment or for a person to operate as a massage technician, agent, manager or employe, except in strict compliance with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-2; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-2) 
Sec. 14-570. - General requirements. 
(a) ?All sauna rooms, massage parlors and all restrooms used in connection therewith shall be constructed of materials and maintained so that they are impervious to moisture, bacteria, mold or fungus growth. 
(b) ?Rooms in which massage is to be practiced shall have at least 50 square feet of clear floor area. Such rooms shall be equipped with a massage table having a surface impervious to liquids. Nondisposable pads shall be cleanable. A separate full-length covering shall be provided for each patron. Reusable covers or towels shall not be used on more than one patron unless they have been laundered. Sanitary towels, washcloths and cleaning agents must be available for each customer. Disposable covers or towels shall not be reused. Linens and other materials shall be stored at least six inches off the floor. 
(c) ?Shower rooms must be finished in tile or equal material with properly functioning floor drains. 
(d) ?Doors on massage rooms shall not be locked, but shall contain an adequate door latch for privacy. All massage rooms shall be clearly identified by door plates or signs. 
(e) ?Each sauna or massage establishment shall have approved fire extinguishers and fire exits designated by fire exit signs. 
(f) ?Any instruments used in performing massage that come into direct contact with the patron shall be disinfected between each massage, using disinfecting agents or sterilizing equipment approved by the health commissioner. 
(g) ?No establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(h) ?No license shall be transferred between locations or persons, and no massage establishment license shall be sold or be subject to any transfer of corporate assets or change of corporate officers or directors. 
(i) ?The establishment shall provide a waiting area for patrons separate from any area wherein massages are given. 
(j) ?The establishment shall permit inspections of the premises at any time during business hours by building inspectors, fire inspectors, health inspectors or personnel of any law enforcement agency. 
(k) ?The establishment shall keep current records of the names and addresses of its massage technicians and employes and the date of employment and the termination of each. Such records shall be open to inspection to the city. 
(l) ?All establishments shall comply with all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-7; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-7) 
Sec. 14-571. - Regulation of technicians and other persons. 
    Each technician shall at all times comply with the following regulations: 
(1) ?The technician shall practice only on the premises of a licensed massage establishment. 
(2) ?No technician shall administer a massage: 
a. ?If the technician believes, knows or should know that he is not free of any contagious or communicable disease or infection; 
b. ?To any massage patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption. 
(3) ?It is unlawful for a technician or any other person in a massage establishment to place his hands upon, to touch with any part of his body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital part of any other person. 
(4) ?It is unlawful for a technician or any other person in a massage establishment, to expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other person. 
(5) ?It shall be unlawful for a technician or any other person, while in the presence of any other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a full opaque covering, the sexual or genital parts of his or her body. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-8; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-8) 
Secs. 14-572—14-590. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 14-591. - Exceptions. 
    The requirements of this article shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist or registered nurse duly licensed by the state, or to any nurse, assistant, trainee or other person administering under the immediate direction, supervision and control of any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist. The requirements of this article shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to any barber or cosmetologist duly licensed by the state who limit massages to head or facial massages. This article shall not apply to any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or healing professions by any person licensed by the state to practice any such art or professions. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-9; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-9) 
Sec. 14-592. - Massage establishment license. 
(a) ?Required. No person shall establish, cause or permit the conduct of a massage establishment without having first obtained a license therefor from the common council. A separate license shall be acquired for each such establishment. 
(b) ?Application. Applications shall be made in writing on forms supplied by the city. All such licenses shall be valid from the date of issue until the following December 31, unless sooner revoked. 
(c) ?Application inclusions. All first time applications shall include: 
(1) ?A nonrefundable fee set from time to time by the council; 
(2) ?The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment; 
(3) ?For an individual or for each person of a partnership or joint venture or stock owner and agent of a corporation: 
a. ?Name and present address; 
b. ?Whether a similar license had been revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason therefor and location thereof; and 
c. ?Whether convicted of any crime or ordinance violation other than traffic offenses within the past three years and, if so, a listing of the same and the locations thereof. 
(4) ?If the applicant is a corporation, LLC or LLP, the names and address of each officer and director and of the stockholders of such corporation, together with the extent of the ownership of each, and a statement whether such officer, director or stockholder holds office or stock in any other corporation, LLC, LLP conducting a similar business in the state. Such application shall be made by an agent registered as such who shall have been a resident of the state for at least 90 days. 
(5) ?The names, addresses and phone numbers of all persons employed or to be employed at the time of starting the business, by the applicant at the proposed establishment at the time of application. 
(6) ?A statement signed by the applicant and each individual of a partnership or a joint venture and individuals specified in (c)(4) of this section that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(d) ?Renewals. All renewal applications shall include: 
(1) ?A nonrefundable fee set by the council from time to time. 
(2) ?The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment. 
(3) ?For an individual or for each person of a partnership or joint venture or agent of a corporation: 
a. ?Name and present address. 
b. ?Whether a similar license had been revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason therefor and location thereof. 
c. ?Whether convicted of any crime or ordinance violation other than traffic offenses within the past three years and, if so, a listing of the same and the locations thereof. 
(4) ?If the applicant is a corporation, LLC, LLP, the names and address of each officer and director and of the stockholders of such, together with the extent of the ownership of each, and a statement whether such officer, director or stockholder holds office or stock in any other corporation, LLC, LLP conducting a similar business in the state. Such application shall be made by an agent registered as such who shall have been a resident of the state for at least 90 days. 
(5) ?The names, addresses and phone numbers of all persons currently employed by the applicant at the proposed establishment at the time of renewal application. 
(6) ?A statement signed by the applicant and each individual of a partnership or a joint venture, corporation, LLC, LLP that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-4; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-4) 
Sec. 14-593. - Massage technicians license. 
(a) ?Required. No person shall act or operate for consideration as a massage technician without having first obtained a license to do so. 
(b) ?Applications; duration. Applications shall be made in writing on forms supplied by the city. All such licenses shall be valid from the date of issue until the following December 31, unless sooner revoked. 
(c) ?Application inclusions. All applications shall include: 
(1) ?A nonrefundable fee set by the council from time to time; 
(2) ?The applicant's full name, date of birth and present address; 
(3) ?Whether the applicant has had a similar permit revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason therefor and location thereof; 
(4) ?Whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation, other than traffic offenses, within the past three years and, if so, a listing of the same and the locations thereof; 
(5) ?The name and address of the licensed massage establishment by which the applicant is employed; 
(6) ?An acceptable diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school; and 
(7) ?A statement signed by the applicant that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-5; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-5) 
Sec. 14-594. - Conditional massage technician's license. 
(a) ?For the purpose of allowing an applicant for a massage technician's license who is otherwise qualified to obtain a license under section 14-593, except for having complied with section 14-593(c)(6), a conditional massage technician's license may be issued by the city. 
(b) ?The conditional massage technician's license shall expire six months after the date of issuance and is issued for the sole purpose of allowing an applicant to obtain and show proof thereof to the city of a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school, and as required for the issuance of the massage technician's license. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-6; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-6) 
Sec. 14-595. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a) ?The common council has the authority to temporarily suspend or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this article for a period of time as determined by the common council. 
(b) ?No licensee shall have available to him the defense that the violations for which his license is suspended or revoked is the result of an act or failure to act by an agent or employe. 
(c) ?There shall be no refund of any portion of the license fee in the event of revocation or suspension of the license issued pursuant to this article. 
(d) ?The grounds for suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this article are as follows: 
(1) ?The holder is guilty of fraud or deceit in being licensed to the practice of massage. 
(2) ?The holder is practicing massage in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify the lust or passions or sexual desires of another. 
(3) ?The holder has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude; the conviction of a felony shall be the conviction of an offense which, if committed within this state, would constitute a felony under the laws thereof. 
(4) ?The holder is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name. 
(5) ?The holder has employed, allowed or permitted an unlicensed person to perform massage in his massage parlor. 
(6) ?The holder has violated any of the provisions of this article or other ordinances of the city or statutes substantially relating to this license. 
(e) ?Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the right of the city to take legal action deemed appropriate and necessary for the public safety and welfare of the city and/or its residents. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7-10; Ord. No. 96-14, § 7-7-10) 
Secs. 14-596—14-625. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MOVIES AND THEATERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-626—14-645. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-646. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to use any building or part of any building for a theater or movie without first obtaining a license. This does not apply to churches, schools and other halls used occasionally for movies, lectures, concerts or amateur theatricals. 
(Code 1986, § 7-11-1(a)) 
Sec. 14-647. - Application. 
    Application for a license to use any premises for theater or movie shall be made to the administrator upon such forms and with such information in writing as required. 
(Code 1986, § 7-11-1(b)(1)) 
Sec. 14-648. - Grant. 
    The administrator may grant the use of any building or part thereof, provided the premises comply with all laws and ordinances and which are safe and proper for the purposes for which the same is to be used. Upon granting such a license, the administrator shall issue the same upon the payment of a fee set by the council from time to time, per seat, for each person the premises can accommodate by seating. 
(Code 1986, § 7-11-1(b)(2)) 
Sec. 14-649. - Term. 
    All licenses shall expire on May 1, after issuance. 
(Code 1986, § 7-11-1(b)(3)) 
Sec. 14-650. - Revocation. 
    The mayor may revoke for cause any license whenever in his judgment the good order and welfare of the city will be promoted and whenever the building does not conform to law and ordinances, or shall be unsafe and improper for the purposes for which it is used. 
(Code 1986, § 7-11-1(c)) 
Secs. 14-651—14-680. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED 

Secs. 14-681—14-740. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, adopted Mar. 9, 2015, repealed Art. XI, §§ 14-681—14-717, which pertained to nonmetallic mining. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
ARTICLE XII. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate direct sales, Wis. Stats. § 66.083. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-741. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be such. 
    Merchandise means personal property of any kind, and shall include merchandise, goods or materials provided, incidental to services offered or sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
    Permanent merchant means any person who, for at least six months prior to the consideration of the application of this article to such merchant, has continuously operated an established place of business in the local trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale and now does business from his residence. 
    Transient merchant means any individual who engages in the retail sale of merchandise at any place in this state temporarily, and who does not intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of such place. For purposes of this article, sale of merchandise includes a sale in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the merchandise constitutes the greatest part of value for the price received, but does not include a farm auction sale conducted by or for a resident farmer of personal property used on the farm, or the sale of produce or other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-2), 5-9-1994) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-742. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person adjudged in violation of any provision of this article shall forfeit not less than $10.00, nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation per day, plus costs of prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-10), 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 14-743. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(1) ?Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes. 
(2) ?Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such merchandise. 
(3) ?Any person selling agricultural products which the person has grown. 
(4) ?Any permanent merchant or employe thereof who takes orders at the home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such merchandise in their regular course of business. 
(5) ?Any person who has an established place of business where the merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested, a home visit by such person. 
(6) ?Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer. 
(7) ?Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of merchandise. 
(8) ?Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. 
(9) ?Any employe, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of such organization, provided that there is submitted to the clerk proof that such charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.41. Any charitable organization engaging in the sale of merchandise and not registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.41, or which is exempt from that statute's registration requirements, shall be required to register. 
(10) ?Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom complaint has been made to the clerk that such person is a transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the clerk proof that such person has leased for at least one year, or purchased, the premises from which he has conducted business in the market area for at least six months prior to the date the complaint was made. 
(11) ?Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in Wis. Stats. § 15.01(7). 
(12) ?This article does not apply to transient merchants while doing business at special events authorized by the council. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-3), 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 14-744. - Prohibited practices. 
(a) ?A transient merchant shall be prohibited from calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(b) ?A transient merchant shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or characteristics of any merchandise offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the identity of the organization he represents. A charitable organization transient merchant shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of the merchandise being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the merchandise. 
(c) ?No transient merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(d) ?No transient merchant shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(e) ?No transient merchant shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he is conducting business. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-7(a)), 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 14-745. - Disclosure requirements. 
(a) ?After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a transient merchant shall expressly disclose his name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of merchandise or services he offers to sell. 
(b) ?If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant, or any offer for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel such transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.00, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 423.203. The seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 423.203(1)(a), (b) and (c), (2) and (3). 
(c) ?If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery of merchandise, he shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement; the amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone number of the seller; the delivery or performance date; and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-7(b)), 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 14-746. - Recordkeeping. 
    The chief of police shall report to the administrator all convictions for violation of this article and the administrator shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-8), 5-9-1994) 
Secs. 14-747—14-765. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-766. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in sales within the city without being registered for that purpose as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-1), 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 14-767. - Application; contents; fees. 
(a) ?Applicants for registration must complete and return to the clerk a registration form furnished by the clerk which shall require the following information: 
(1) ?Name, permanent address and telephone number. 
(2) ?Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes. 
(3) ?Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the transient merchant represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold. 
(4) ?Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any. 
(5) ?Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the merchandise, and any services offered. 
(6) ?Proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable. 
(7) ?Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct of his business. 
(8) ?Most recent cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where the applicant conducted business. 
(9) ?Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving this city. 
(10) ?Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant business within the last five years, the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(b) ?Applicants shall present to the clerk for examination: 
(1) ?A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(2) ?A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures where the applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities. 
(3) ?A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law. Such certificate shall state that the applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application license is made. 
(c) ?At the time the registration is returned, a fee set by the council from time to time shall be paid to the administrator to cover the cost of processing the registration. An applicant who is a member of a religious organization selling religious literature shall be exempt from payment of the fee. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the administrator his agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant, if the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. Upon payment of the fee and the signing of the statement, the administrator shall register the applicant as a transient merchant and date the entry. Such registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in section 14-768(b). 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-4), 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 14-768. - Investigation. 
(a) ?Upon receipt of each application, the administrator may refer it immediately to the chief of police who may make and complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration. 
(b) ?The administrator shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation described in subsection (a) of this section, that the application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the most recent cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of section 14-767(b). 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-5), 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 14-769. - Appeal. 
    Any person refused or denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the common council, or if none has been adopted, under the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 68.07—68.16. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-6), 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 14-770. - Revocation. 
(a) ?Registration may be revoked by the common council after notice and hearing, if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statements in the application for registration; made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in transient sales; violated any provision of this article; or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in selling. 
(b) ?Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally or pursuant to section 14-769 on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(7-4-9), 5-9-1994) 
Chapter 18 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance regarding natural and manmade emergencies saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(27); administration, ch. 2; council, § 2-36 et seq.; court, ch. 22; emergency services, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 46. 

Sec. 18-1. - Civil defense plan adopted. 
    Joint Action Emergency Government Ordinance #O-26-93 of the board of supervisors of the county providing for a county-municipal joint action civil defense plan or organization was adopted by the county board on December 21, 1993. A copy of County Ordinance O-26-93 is on file in the administrator's office and made a part of this chapter by reference, and is hereby ratified and accepted between the city and county, as provided by section III of the joint action ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-11, § 1(a), 11-14-1994) 
Sec. 18-2. - Appointment of emergency government director. 
    The county/municipal emergency government director, appointed and employed by the county board as provided in the ordinance referred to in this section is hereby designated and appointed emergency government director for the city, subject to the conditions and provisions as set forth in the state statutes, and the county joint action ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-11, § 1(b), 11-14-1994) 
Chapter 22 - COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 755.01 et seq., 800.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Municipal court created. 
    There is created and established a municipal court under the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 755 to be designated as the "municipal court for the City of Mosinee." 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § 1(a), 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 22-2. - Hours. 
    The municipal court shall be open at such location and at such times as determined by the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § 1(g), 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 22-3. - Fines, forfeitures and court costs. 
    The municipal judge may impose punishment and sentences as provided by Wis. Stats. § 800.09, and as provided for in the ordinances of the city. Court costs shall be collected on each separate matter as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 814.65(1), and the collected fees shall be distributed as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 814.65(1). All monies received by the municipal court shall be paid to the administrator within seven days by the municipal judge or other court personnel. At the time of payment, the municipal judge shall report to the administrator the title of the action, the offense for which a forfeiture was imposed, and the total amount of the forfeiture, fees, penalty assessment and costs, if any. 
(Code 1986, tit. 2, ch. 11, § 1(h); Ord. No. 95-6, § 1, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 97-11, § 1, 12-8-1997; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 22-4. - Contempt procedure. 
(a) ?The municipal judge may impose a sanction authorized under Wis. Stats. § 800.12(2) for contempt of court, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 785.01(1), in accordance with the procedures under Wis. Stats. § 785.03. 
(b) ?The municipal judge may impose a forfeiture for contempt under Wis. Stats. § 800.12(1) in an amount not to exceed $50.00 or, upon nonpayment of the forfeiture and the penalty assessment under Wis. Stats. § 165.87, and jail assessment under Wis. Stats. § 302.46 and any applicable domestic abuse assessment under Wis. Stats. § 973.055(1), a jail sentence not to exceed seven days. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § 1(i), 8-28-1995) 
Secs. 22-5—22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employes, § 2-176 et seq. 

Sec. 22-36. - To preside over municipal court; election. 
    Such court shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided over by a municipal judge who resides in the city. Such municipal judge shall be elected at large in the spring election for a term of four years commencing on May 1. All candidates for the position of municipal judge shall be nominated by nomination papers as provided in Wis. Stats. § 8.10, and selection at a primary election if such is held as provided in Wis. Stats. § 8.10. The common council shall provide for a primary election if more than two candidates file nomination papers for such position of municipal judge as provided in Wis. Stats. § 8.11(1)(a), and such primary election shall be held on the third Tuesday of February as provided in Wis. Stats. § 5.02(22). 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § 1(b), 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 22-37. - Supervision of election. 
    The administrator shall see to the compliance with Wis. Stats. §§ 5.58(1c), 5.60(1)(b), 5.60(2), 7.10(1)(a), 7.60(4)(a) and 8.10(6)(a) to provide for the election of a municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § 1, 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 22-38. - Oath and bond. 
    The judge shall, after his election or appointment to fill a vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 757.02(1), and at the same time execute and file an official bond in the amount fixed by the council from time to time. The judge shall not act until his oath and bond have been filed as required by Wis. Stats. § 19.01(4)(c) and the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 755.03(2) have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § 1(d), 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 22-39. - Salary. 
    The salary of the municipal judge shall be fixed by the common council of the city which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No salary shall be paid for any time during his term during which such judge has not executed his official bond or official oath, as required by Wis. Stats. § 755.03, and filed pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.01(4)(c). 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § 1(e), 8-28-1995) 
Sec. 22-40. - Jurisdiction. 
    The municipal judge of the municipal court shall have such jurisdiction as provided by Wis. Stats. §§ 755.045 and 755.05, and as otherwise provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § 1(f), 8-28-1995) 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance calling an election saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(19); any ordinance regarding the establishment of wards, ward boundaries and election precincts saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(24); administration, ch. 2; council, § 2-36 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Ward boundaries. 
    In accordance with the ward plan promulgated by the common council, the city consists of seven wards, the respective boundaries of which are described as follows: 
(1) ?First ward. The first district is that part of the city bounded by the following lines: Commencing at the intersection of the Wisconsin River and Main Street, thence southwesterly along 2nd Street to High Street, thence westerly along High Street to 11th Street, thence northeasterly along 11th Street to Main Street, thence west along Main Street to the northern City limit near 14th Street, thence north to the northern city limit boundary of the City of Mosinee, thence easterly along the bank of the Wisconsin River, and thence south and southwesterly along the eastern bank of the Wisconsin River to the point of return. 
Ward 1 population: 603. 
(2) ?Second ward . The second district is that part of the city bounded by the following lines: Commencing at the eastern edge of the Wisconsin River and Main Street, thence north along Main Street to 2nd Street, thence southeasterly along 2nd Street to High Street, thence westerly along High Street to 8th Street, thence Southeasterly along 8th Street to Short Street, thence westerly along Short Street to 10th Street, thence south along 10th Street to 11th Street, thence south on 11th Street to Western Avenue, thence easterly along Western Avenue to Novak Street, thence south along Novak Street to Pinecrest Avenue, thence westerly along Pinecrest Avenue to Wilson Street, thence south along Wilson Street to Edgewood Drive, thence westerly along Edgewood Drive to Maple Street, thence south along Maple Street to the southern City limit, thence easterly along the southern city limit to the east bank of the Wisconsin River, thence north along the east bank of the Wisconsin River to the Wisconsin River Bridge, thence westerly along the Wisconsin River Bridge to the point of beginning. 
Ward 2 population: 654. 
(3) ?Third ward . The third ward is that part of the city bounded by the following lines: Commencing at the intersection of 12th Street and Fremont Street, thence south along 12th Street to Wisconsin Street, thence westerly along Wisconsin Street to Range Line Road, thence north along Rangeline Road to Main Street (North City limit line), thence east along Main Street to 11th Street, thence south along 11th Street to High Street, thence southeasterly along High Street to 8th Street, thence southwesterly along 8th Street to Jackson Street, thence westerly along Jackson Street to 11th Street, thence south along 11th Street to Fremont Street, thence westerly along Fremont Street to the point of beginning. 
Ward 3 population: 623. 
(4) ?Fourth ward. The fourth ward is that part of the city bounded by the following lines: Commencing at the intersection of 8th Street and Short Street, thence westerly along Short Street to 10th Street, thence westerly along 10th Street (Mosinee Avenue) to Rangeline Road, thence north along Rangeline Road to Wisconsin Street, thence easterly along Wisconsin Street to 12th Street, thence north along 12th Street to Fremont Street, thence easterly along Fremont Street to 11th Street, thence north along 11th Street to Jackson Street, thence east along Jackson Street to 8th Street, thence south along 8th Street to the point of beginning. 
Ward 4 population: 663. 
(5) ?Fifth ward. The fifth ward is that part of the city bounded by the following lines: Commencing at the intersection of State Highway 153 and Rangeline Road, thence south along Rangeline Road (west City limit boundary) to the southern City Limit Boundary, thence easterly along the south City Limit Boundary to Maple Street, thence north along Maple Street to Edgewood Drive, thence easterly along Edgewood Drive to Wilson Street, thence north along Wilson Street to Pinecrest Avenue, thence easterly along Pinecrest Avenue to Novak Street, thence north along Novak Street to Western Avenue, thence west along Western Avenue to 11th Street, thence north along 11th Street to Mosinee Avenue, thence westerly along Mosinee Avenue to Bobcat Drive, thence south along Bobcat Drive to State Highway 153, thence easterly along State Highway 153 to the point of beginning. 
Ward 5 population: 604. 
(6) ?Sixth Ward. The sixth ward is that part of the city bounded by the following lines: All that part of the city lying east of the Wisconsin River and north of State Highway 153. 
Ward 6 population: 567. 
(7) ?Seventh ward. The seventh ward is that part of the city bounded by the following lines: All that part of the city lying east of the Wisconsin River and south of State Highway 153. 
Ward 7 population: 274. 
(Ord. No. 91-16, § 1, 8-26-1991; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 7-23-2001; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 26-2. - Ward populations. 
    The 2010 population of each of the wards enumerated in section 26-1 is as follows: 
Ward Population ?1 ? 603 ?2 ? 654 ?3 ? 623 ?4 ? 663 ?5 ? 604 ?6 ? 567 ?7 ? 274 ?Total: 3,988  
(Code 1986, § 2-1-3; Ord. No. 91-16, § 2, 8-26-1991; Ord. No. 2001-96, § 2, 7-23-2001; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 2, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 26-3. - Appointment of election officials. 
    There shall be seven inspectors for each polling place at each election held under Wis. Stats. chs. 5 to 12. When voting machines are used, the number of inspectors may be reduced to five. Inspectors shall be appointed as provided in Wis. Stats. § 7.30. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-4) 
State Law reference— Election officials generally, Wis. Stats. § 7.01 et seq. 
Sec. 26-4. - Spring primary election. 
    Whenever three or more candidates file nomination papers for a city office, a spring primary election shall be scheduled according to statute. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-5; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 10-24-1994) 
Sec. 26-5. - Appointment. 
    There shall be seven inspectors for each polling place at each election held under Wis. Stats. chs. 5 to 12. When voting machines are used, the number of inspectors may be reduced to five. Inspectors shall be appointed as provided in Wis. Stats. § 7.30. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-4) 
State Law reference— Authority, Wis. Stats. § 7.30. 
Sec. 26-6. - Elections. 
(a) ?The annual city election shall be held on the first Tuesday in April at such places as the common council shall designate. 
(b) ?The polls for all elections shall open at 7:00 a.m. and close at 8:00 p.m. 
(c) ?Registration of electors is required, the same to be in accordance with statutory provisions thereunto pertaining in Wis. Stats. ch. 6. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-5; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 1, 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 26-7. - Board of canvassers. 
(a) ?The board of canvassers shall be comprised of the municipal clerk and two electors of the municipality appointed by the clerk who will serve two-year terms expiring on odd numbered years. 
(b) ?The board of canvassers shall conduct a municipal canvass within 24 hours after the municipal election, and officially determine the outcome of the election by completing the required forms set forth by the State of Wisconsin. 
(c) ?If an election is held which has municipal office elections or municipal referenda on the ballot, and a municipal board of canvassers is not conducted within one day of the election, the clerk is required to do so immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 5-14-2007) 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - E 911 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    E 911 emergency telephone system means as defined in Wis. Stats. § 146.70. 
(Ord. No. 93-5, § 1(a), 3-31-1993) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Regulated use. 
(a) ?No person shall use the E 911 emergency telephone system for regular business or nonemergency telephone calls. 
(b) ?No person shall intentionally dial the telephone number "911" to report an emergency, knowing in fact that the situation which he reports does not exist. 
(Ord. No. 93-5, § 1(b), 3-31-1993) 
Sec. 30-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person found guilty of any violation of this article shall be fined no less than $20.00 nor more than $150.00, together with the costs of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 93-5, § 1(c), 3-31-1993) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, § 14-161 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 18; emergency services, ch. 30; burning of waste, § 66-35. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Adoption of state codes. 
    The following orders, rules and regulations of the state department of industry, labor and human relations, all of which are set forth in the Wisconsin Administrative Code as from time to time amended, are incorporated in this section by reference and adopted as part of this chapter: 
(1) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 7 Explosive Materials (2) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 8 Mines, Pits and Quarries (3) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 9 Manufacture of Fireworks (4) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 11 Liquid Petroleum Gases (5) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 14 Fire Prevention (6) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 16 Electrical (7) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 17 Electrical Inspection (8) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 45 Mechanical Refrigeration (9) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 48 Petroleum Products (10) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. Comm. 82—87 Plumbing (11) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. ILHR. 10 Flammable and Combustible Liquids (12) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. ILHR. 12 Liquid Natural Gas (13) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. ILHR. 13 Compressed Natural Gas (14) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. ILHR. 15 Cleaning and Dyeing (15) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. ILHR. 43 Anhydrous Ammonia (16) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. ILHR. 50—64 Building and Heating (17) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. HSS. 45 Family Day Care Centers for Children (18) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. HSS. 46 Group Day Care Centers for Children (19) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. NR. 110 Sewerage Systems (20) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. NR. 116 Floodplain Management (21) Wis. Adm. Code Ch. TRANS. 208 State Trunk Highway Location Process  
(Code 1986, § 3-4-1) 
Sec. 34-2. - State and national electrical codes. 
    The city adopts the state and national electrical codes, by reference, past, present and future, to ensure the fire safety and prevention for all business and residences in the city and its fire protection area. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-13) 
Sec. 34-3. - Damaging fire hose. 
    No person shall willfully injure in any manner, any hose, hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to the city, and no vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, private driveway or other place, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-4) 
Sec. 34-4. - Vehicles to yield right-of-way to fire vehicles. 
    Whenever there shall be a fire or fire alarm, or the fire department shall be out for practice, every person driving or riding in a motor or other vehicle shall move and remain to the side of the street until the fire engine and fire truck and other fire apparatus shall have passed. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-7) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 34-5. - Impeding fire equipment. 
    No person shall impede the progress of the fire engine or fire truck or other fire apparatus of the Mosinee Volunteer Fire Department along the streets or alleys of such city at the time of a fire or when the fire department of the city is using such streets or alleys in response to a fire alarm or for practice. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-2) 
Sec. 34-6. - Interference with use of hydrants. 
    No person shall occupy any portion of such streets or alleys with a motor or other vehicle between such fire engine or fire truck or other fire apparatus or any hydrant to which a fire hose may be, or may be about to be attached. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-8) 
Sec. 34-7. - Open burning. 
(a) ?Prohibited. No person shall build any outdoor fire within the corporate limits of the city except as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b) ?Exceptions. 
(1) ?Outdoor cooking over a fire contained in a device or structure designed for such use. 
(2) ?Controlled burning of grass or similar vegetation for environmental management purposes, with the prior written approval of the fire chief. 
(3) ?Ceremonial campfires or bonfires, with prior written approval of the fire chief. 
(4) ?Controlled burning of dry leaves and other nonoffensive, dry yard debris during the periods of April 1 through May 31, and October 1 through November 30 of each year; provided, however, that such burning is: 
a. ?Monitored by a responsible person until the fire has extinguished itself completely; 
b. ?Conducted on days when excessive wind or atmospheric conditions will not result in danger to public health or safety; 
c. ?Located off the public street pavement or street gutter; 
d. ?Located at least 50 feet from any neighboring residence; and 
e. ?Not used for covert incineration of offensive substances or materials. 
(5) ?Other occasions of desirable outdoor burning not specified by this subsection (b), but not as an alternative to refuse removal or disposal of which other methods are available, may be granted single occasion approval as in subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section. 
(6) ?Whenever approval and special permit are granted by the fire chief under subsection (b)(2), (b)(3) and (b)(5) of this section, the permit may specify and be conditioned on observance of safety restrictions set forth therein. 
(c) ?Chief may prohibit. The fire chief is permitted to prohibit any or all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
(d) ?Burning on streets. No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk. 
(e) ?Liability. Persons utilizing and maintaining outdoor fires shall be responsible for any liability resulting from damage caused by his fire. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-10) 
Sec. 34-8. - Decorations. 
    All decorations used in public buildings shall be of a flameproof material or have a flameproof material added to such decoration. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-11) 
Sec. 34-9. - Smoking. 
    The fire chief or his designated fire inspector has the right to restrict the use of smoking in areas of fire danger. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-12) 
Cross reference— Smoking generally, § 38-41 et seq. 
Secs. 34-10—34-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employes, § 2-176 et seq. 
State Law reference— Police and fire departments generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 

Sec. 34-41. - Official recognition; organization; bylaws. 
(a) ?Department recognized. The Mosinee Volunteer Fire Department is officially recognized, and the duty of conducting the fire department is delegated to such organization, and its organization and internal regulations shall be governed by the bylaws of that organization, insofar as they do not conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b) ?Composition. 
(1) ?The fire department shall consist of the following officers: one chief, one assistant chief, one chief engineer, a secretary-treasurer, one hose captain, one ladder captain, one fire inspector (captain) and as many drivers and firefighters who are residents of the city as may be appointed by the chief and be approved by the council, provided that at no time shall the department consist of less than 22 active members. 
(2) ?Active membership in the department for members other than the chief shall cease at the age of 55 years unless the common council shall, by a majority vote, approve of the person continuing as an active member. Upon reaching the age of 55, active members shall become honorary members. 
(3) ?Any person desiring to be a member of the fire department may file with the police and fire commission an application in such form as they may require. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of physical fitness from a physician. 
(4) ?All resignations from the department shall take the same course as applications for the appointments to membership. 
(c) ?Bylaws. 
(1) ?The fire department shall operate under bylaws, providing for the control, management, government and regulation of the business and proceedings of the department. Amendments to the bylaws shall become effective upon adoption by a two-thirds vote of the members of the department and the approval of the council. 
(2) ?The bylaws shall also provide for a system whereby the fire department shall advise the board of police and fire commissioners as to qualifications of any person applying to become a member of the fire department and for internal grievance procedures. 
(d) ?Appointment of officers; subordinate officers. In accordance with department bylaws, fire department officers below the rank of chief shall be appointed by the fire chief. Such appointment shall be approved by a two-thirds vote of the regular membership and also approved by the board of police and fire commissioners, in accordance with state law. 
(e) ?Source of funds. The common council shall appropriate funds to provide for operation and maintenance and for such apparatus and equipment for the use of the fire department as it may deem expedient and necessary to maintain efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire. 
(f) ?Compensation. The officers and members of the fire department shall receive such compensation from the city as may from time to time be fixed by the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 34-42. - Police power of the department; investigation of fires. 
(a) ?Police authority at fires. 
(1) ?The chief and assistants or officers in command at any fire are hereby vested with full and complete police authority at fires. Any officer of the department may cause the arrest of any person failing to give the right-of-way to the fire department in responding to a fire. 
(2) ?The fire chief may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no persons, except firefighters and police officers and those admitted by order of any officer of the department, shall be permitted to come. 
(3) ?The chief shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect the adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire he shall have the power to cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the same impedes the work of the department during the progress of a fire. 
(b) ?Fire inspection duties. 
(1) ?While acting as fire inspector pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 101.14(2), the fire chief, or any officer of the fire department designated by the fire chief, shall have the right and authority to enter any building or upon any premises in the city at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspections or investigations which, under the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, he may deem necessary. Should the fire inspector find that any provisions of this Code relating to fire hazards and prevention of fires are being violated, or that a fire hazard exists which should be eliminated, it shall be his duty to give such directions for the abatement of such conditions as he shall deem necessary, and if such directions be not complied with, to report such noncompliance to the mayor for further action. 
(2) ?The chief of the fire department is required, by himself or by officers or members of the fire department designated by him as fire inspectors, to inspect all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of any law or ordinance relating to the fire hazard or to the prevention of fires. Such inspections shall be made at least once in six months in all of the territory served by such fire department, and oftener as the chief of the fire department orders. Each six-month period shall begin on January 1 and July 1. 
(3) ?Written reports of inspections shall be made and kept on file in the office of the chief of the fire department in the manner and form required by the department of industry, labor and human relations. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 101.14(2). 
Sec. 34-43. - Firefighters may enter adjacent property. 
    It shall be lawful for any firefighter while acting under the direction of the fire chief or other officer in command to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire and in case any person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his duty as is provided in this article, the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting firemen in the discharge of their duty. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-5) 
Sec. 34-44. - Use of private vehicles as emergency vehicles. 
    The privately owned motor vehicles of members of the Mosinee Volunteer Fire Department used while enroute to an emergency call pursuant to orders of their chief or other commanding officer are designated as authorized emergency vehicles. Such vehicles shall be equipped with a siren and a flashing, oscillating or rotating red light. These vehicles shall be used subject to the provisions of the laws of the state which regulate operation of emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-45) 
Sec. 34-45. - Equipment and apparatus. 
(a) ?The chief shall have control of all apparatus used by the department, and shall be responsible for its proper maintenance. 
(b) ?No apparatus shall be used for any purpose except for firefighting that is within the city limits or by agreement with the individual township or in training therefor, except pursuant to any other agreement approved by the common council after the chief has given his recommendations on such use. With the approval of the chief, such apparatus may be used for emergency purposes. A written report of all such uses shall be made quarterly to the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-9) 
Secs. 34-46—34-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of fireworks generally, Wis. Stats. § 167.10. 

Sec. 34-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means anything manufactured, processed or packaged for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion and as defined in Wis. Stats. § 167.10(1) and shall include all rockets or similar missiles containing explosive fuel, and which does not have another common use, but does not include any of the following: 
(1) ?Fuel or a lubricant. 
(2) ?A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell. 
(3) ?A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle. 
(4) ?A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater. 
(5) ?A cap containing not more than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture, if the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion. 
(6) ?A toy snake which contains no mercury. 
(7) ?A model rocket engine. 
(8) ?Tobacco and a tobacco product. 
(9) ?A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in length or 0.25 inch in outside diameter which does not contain magnesium, chlorate or perchlorate. 
(10) ?A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture. 
(11) ?A device designed to produce an audible sound but not explode, spark, move or emit an external flame after ignition and which does not exceed three grams in total weight. 
(12) ?A device that emits smoke with no external flame and does not leave the ground. 
(13) ?A cylindrical fountain not exceeding 100 grams in total weight with an inside tube diameter not exceeding 0.75 inch, designed to sit on the ground and emit only sparks and smoke. 
(14) ?A cone fountain not exceeding 75 grams in total weight, designed to sit on the ground and emit only sparks and smoke. 
(Code 1986, § 7-8-1(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-77. - Private use and sale. 
    No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep, discharge or explode any fireworks except toy pistol paper caps, sparklers and toy snakes within the limits of the city unless he shall be authorized by a fireworks permit as provided in section 34-79(c). 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 34-78. - Sale or possession with intent to sell. 
    No person may sell or possess with intent to sell fireworks, except: 
(1) ?To a person holding a permit under section 34-79(c); 
(2) ?To a city or town; or 
(3) ?For a purpose specified under section 34-79(b)(1)—(6). 
(Code 1986, § 7-8-1(b)) 
Sec. 34-79. - Use. 
(a) ?Permit required. No person may possess or use fireworks without a user's permit from the mayor or from an official or employe of the city as designated by the common council. No person may use fireworks or a device listed under subsections 34-76(5)—(7) and (9)—(14) while attending a fireworks display for which a permit has been issued to a person listed under subsections (c)(1)—(5) of this section or under subsection (c)(6) of this section if the display is open to the general public. 
(b) ?Permit exceptions. Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to: 
(1) ?The city, except that city fire and law enforcement officials shall be notified of the proposed use of fireworks at least two days in advance. 
(2) ?The possession or use of explosives in accordance with rules or general orders of the state department of industry, labor and human relations. 
(3) ?The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with rules adopted by the state department of natural resources. 
(4) ?The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in any manufacturing process. 
(5) ?The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in connection with classes conducted by educational institutions. 
(6) ?A possessor or manufacturer of explosives in possession of a license or permit under 18 USC 841 to 848 if the possession of the fireworks is authorized under the license or permit. 
(c) ?Parties permit may be issued to. A permit under this section may be issued only to the following: 
(1) ?A public authority. 
(2) ?A fair association. 
(3) ?An amusement park. 
(4) ?A park board. 
(5) ?A civic organization. 
(6) ?A group of resident or nonresident individuals. 
(7) ?An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory birds or animals. 
(d) ?Crop protection signs. A person issued a permit for crop protection shall erect appropriate warning signs disclosing the use of fireworks for crop protection. 
(e) ?Bond. The mayor issuing a permit under this section may require an indemnity bond with good and sufficient sureties or policy of liability insurance for the payment of all claims that may arise by reason of injuries to person or property from the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under the permit. The bond or policy, if required, shall be taken in the name of the city, and any person injured thereby may bring an action on the bond or policy in the person's own name to recover the damage the person has sustained, but the aggregate liability of the surety or insurer to all persons shall not exceed the amount of the bond or policy. The bond or policy, if required, together with a copy of the permit shall be filed in the office of the administrator. 
(f) ?Required information for permit. A permit under this section shall specify all of the following: 
(1) ?The name and address of the permit holder. 
(2) ?The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased. 
(3) ?The kind and quantity of fireworks which may be purchased. 
(4) ?The date and location of permitted use. 
(5) ?Other special conditions prescribed by ordinance. 
(g) ?Copy of permit. A copy of a permit under this subsection shall be given to the fire chief and chief of police at least two days before the date of authorized use. 
(h) ?Minors. A permit under this section may not be issued to a minor. 
(Code 1986, § 7-8-1(c)) 
Sec. 34-80. - Storage and handling. 
(a) ?Fire extinguishers required. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store or handle fireworks in any premises unless the premises are equipped with fire extinguishers approved by the fire chief. 
(b) ?Smoking. No person may smoke where fireworks are stored or handled. 
(c) ?Fire chief to be notified. A person who stores or handles fireworks shall notify the fire chief of the location of the fireworks. 
(d) ?Storage distance. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store fireworks within 50 feet of a dwelling. 
(e) ?Restrictions on storage. No person may store fireworks within 50 feet of a public assemblage or place where gasoline or volatile liquid is sold in quantities exceeding one gallon. 
(Code 1986, § 7-8-1(d)) 
Sec. 34-81. - Parental liability. 
    A parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the minor is liable for damages caused by the minor's use of the fireworks. 
(Code 1986, § 7-8-1(e)) 
Secs. 34-82—34-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FEES 

Sec. 34-106. - Fees for services. 
    By a majority vote of the common council, fees may be established and charged to property owners within the fire service area for services rendered by the fire department. Fees for service shall include, but not be limited to, emergency fire or ambulance service, fire inspections, and fuel spills. Such fees for services may be amended as deemed appropriate by majority action of the common council. 
(Ord. No. 92-7, § 1, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 34-107. - Fuel storage tank inspection fees. 
    If the city fire inspector and/or his designee is required by state law or city ordinance to perform inspection duties within the city's defined fire service area pertaining to either the installation or removal of fuel storage tanks, fees will be charged for initial site visits up to one hour and for additional time for site visits or revisits to the subject property owner as set from time to time by the council. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 5-29-1991) 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; rabies, § 10-101; manufactured homes, ch. 50; public nuisances, § 54-191 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; noxious weeds, § 86-31 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Rules and regulations for enforcement of chapter provisions. 
    The common council may make reasonable and general rules for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and for the prevention of the creation of health nuisances and the protection of the public health and welfare, and may, where appropriate, require the issuance of licenses and permits. All such regulations shall have the same effect as ordinances, and any person violating any of such regulations and any lawful order of the council shall be subject to the general penalty provided for in section 1-13. 
(Code 1986, § 6-1-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Health nuisances; abatement. 
    A health nuisance is any source of filth or cause of sickness. The common council shall abate health nuisances pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 146.14, which is adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 6-1-2) 
Sec. 38-3. - Keeping of livestock. 
(a) ?Sanitary requirements. If permitted by other city ordinances, all structures, pens, buildings, stables, coops or yards wherein animals or fowl are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of rodents, vermin and objectionable odors. 
(b) ?Animals excluded from food handling establishments. No person shall take or permit to remain any dog, cat or other live animal on or upon any premises where food is sold, offered for sale or processed for consumption by the general public. 
(Code 1986, § 6-1-3) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 38-4. - Deposit of deleterious substances. 
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any public street or on any public ground or on any private property not his own, any refuse, garbage, litter, waste material or liquid or any other objectionable material or liquid. When any such material is placed on the person's own private property, it shall be properly enclosed and covered so as to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 6-1-4) 
Sec. 38-5. - Cleanup of spilled or accidentally discharged wastes. 
(a) ?Required. All persons delivering, hauling, disposing, storing, discharging or otherwise handling potentially polluting substances, solid or liquid, such as, but not limited to, the following: fuel oil, gasoline, solvents, industrial liquids or fluids, milk, grease trap and septic tank wastes, sewage sludge, sanitary sewer wastes, storm sewer catchbasin wastes, oil or petroleum wastes, shall immediately clean up any such spilled material to prevent its becoming a hazard to health or safety or directly or indirectly causing the pollution to the lakes and streams under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b) ?Notification. Spills or accidental release of hazardous materials or pollutants at a site or of a quantity or nature that cannot adequately be cleaned up by the responsible party or parties shall be immediately reported to the police department so that assistance can be given by the proper agency. 
(c) ?Financial liability. The party or parties responsible for the release, escape or discharge of wastes may be held financially liable for the cost of any cleanup or attempted cleanup deemed necessary or desirable and undertaken by the city, or its designated agent, in an effort to minimize the pollutional effects of the discharged waste. 
(Code 1986, § 6-2-1) 
Sec. 38-6. - Storage of polluting substances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store any potentially polluting substances unless such substances are stored in such manner as to securely prevent them from escaping onto the ground surface and/or into any street, sewer, ditch or drainageway, lake or stream within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 6-2-2) 
Secs. 38-7—38-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention regulations for smoking, § 34-9. 

Sec. 38-41. - Adoption of state law provisions by reference. 
    The definitions in Wis. Stats. § 101.123, Clean Indoor Air Act, are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. 
Sec. 38-42. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a) ?Any person who willfully violates section 38-43(a), (b), or (e) after being advised by an employe of the facility that smoking in the area is prohibited or any person in charge or his agent who willfully fails to comply with section 38-46 shall forfeit not more than $10.00. 
(b) ?A violation of this section does not constitute negligence as a matter of law. 
(c) ?Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 165.60, state or local officials or any affected party may institute an action in any court with jurisdiction to enjoin repeated violations of this article. 
Sec. 38-43. - Prohibited areas. 
(a) ?Except as provided in section 38-44, no person may smoke in the following places: 
(1) ?Public conveyances. 
(2) ?Educational facilities. 
(3) ?Inpatient health care facilities. 
(4) ?Indoor movie theaters. 
(5) ?Offices. 
(6) ?Passenger elevators. 
(7) ?Restaurants. 
(8) ?Retail establishments. 
(9) ?Public waiting rooms. 
(10) ?Any enclosed, indoor area of a state, county, city, village or town building. 
(b) ?Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section and section 38-44 and except as provided in this section, no person may smoke in a motor bus, in a hospital or in a physician's office. 
(c) ?Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, a person who is an adult patient of a hospital or unit of a hospital that has as its primary purpose the care and treatment of mental illness, alcoholism or drug abuse and who has the written permission of a physician may smoke in a room that is designated as a smoking area under section 38-45(a). 
(d) ?The prohibition in subsections (a) and (b) of this section applies only to enclosed, indoor areas. 
(e) ?Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section and section 38-44, no person may smoke on the premises, indoors or outdoors, of a day care center when children who are receiving day care services are present. 
Sec. 38-44. - Exceptions. 
    The regulation of smoking in section 38-43(a) does not apply to the following: 
(1) ?Areas designated smoking areas under section 38-45. 
(2) ?Rooms in which the main occupants are smokers, even if nonsmokers are periodically present in the office or room. 
(3) ?Entire rooms or halls used for private functions, if the arrangements for the function are under the control of the sponsor of the function. 
(4) ?Restaurants holding a "class B" intoxicating liquor or class "B" fermented malt beverage license if the sale of intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages or both accounts for more than 50 percent of the restaurant's receipts. 
(5) ?A correctional institution under Wis. Stats. § 301.046(1) if the institution is the prisoner's place of residence. 
(6) ?A type 2 prison, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 301.01(6). 
Sec. 38-45. - Designation of smoking areas. 
(a) ?Except as provided in this section, a person in charge or his agent may designate smoking areas in the places where smoking is regulated under section 38-43(a) unless a fire marshal, law, ordinance or resolution prohibits smoking. A person in charge or his agent may not designate an entire building as a smoking area or designate any smoking areas in a motor bus, hospital or physician's office or on the premises, indoors or outdoors, of a day care center when children who are receiving day care services are present, except that in a hospital or a unit of a hospital that has as its primary purpose the care and treatment of mental illness, alcoholism or drug abuse a person in charge or his agent may designate one or more enclosed rooms with outside ventilation as smoking areas for the use of adult patients who have the written permission of a physician. Subject to this section and section 38-44, a person in charge or his agent may not designate an entire room as a smoking area. This subsection (a) does not apply to places described in subsection (b). 
(b) ?The secretary of health and social services or his designee may designate areas where smoking is permitted in a state institution other than a prison, unless a fire marshal, law or resolution prohibits smoking in the area. The secretary of corrections or his designee may designate areas where smoking is permitted in a prison, unless a fire marshal, law or resolution prohibits smoking in the area. Either secretary or his designee may designate an entire room as a smoking area in a state institution administered by the secretary's department. 
(1) ?A person in charge of a jail or lockup facility, or his agent, may designate areas where smoking is permitted in the jail or lockup facility, unless a fire marshal, law or resolution prohibits smoking in the area. The person in charge or his agent may designate an entire room in the jail or lockup facility as a smoking area. 
(2) ?Except in a prison, secured correctional facility, jail or lockup facility, an entire building may not be designated as a smoking area. 
(c) ?The person in charge or his agent shall post notice of the designation of a smoking area in or near the area designated. If an entire room is designated a smoking area, the person in charge or his agent shall post notice of the designation conspicuously on or near all entrances to the room normally used by the public. This subsection does not apply to a place described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d) ?The person in charge of a state institution, jail or lockup facility, or his agent, shall post notice of the designation of a smoking area under subsection (b) of this section in or near the area designated. If an entire room is designated a smoking area, the person in charge or his agent shall post notice of the designation conspicuously on or near all normally used entrances to the room. If an entire building in a prison, secured correctional facility, jail or lockup facility is designated a smoking area, the person in charge, or his agent, shall post notice of the designation on or near all normally used entrances to the building, but need not post notice of the designation on or near entrances to rooms within the building. 
(e) ?The person in charge or his agent shall utilize, if possible, existing physical barriers and ventilation systems when designating smoking areas. This subsection requires no new construction of physical barriers or ventilation systems in any building. 
(f) ?This section requires the posting of signs only in areas where smoking is permitted. 
Sec. 38-46. - Responsibilities. 
    The person in charge or his agent shall: 
(1) ?Post signs identifying designated smoking areas; and 
(2) ?Arrange seating to accommodate nonsmokers if smoking areas are adjacent to nonsmoking areas. 
Chapter 42 - LAND USE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This chapter is derived from title 10, Land Use Regulations, of the city's 1986 Code. 
Cross reference— Manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; waterways, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinances, including amendments to the zoning map, except that certain amendments were added as part of this codification, saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(11); zoning board of appeals, § 2-436 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-31. - Authority of article. 
    This article is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23(7) and 87.30 and amendments thereto. 
Sec. 42-32. - Title of article. 
    This article shall be known as, referred to, and cited as the "Zoning Code, City of Mosinee, Wisconsin" and is hereafter referred to as "this article." 
Sec. 42-33. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of the people of the City of Mosinee, Wisconsin. 
Sec. 42-34. - Intent and purposes in view. 
    The general intent and purposes in view of this article are to regulate and restrict the use of all structures, lands and waters, and to: 
(1) ?Promote and protect the comfort, public health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the people. 
(2) ?Divide the city into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business and manufacturing and other specified uses. 
(3) ?Protect the character and the stability of the residential, business, manufacturing and other districts within the city and to promote the orderly and beneficial development thereof. 
(4) ?Regulate lot coverage, the intensity of use of lot areas, and the size and location of all structures so as to prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation and drainage. 
(5) ?Regulate population density and distribution so as to avoid sprawl or undue concentration and to facilitate the provision of adequate public services, utilities and other public requirements. 
(6) ?Regulate parking, loading and access so as to lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of streets and highways. 
(7) ?Secure safety from fire, panic, flooding, pollution, contamination and other dangers. 
(8) ?Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(9) ?Preserve and protect the beauty of the city. 
(10) ?To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts. 
(11) ?To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district. 
(12) ?Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of the surface and subsurface waters. 
(13) ?Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions. 
(14) ?Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects. 
(15) ?Provide for and protect a variety of suitable commercial and industrial sites. 
(16) ?Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial streets and highways. 
(17) ?Implement those municipal, county, watershed and regional comprehensive plans or components of such plans adopted by the city. 
(18) ?Provide for the administration and enforcement of this article; and to provide penalties for the violation of this article. 
Sec. 42-35. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
Sec. 42-36. - Interpretation. 
(a) ?In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the city. 
(b) ?Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this article, upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings, are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this article or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
Sec. 42-37. - Severability and nonliability. 
    The city does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the common council, its agencies, or employes for any flood damages, sanitation problems or structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon, and conformance with this article. 
Sec. 42-38. - Jurisdiction and general provisions. 
(a) ?Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this article shall apply to all structures, lands, water, and air within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b) ?Compliance. No new structure, new use of land, water or air or change in the use of land, water or air shall hereafter be permitted, and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a zoning permit and without full compliance with the provisions of the ordinance from which this article is derived and all other applicable local, county and state regulations. 
(c) ?District regulations to be complied. Except as otherwise provided, the use and height of buildings hereafter erected, converted, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and the use of any land shall be in compliance with the regulations established in this article for the district in which such building or land are located. 
(d) ?Yard reduction or joint use. 
(1) ?No lot, yard, parking area, building area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as not to meet the provisions of this article. No part of any lot, yard, parking area, or other space required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use. 
(2) ?No part of a yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this article shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space required for another building. 
(3) ?Where a lot is to be occupied for a permitted use without buildings, the side yards and front yard required for such lot shall be provided and maintained unless otherwise stipulated in this article, except that side yards shall not be required on lots used for garden purposes without buildings or structures nor on lots used for public recreation areas. 
(4) ?No land which is located in a residence district shall be used for driveway, walkway, or access purposes to any land which is located in a business or industrial district, or used for any purpose not permitted in a residence district. 
(e) ?One main building per lot. Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot. 
(f) ?Lots abutting more restrictive district. In all residential districts, any side yard, rear yard or front yard abutting a district boundary line shall have a minimum width and depth in the less restricted district equal to the average of the required minimum widths and depths for such yards and courts in the two districts which abut the district boundary line. 
Sec. 42-39. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A zones means areas of potential flooding shown on the city's flood insurance rate map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These zones may be numbered as A0, A1 to A99, or be unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
    Abutting means having a common property line or district line. 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or detached structure subordinate to the principal use of a structure, parcel of land, or water and located on the same lot or parcel serving a purpose incidental to the principal use or the principal structure. 
    Acre, gross means the net area of land devoted to the land use, plus the proportionate area devoted to all supporting land uses, including public streets, public lands or unusable lands, and school sites, contained within 43,560 square feet. 
    Acre, net means the actual land devoted to the land use, excluding public streets, public lands or unusable lands, and school sites contained within 43,560 square feet. 
    Alley means a public way not less than ten or more than 21 feet wide which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, must always be included for each apartment. 
    Arterial street means a public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for large volume or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall include freeways and expressways as well as arterial streets, highways and parkways. 
    Basement means that portion of any structure located partly below the average adjoining lot grade which is not designed or used primarily for yearround living accommodations. Space partly below grade which is designed and finished as habitable space is not defined as basement space. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means any place of lodging that provides four or fewer rooms for rent for more than ten nights in a 12-month period, is the owner's personal residence, is occupied by the owner at the time of rental, and in which the only meal served is breakfast. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks or other recognized lines of demarcation. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals and lodging are regularly furnished by prearrangement for compensation for three or more persons not members of a family, but not exceeding 12 persons and not open to transient customers. 
    Buildable lot area means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
    Building means any structure, including decks, intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery or materials. When a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each part shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building, detached means a building surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
    Building, heights of means the vertical distance from the average curb level in front of the lot or the finished grade at the building line, whichever is higher, to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a gambrel, hip or pitch roof. 
    Building, principal means a building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
    Building, setback line means a line parallel to the lot line at a distance equal to the lot line regulated by the yard requirements set up in this Code. 
    Business means an occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time, labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered. 
    Channel means those floodlands normally occupied by a stream of water under average annual high-water flow conditions while confined within generally well-established banks. 
    Community living arrangement means the following facilities licensed or operated, or permitted under the authority of statute: Child welfare agencies under Wis. Stats. § 48.60, group foster homes for children under § 48.02(6), and community-based residential facilities under § 50.01; but does not include day care centers, nursing homes, general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons and jails. The establishment of a community living arrangement shall be in conformance with applicable statute, including Wis. Stats. §§ 46.03(22), 59.69(15), 62.23(7)(i), and 62.23(7a), and amendments thereto, and also the Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
    Conditional uses means uses of a special nature as to make impractical their predetermination as a permitted use in a district. 
    Conservation standards means guidelines and specifications for soil and water conservation practices and management enumerated in the "Technical Guide," prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service for Winnebago County, adopted by the county soil and water conservation district supervisors, and containing suitable alternatives for the use and treatment of land based upon its capabilities from which the landowner selects that alternative which best meets his needs in developing his soil and water conservation. 
    Controlled access arterial street means the condition in which the right of owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons to access, light, air or view in connection with an arterial street is fully or partially controlled by public authority. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, construction of or additions or substantial improvements to building, other structures or accessory uses, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or disposition of materials. 
    District, basic means parts of the city for which the regulations of this article governing the use and location of land and building are uniform. 
    District, overlay means regulatory areas, providing for the possibility of superimposing certain additional requirements upon a basic zoning district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district. In the instance of conflicting requirements, the more strict of the conflicting requirements shall apply. 
    Dwelling means a building designed or used exclusively as a residence or sleeping place, but does not include boardinghouses or lodginghouses, motels, hotels, tents, cabins, or mobile homes. 
    Dwelling unit means a group of rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling, which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one family. 
    Dwelling, efficiency means a dwelling unit consisting of one principal room with no separate sleeping rooms. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not to exceed the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a building designed for or occupied by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a building containing two separate dwelling (or living) units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families. 
    Equal degree of hydraulic encroachment means the effect of any encroachment into the floodway is to be computed by assuming an equal degree of hydraulic encroachment on the opposite side of a river or stream for a significant hydraulic reach, in order to compute the effect of the encroachment upon hydraulic conveyance. This computation ensures that the property owners up, down or across the river or stream will have the same rights of hydraulic encroachment. 
    Essential services means services provided by public and private utilities, necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater drainage and communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catchbasins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations, and hydrants, but not including buildings. 
    Family means one or more persons immediately related by blood, marriage or adoption and living as a single housekeeping unit in one dwelling unit shall constitute a family. A family may include, in addition thereto, two, but not more than two, persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption. A person shall be considered to be related for the purpose of this section if he is dwelling for the purpose of adoption or for a foster care program. 
Exceptions: Nothing in this article shall prohibit, under the definition of the term "family," priests, laybrothers, nurses or such other collective body of persons living together in one house under the same management and care, subsisting in common, and directing their attention to a common object or the promotion of their mutual interest and social happiness. 
    Farmstead means a single-family residential structure located on a parcel of land which primary land use is associated with agriculture. 
    Flood means a temporary rise in streamflow or stage in lake level that results in water overtopping the banks and inundating areas adjacent to the stream channel or lake bed. 
    Flood insurance study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards, and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations; or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mud flow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. Such studies shall result in the publication of a flood insurance rate map showing the intensity of flood hazards in either numbered or unnumbered A zones. 
    Flood profile means a graph showing the relationship of the floodwater surface elevation of a flood event of a specified recurrence interval to the stream bed and other significant natural and manmade features along a stream. 
    Flood protection elevation means a point two feet above the water surface elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood. This safety factor, also called freeboard, is intended to compensate for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than those computed. Such unknown factors may include ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action and obstructions of bridge openings. 
    Flood stage means the elevation of the floodwater surface above an officially established datum plane, which is mean sea level, 1929 adjustment, on the supplementary floodland zoning map. 
    Floodlands means, for the purpose of this article, the floodlands are all lands contained in the regional flood or 100-year recurrence interval flood. For the purpose of zoning regulation, the floodlands are divided into the floodway district, the floodplain conservancy district and the floodplain fringe overlay district. 
    Floodplain fringe means those floodlands, outside the floodway, subject to inundation by the 100-year recurrence interval flood. For the purpose of this article, the floodplain fringe includes the floodplain conservancy district and the floodplain fringe overlay district. 
    Floodproofing means measures designed to prevent and reduce flood damage for those uses which cannot be removed from, or which, of necessity, must be erected in the floodplain, ranging from structural modifications through installation of special equipment or materials to operation and management safeguards, such as the following: reinforcing of basement walls; underpinning of floors; permanent sealing of all exterior openings; use of masonry construction; erection of permanent watertight bulkheads, shutters and doors; treatment of exposed timbers; elevation of flood vulnerable utilities; use of waterproof cement; adequate fuse protection; sealing of basement walls; installation of sump pumps; placement of automatic swing check valves; installation of seal-tight windows and doors; installation of wire reinforced glass; location and elevation of valuable items; waterproofing, disconnecting, elevation or removal of all electric equipment; avoidance of the use of flood vulnerable areas; temporary removal or waterproofing of merchandise; operation of emergency pump equipment; closing of backwater sewer valve; placement of plugs and flood drain pipes; placement of movable watertight bulkheads; erection of sand bag levees; and the shoring of weak walls or structures. Floodproofing of structures shall be extended at least to a point two feet above the elevation of the regional flood. Any structure that is located entirely or partially below the flood protection elevation shall be anchored to protect it from larger floods. 
    Floodway means a designated portion of the 100-year flood area that will safely convey the regulatory flood discharge with small, acceptable upstream and downstream stage increases, limited in the state to 0.1 foot unless special legal measures are provided. The floodway, which includes the channel, is that portion of the floodplain not suited for human habitation. All fill, structures and other development that would impair floodwater conveyance by adversely increasing flood stages or velocities or would itself be subject to flood damage, should be prohibited in the floodway. 
    Floor area, business and manufacturing buildings means, for the purpose of determining off-street parking and off-street loading requirements, the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of the building, or portion thereof, devoted to a use requiring off-street parking or loading. This area shall include accessory storage areas located within selling or working space occupied by counters, racks or closets and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. However, floor area, for the purposes of determining off-street parking spaces, shall not include floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes except as otherwise noted in this section. 
    Foster home means the primary domicile of a foster parent which is for four or fewer foster children and which is licensed under Wis. Stats. § 48.62 and amendments thereto. 
    Frontage means all the property abutting on one side of a street. 
    Garage, private means a detached accessory building of greather than 120 square feet or portion of the principal building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for storage of automobile of the occupant of the premises. 
    Garage, public means any building or portion thereof, not accessory to a residential building or structure, used for equipping, servicing, repairing, leasing or public parking of motor vehicles. 
    Group home means any facility operated by a person required to be licensed by the state under Wis. Stats. § 48.62 for the care and maintenance of five to eight foster children. 
    Home occupation means any business or profession carried on only by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises, carried on wholly within the principal building or accessory building thereto, in connection with which there are no signs or exterior display or storage other than a sign permitted by this article, and no activity that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being used, in whole or in part, for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. The use is to be clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and shall not endanger the public health or safety. No articles shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises except such as is produced by the occupation on the premises, and no mechanical or electrical equipment shall be installed or maintained other than such as is customarily incidental to domestic use. Persons operating a home occupation shall employ no more than one nonresident employe. No business such as a shop or store shall be conducted upon the premises. No material or equipment shall be stored outside the confines of the home. No mechanical equipment may be used which creates a disturbance such as noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance. The home may not be altered to attract business. No motors shall be utilized which exceed one horsepower each and not exceeding five horsepower in total, such activity being deemed a public nuisance. Repairing of motor bicycles, motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, other than those licensed and owned by the occupants of a home in a residential area is strictly prohibited. For the purpose of this definition, the definitions of the above-mentioned vehicles shall be as set forth in Wis. Stats. ch. 340. Such repairing is deemed a public nuisance. It is immaterial for the purpose of this subsection whether or not such repairing is done in return for remuneration. 
    Hotel means a building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered to transient guests for compensation and in which there are more than five sleeping rooms with no cooking facilities in any individual room or apartment. 
    Loading area means a completely off-street space or berth on the same lot for the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley. 
    Lodginghouse means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation for not more than three persons not members of the family. 
    Lot means a parcel of land having frontage on a public street, or other officially approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area and other open space provisions of this article as pertaining to the district wherein located. 
    Lot, corner means a lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection, provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of 135 degrees or less, measured on the lot side. 
    Lot coverage (residential) means the area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory building. 
    Lot coverage (except residential) means the area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings including any driveways, parking areas, loading areas, storage areas and walkways. 
    Lot, interior means a lot situated on a single street which is bounded by adjacent lots along each of its other lines and is not a corner lot. 
    Lot line means a property boundary line of any lot, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the abutting street or alley right-of-way line. 
    Lot lines and area means the peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land and the total area lying within such boundaries. 
    Lot, substandard means a parcel of land held in separate ownership having frontage on a public street, or other approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or structure, together with accessory buildings and uses, having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street parking areas or other open space provisions of this article pertaining to the district wherein located. 
    Lot, through means a lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the building side yard setback line. 
    Minor structures means any small, movable accessory erection or construction such as birdhouses; tool houses; pet houses; play equipment; arbors and walls and fences under four feet in height. 
    Manufactured home means a manufactured home that is HUD certified and labeled under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. A mobile home is a transportable structure, being eight feet or more in width (not including the overhang of the roof), built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
    Manufactured home lot means a parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
    Manufactured home park means a parcel of land which has been developed for the placement of manufactured homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation. Individual lots within a manufactured home park are rented to individual manufactured home users. 
    Manufactured home subdivision means a land subdivision, as defined by Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and the city's subdivision ordinance, with lots intended for the placement of individual manufactured home units. Individual homesites are in separate ownership as opposed to the rental arrangements in manufactured home parks. 
    Modular unit means a modular unit is a factory fabricated transportable building unit designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure to be used for residential, commercial, educational or industrial purposes. 
    Nonconforming uses means any structure, use of land, use of land and structure in combination, or characteristic of use (such as yard requirement or lot size) which was existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or amendments thereto and which is not in conformance with this article. Any such structure conforming in respect to use but not in respect to frontage, width, height, area, yard, parking, loading or distance requirements shall not be considered a nonconforming use, but shall be considered nonconforming with respect to those characteristics. 
    Official letter of map amendment means official notification from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), that a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map has been amended. 
    Parking lot means a structure or premises containing five or more parking spaces open to the public. 
    Parking space means a graded and surfaced area of not less than 180 square feet in area either enclosed or open for the parking of a motor vehicle, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley. 
    Parties in interest means all abutting property owners, all property owners within 100 feet, and all property owners of opposite frontages. 
    Professional office means the office of a doctor, practitioner, dentist, minister, architect, landscape architect, engineer, lawyer, author, musician or other recognized trade. When established in a residential district, a professional office shall be incidental to the residential occupation, not more than 25 percent of the floor area of only one story of a dwelling unit shall be occupied by such office and only one unlighted nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area, containing the name and profession of the occupant of the premises shall be exhibited. 
    Public airport means any airport which complies with the definition contained in Wis. Stats. § 114.002(7) or any airport which serves or offers to serve common carriers engaged in air transport. 
    Rear yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. This yard shall be opposite the street yard or one of the street yards on a corner lot. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have generally occurred in the state and which may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics. The flood frequency of the regional flood is once in every 100 years; this means that in any given year, there is a one percent chance that the regional flood may occur or be exceeded. During a typical 30-year mortgage period, the regional flood has a 26 percent chance of occurrence. 
    Retail means the sale of goods or merchandise in small quantities to the consumer. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the foundation of that portion of the building to be enclosed. The overhang cornices shall not exceed 24 inches. Any overhang of the cornice in excess of 24 inches shall be compensated by increasing the setback by an amount equal to the excess of cornice over 24 inches. Uncovered steps shall not be included in measuring the setback. On corner lots, the setback shall be measured from the street line on which the lot fronts. The setback from the side street shall be equal to 75 percent of the setback required on residences fronting on the side street, but the side yard setback shall in no case restrict the buildable width to less than 30 feet. 
    Side yard means a yard extending from the street to the rear of the lot, the width of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. 
    Signs means any medium, including its structure, words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or trademarks by which anything is made known and which are used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity or product and which is visible from any public street or highway. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each 14 feet or fraction thereof. A basement having one-half or more of its height above grade shall be deemed a story for purposes of height regulation. 
    Story, half means that portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than 4½ feet above the finished floor of such story. In the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings less than three stories in height, a half-story in a sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of this article. 
    Street means property other than an alley or private thoroughfare or travelway which is subject to public easement or right-of-way for use as a thoroughfare and which is 21 feet or more in width. 
    Street yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing street or highway right-of-way line, and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure. Corner lots shall have two street yards. 
    Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    Temporary structure means a movable structure not designed for human occupancy nor for the protection of goods or chattels and not forming an enclosure, such as billboards. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
    Use, accessory means a subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or main use, when permitted by district regulations. 
    Use, principal means the main use of land or building as distinguished from subordinate or accessory use. 
    Utilities means public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations, static transformer stations, telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays and gas regulation stations, inclusive of associated transmission facilities, but not including sewage disposal plants, municipal incinerators, warehouses, shops, storage yards and power plants. 
    Vision clearance means an unoccupied triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot which is bounded by the street lines and a setback line connecting points specified by measurement from the corner on each street line. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except the vegetation. The street and rear yards extend the full width of the lot. 
    Zero lot line means the concept whereby two respective dwelling units within a building shall be on separate and abutting lots and shall meet on the common property line between them, thereby having zero spacing between such units. 
    Zoning permit means a permit issued by the zoning administrator to certify that the use of lands, structures, air and waters subject to this article are or shall be used in accordance with the provisions of said article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 4-9-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 42-40—42-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 42-61. - General administrative system. 
    This article contemplates an administrative and enforcement officer entitled the "zoning administrator" to administer and enforce the same. Certain considerations, particularly with regard to granting of permitted conditional uses, planned unit development conditional uses, changes in zoning districts and zoning map and amending the text of this article require review and recommendation by the plan commission and ultimate action by the common council. A zoning board of appeals is provided to ensure proper administration of the article and to avoid arbitrariness. 
Sec. 42-62. - Zoning administrator. 
    The city administrator is designated as the administrative and enforcement officer for the provisions of this article and is referred to as the zoning administrator. The duty of the zoning administrator shall be to interpret and administer this article and to issue, after onsite inspection, all permits required by this article. The zoning administrator shall further: 
(1) ?Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions. 
(2) ?Record the lowest floor elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered or improved in the floodland districts. 
(3) ?Establish that all necessary permits that are required for floodland uses by state and federal law have been secured. 
(4) ?Inspect all structures, lands and waters as often as necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(5) ?Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of structures, lands and waters, give notice of all violations of this article to the owner, resident, agent or occupant of the premises and report uncorrected violations to the city attorney in a manner specified by the city attorney. 
(6) ?Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until the city attorney has inspected and approved such use or erection. 
(7) ?Request assistance and cooperation from the police department and city attorney as deemed necessary. 
Cross reference— Officers and employes, § 2-176 et seq. 
Sec. 42-63. - Role of specific city officials in zoning administration. 
(a) ?Plan commission. The plan commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the city to the common council, other public officials and other interested organizations and citizens. In general, the plan commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this article, its functions are primarily recommendatory to the common council pursuant to guidelines set forth in this article as to various matters and, always, being mindful of the intent and purposes of this article. Recommendations shall be in writing. A recording thereof in the plan commission's minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. The plan commission may, in arriving at its recommendation, on occasion and of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing. 
(b) ?Common council. The common council, the governing body of the city, subject to recommendations by the plan commission and the holding of public hearings by such council, has ultimate authority to grant permitted conditional uses, planned unit development conditional uses, make changes and amendments in zoning districts, the zoning map and supplementary floodland zoning map, and to amend the text of this article. The council may delegate to the plan commission the responsibility to hold some or all public hearings as required under this chapter and other provisions therefor elsewhere in this article. 
(c) ?Zoning board of appeals. A zoning board of appeals is established to provide an appeal procedure for persons who deem themselves aggrieved by decisions of administrative officers in enforcement of this article. See sections 42-116—42-119 for detailed provisions. 
Sec. 42-64. - Zoning permit. 
(a) ?Required. No new structure, new use of land, water or air, or change in the use of land, water or air shall after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived be permitted and no structure or part thereof shall after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a zoning permit. 
(b) ?Application. Applications for a zoning permit shall be made to the zoning administrator and shall include the following where pertinent and necessary for proper review: 
(1) ?Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional engineer and contractor. 
(2) ?Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of employes; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies. 
(3) ?Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state or other map drawn to scale and showing such of the following as may be required by the zoning administrator: the location, boundaries, dimensions, uses and size of the following: Subject site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements, streets and other public ways; public utilities; off-street parking, loading areas and driveways; existing highway access restrictions; high water; channel, floodway and floodplain boundaries; and existing and proposed street, side and rear yards. 
(4) ?Additional information as may be required by the zoning administrator or the plan commission (if involved). 
(c) ?Action. 
(1) ?A zoning permit shall be granted or denied in writing by the zoning administrator within 30 days of application and the applicant shall post such permit in a conspicuous place at the site. 
(2) ?The permit shall expire within six months unless substantial work has commenced, or within 18 months after the issuance of the permit if the structure for which a permit is issued is not substantially completed, in which case of expiration, the applicant shall reapply for a zoning permit before commencing work on the structure. 
(3) ?Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this article shall be null and void. 
Sec. 42-65. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a) ?Required. No vacant land hereafter developed; no building hereafter erected, relocated, moved, reconstructed or structurally altered; and no floodlands hereafter filled, excavated or developed shall be occupied or used until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the zoning administrator. Such certificate shall show that the structure, premises or use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b) ?Application. Application shall be made in the same manner as for a zoning permit pursuant to section 42-64 and coincidental with application for zoning and/or building permit. Application for certificate of compliance in the floodland districts shall include certification by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor that the plans therefor will fully comply with the floodland regulations set forth in this article; before the certificate shall issue, further such certification by the engineer or surveyor shall also be filed to the effect that the project does, indeed, so comply. 
(c) ?Existing uses. Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of the adoption of this article, certifying, after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this article. 
(d) ?Nonconforming uses. 
(1) ?No nonconforming use shall be maintained, renewed or changed until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the zoning administrator. 
(2) ?Certificates of compliance for the continued occupancy of nonconforming uses existing at the time of the passage of this article shall be issued by the zoning administrator and the certificate shall state that the use is a nonconforming one and does not conform with the provisions of this article. The zoning administrator shall notify the owners of the property being used as nonconforming use. 
Sec. 42-66. - Site plan approval. 
(a) ?Site plan approval. All applications for zoning permits for any construction, reconstruction, expansion or conversion, except for one- and two-family residences in residential districts, shall require site plan approval by the plan commission in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(b) ?Application. The applicant for a zoning permit shall also submit a site plan and sufficient plans and specifications of proposed buildings, machinery and operations to enable the plan commission or its expert consultants to determine whether the proposed application meets all the requirements applicable thereto in this article. 
(c) ?Administration. The zoning administrator shall make a preliminary review of the application and plans, and refer them, along with a report of his findings, to the plan commission within ten days. The plan commission shall review the application and may refer the application and plans to one or more expert consultants selected by the common council to advise whether the application and plans meet all the requirements applicable thereto in this article. Within 30 days of its receipt of the application, the plan commission shall authorize the zoning administrator to issue or refuse a zoning permit. 
(d) ?Requirements. In acting on any site plan, the plan commission shall consider the following: 
(1) ?The appropriateness of the site plan and buildings in relation to the physical character of the site and the usage of adjoining land areas. 
(2) ?The layout of the site with regard to entrances and exits to public streets; the arrangement and improvement of interior roadways; the location, adequacy and improvement of areas for parking and for loading and unloading; and shall, in this connection, satisfy itself that the traffic pattern generated by the proposed construction or use shall be developed in a manner consistent with the safety of residents and the community, and the applicant shall so design the construction or use as to minimize any traffic hazard created thereby. 
(3) ?The adequacy of the proposed water supply, drainage facilities and sanitary and waste disposal. 
(4) ?The landscaping and appearance of the completed site. The plan commission may require that those portions of all front, rear and side yards not used for off-street parking shall be attractively planted with trees, shrubs, plants or grass lawns, and that the site be effectively screened so as not to impair the value of adjacent properties nor impair the intent or purposes of this section. 
(e) ?Effect on municipal services. Before granting any site approval, the plan commission may, besides obtaining advice from consultants, secure such advice as may be deemed necessary from municipal officials, with special attention to the effect of such approval upon existing municipal services and utilities. Should additional facilities be needed, the plan commission shall forward its recommendations to the common council and shall not issue final approval until the common council has entered into an agreement with the applicant regarding the development of such facilities. 
Sec. 42-67. - Violations and penalties. 
(a) ?Violations. It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land, or to use water or air in violation of any of the provisions of this article. In case of any violation, the common council, the zoning administrator, the plan commission or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation, may cause appropriate action or proceeding to be instituted to enjoin a violation of this article or cause a structure to be vacated or removed. 
(b) ?Remedial action. Whenever an order of the zoning administrator has not been complied with within 30 days after written notice has been mailed to the owner, resident agent or occupant of the premises, the common council, the zoning administrator or the city attorney may institute appropriate legal action or proceedings. 
(c) ?Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article or any order of the zoning administrator issued in accordance with this article or resists enforcement shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture and such additional penalties as provided for in section 1-13, except that the minimum forfeiture shall be $100.00. 
Secs. 42-68—42-90. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Changes and Amendments 

Sec. 42-91. - Authority. 
    Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice require, the common council may, by ordinance, change the district boundaries established by this article and the zoning map incorporated in this section by reference or amend, change or supplement the text of the regulations established by this article or amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the plan commission. 
Sec. 42-92. - Initiation. 
    The common council, the city plan commission, the zoning board of appeals, other government bodies and any private petitioners may apply for an amendment to the text of this article, to the district boundaries established or by amendments hereto in the accompanying zoning map made a part of this article. 
Sec. 42-93. - Petition. 
(a) ?Filing procedure. Petitions for any change to the district boundaries and maps or amendments to the text regulations shall be addressed to the common council and shall be filed with the zoning administrator, describe the premises to be rezoned or the portions of text of regulations to be amended, list the reasons justifying the petition, specify the proposed use, if applicable, and have attached the following, if petition is for change of district boundaries: 
(1) ?Plot plan, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet showing the area proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the location and classification of adjacent zoning districts, and the location and existing use of all properties within 300 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(2) ?Owners' names and addresses of all properties lying within 100 feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. 
(3) ?Together with additional information as may be required by the plan commission or common council. 
(b) ?Recommendations. The zoning administrator shall cause the petition to be forwarded to the plan commission for its consideration and recommendation. The plan commission shall review all proposed amendments to the text and zoning maps within the corporate limits and shall recommend in writing that the petition be granted as requested, modified or denied. A recording of the recommendation in the plan commission's official minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. In arriving at its recommendation, the plan commission may, on occasion, of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing on proposed amendment(s). 
(c) ?Hearings. 
(1) ?The common council, following receipt of recommendation of the plan commission, shall hold a public hearing upon each proposed change or amendment, giving notice of the time, place and the change or amendment proposed by publication of a class 2 notice, under Wis. Stats. ch. 985. At least ten days prior, written notice shall also be given to the clerk of any municipality within 1,000 feet of any land to be affected by the proposed change or amendment. 
(2) ?The common council may delegate to the plan commission the responsibility to hold public hearings as required under this section. 
(d) ?Common council's action. Following such hearing and after consideration of the plan commission's recommendations, the common council shall vote on the proposed ordinance effecting the proposed change or amendment. 
(e) ?Zone change request fee. The fee for requesting a change to this article as described in this section shall be as set by the council from time to time. Such fee shall be paid to the administrator at the time the zone change request is filed with the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 91-3, § 10-1-182(e), 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 42-94. - Protest. 
(a) ?In the event of a protest against amendment to the zoning map, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the areas of the land included in such proposed change, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such changes or amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the full common council membership. 
(b) ?In the event of protest against amendment to the text of the regulations of this article, duly signed and acknowledged by 20 percent of the number of persons casting ballots in the last general election, it shall cause a three-fourths vote of the full common council membership to adopt such amendment. 
Secs. 42-95—42-115. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Appeals 

Sec. 42-116. - To the zoning board of appeals. 
(a) ?Scope. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the alleged aggrievance or judgment in question by filing with the officers from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with payment of a filing fee as may be established by the common council. The officers from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeals all papers constituting the record of appeals upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b) ?Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certified to the board of appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in their opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(c) ?Powers of zoning board of appeals. In addition to the powers enumerated elsewhere in this Code, the board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1) ?Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator and/or building inspector. 
(2) ?Variances. To hear and grant appeals for variances as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit and purposes of this article shall be observed and the public safety, welfare and justice secured. Use variances shall not be granted. 
(3) ?Interpretations. To hear and decide application for interpretations of the zoning regulations and the boundaries of the zoning districts after the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(4) ?Substitutions. To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses, provided that no structural alterations are to be made and the city plan commission has made a review and recommendation. Whenever the board of appeals permits such a substitution, the use may not thereafter be changed without application. 
(5) ?Unclassified uses. To hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified uses, provided that such uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district, and the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. 
(6) ?Temporary uses. To hear and grant applications for temporary uses, in any district provided that such uses are of a temporary nature, do not involve the erection of a substantial structure, and are compatible with the neighboring uses, and the plan commission has made a review and recommendation. The permit shall be temporary, revocable, subject to any condition required by the board of zoning appeals, and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. Compliance with all other provisions of this article shall be required. 
(7) ?Permits. The board of appeals may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, modify the requirements appealed from and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
Sec. 42-117. - Hearings. 
    The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing, cause notice thereof to be published in the official newspaper not less than seven days prior thereto, cause notice to be given to the appellant or applicant and the administrative officers appealed from by regular mail or by personal service not less than five days prior to the date of hearing. In every case involving a variance, notice shall also be mailed not less than five days prior to the hearing to the fee owners of record of all land within 100 feet of any part of the subject building or premises involved in the appeal. 
Sec. 42-118. - Decisions of board of appeals. 
(a) ?Time frame. The board of appeals shall decide all appeals and applications within 30 days after the public hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the board's decision to the appellant or applicant and the zoning administrator. 
(b) ?Conditions. Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit ordered or authorized by this board. 
(c) ?Validity. Variances, substitutions or use permits granted by the board shall expire within six months unless substantial work has commenced pursuant to such grant. 
Sec. 42-119. - Variations. 
(a) ?Purpose. 
(1) ?The board of appeals may authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this article shall be observed and substantial justice done. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law. 
(2) ?For the purposes of this section, the term "unnecessary hardship" shall be defined as an unusual or extreme decrease in the adaptability of the property to the uses permitted by the zoning district which is caused by facts, such as rough terrain or poor soil conditions, uniquely applicable to the particular piece of property as distinguished from those applicable to most or all property in the same zoning district. 
(b) ?Application for variation. The application for variation shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Applications may be made by the owner or lessee of the structure, land or water to be affected. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1) ?Name and address of applicant and all abutting and opposite property owners of record. 
(2) ?Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of the property. 
(3) ?Address and description of the property. 
(4) ?A site plan showing an accurate depiction of the property. 
(5) ?Additional information required by the plan commission, zoning administrator or board of zoning appeals. 
(6) ?Fee receipt in the amount set by the council from time to time. 
(c) ?Public hearing of application. The board of appeals shall conduct at least one public hearing on the proposed variation. Notice of such hearing shall be given not more than 30 days and not less than ten days before the hearing in one or more of the newspapers in general circulation in the city, and shall give due notice to the parties in interest, the zoning administrator, and the plan commission. At the hearing the appellant or applicant may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. The board of appeals shall thereafter reach its decision within 30 days after the final hearing and shall transmit a written copy of its decision to the appellant or applicant, zoning administrator and plan commission. 
(d) ?Action of the board of appeals. For the board of appeals to grant a variance it must find that: 
(1) ?Denial of variation may result in hardship to the property owner due to physiographical considerations. There must be exceptional, extraordinary or unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure, use or intended use that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same district and the granting of the variance would not be of so general or recurrent nature as to suggest that this article should be changed. 
(2) ?The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based are unique to the property for which variation is being sought, and that such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same district and same vicinity. 
(3) ?The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase the value or income potential of the property. 
(4) ?The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
(5) ?The proposed variation will not undermine the spirit and general and specific purposes of this article. 
(e) ?Conditions. The board of appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this section. 
Secs. 42-120—42-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 42-141. - Establishment of districts. 
    For the purpose of this article, present and future, provision is hereby made for the division of the city into the following 16 basic zoning districts: 
(1) ?R-1 Single-family residence district. 
(2) ?R-2 Single-family residence district. 
(3) ?R-3 Single-family residence district. 
(4) ?R-4 General residence district. 
(5) ?R-5 Agricultural and estate district. 
(6) ?B-1 Neighborhood shopping district. 
(7) ?B-2 Community service district. 
(8) ?B-3 General commercial district. 
(9) ?B-4 Central business district. 
(10) ?M-1 Limited industrial district. 
(11) ?M-2 General industrial district. 
(12) ?I-R Interchange residence district. 
(13) ?I-B Interchange business district. 
(14) ?I-M Interchange industrial district. 
(15) ?VP Valley plain district. 
(16) ?MW Municipal well recharge area overlay district. 
Sec. 42-142. - Vacation of streets; annexations. 
(a) ?Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the vacated land reverts. 
(b) ?On land hereafter annexed to, or consolidated with, the city, no building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or moved and no change in the use of land or existing buildings or structures shall be made until an ordinance designating the zoning district classification of such annexed land is duly adopted by the common council. Within 30 days of the annexation, the plan commission shall file an application for an amendment to establish the zoning district classification of such land. However, if no action is taken regarding the classification of annexed land within 90 days of the date of annexation, such land shall acquire the R-1 district classification and shall remain so zoned until properly reclassified. 
Sec. 42-143. - Zoning map. 
(a) ?The boundaries of the districts listed in section 42-141 are hereby established as shown on the map entitled "District Map, City of Mosinee, Wisconsin," dated May 1993, as amended, which map is on file in the office of the city administrator and is made a part of this article by reference. All notations and references shown on the district map are as much a part of this article as though specifically described in this section. 
(b) ?The zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, and all amendments thereto, shall be a part of this article, and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described in this section. The administrator is authorized to make copies of such map available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-2005; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 2005-07, § 1, 9-12-2005; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1, 12-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 9-10-2007; Ord No. 2007-06, § 1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 1, 10-26-2009; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 1, 11-9-2009; Ord. No. 2010-03, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 2013-01, §§ 1—7, 6-10-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 42-144. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1) ?Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2) ?Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3) ?Boundaries indicated as approximately following city boundaries shall be construed as following municipal boundaries. 
(4) ?Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(5) ?Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6) ?Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in the preceding shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
Sec. 42-145. - Interpretation of district requirements. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. Unless otherwise specifically set forth, wherever a permitted use is named as a major category for a zoning district in this division, it shall be deemed to include all and only those itemized uses under the major category. No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted hereafter in the zoning district in which such building or tract of land shall be located, with the exception of the following: 
(1) ?Uses lawfully established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Uses already established on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of article F. 
(2) ?Conditional uses, allowed in accordance with this article. 
(b) ?Conditional uses. Conditional uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed in the zoning districts indicated, subject to the issuance of conditional use permits in accordance with the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article. Unless otherwise specifically set forth, wherever a conditional use is named as a major category in this article, it shall be deemed to include all and only those itemized uses listed under the district category. 
(c) ?Lot size requirements. Lot size requirements shall be as specified under each zoning district. In addition, the following regulations shall be complied with: 
(1) ?No use shall be established or hereafter maintained on a lot recorded after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived which is of less area or less width than prescribed in this division for such use in the zoning district in which it is to be located. 
(2) ?In a residence district on a lot of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, a single-family dwelling may be established regardless of the size of the lot, provided that all other requirements of this article are met. 
(3) ?No building shall be converted so as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the lot size requirements of the district in which such building is located. 
(4) ?Lot width shall be measured within the first 30 feet of lot depth in back of the required front yard. 
(d) ?Yard requirements. 
(1) ?Yard requirements shall be as set forth under each zoning district. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations indicated in this division and shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky, except as specifically excepted in this article. 
(2) ?All accessory buildings which are attached to principal buildings (e.g., attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building. 
(3) ?Where more than 30 percent of the frontage on one side of a duly recorded subdivided block is occupied by residences on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, a majority of such residences having observed or conformed to an average setback line with a variation of no more than six feet, no building shall thereafter be erected or structurally altered so as to project beyond such average setback line. 
(e) ?Building bulk limitations. 
(1) ?Building bulk limitations shall be expressed in terms of minimum yard requirements and maximum building height, or in terms of floor area ratio. Single-family and two-family residences are regulated on the basis of maximum building height, whereas all other uses, in all districts, must comply with the floor area ratio limitations prescribed in each zoning district. 
(2) ?The floor area ratio requirements shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings (total floor area of both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot. 
(f) ?Residential building orientation requirements. The architectural front of any principal residential building must face the front yard of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 1, 7-12-2004) 
Secs. 42-146—42-165. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - R-1 Single-Family Residence District 

Sec. 42-166. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the R-1 single-family residence district: 
(1) ?Single-family detached dwelling, but all new construction shall have a garage. 
(2) ?Cemeteries. 
(3) ?Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions as follows: 
a. ?Elementary and nursery schools. 
b. ?Junior or senior high schools. 
c. ?Public libraries and public art galleries. 
d. ?Public museums. 
(4) ?Recreational and social facilities: 
a. ?Athletic fields, noncommercial. 
b. ?Golf courses, but not golf driving ranges, pitch and putt, or miniature golf courses. 
c. ?Grounds of recreational clubs, noncommercial. 
d. ?Parks and playgrounds. 
e. ?Recreational buildings and community centers, noncommercial. 
f. ?Swimming pools, noncommercial. 
g. ?Tennis clubs and courts. 
(5) ?Religious institutions, as follows: 
a. ?Churches, chapels, temples, and synagogues. 
b. ?Convents, seminaries, monasteries, and nunneries. 
c. ?Rectories, parsonages, and parish houses. 
d. ?Religious retreats. 
(6) ?Signs, as regulated hereunder. 
(7) ?Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a principal use, as follows: 
a. ?Agricultural buildings and structures. 
b. ?Athletic fields and playgrounds. 
c. ?Boathouses, private. 
d. ?Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses, and tennis clubs. 
e. ?Garages and carports. 
f. ?Greenhouses and conservatories, private. 
g. ?Guest houses, private. 
h. ?Home occupations. 
i. ?Living quarters, detached—for persons employed on the premises if occupied only by such persons and their immediate family. 
j. ?Roadside stands—for the display and sale of agricultural products on zoning lots where the principal use is agriculture. 
k. ?Sewage disposal units, individual. 
l. ?Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields. 
m. ?Storage of building materials and equipment, and temporary buildings for construction purposes—for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
n. ?Swimming pools and tennis courts, private. 
o. ?Temporary real estate tract offices—for the purpose of conducting the sale of lots of the tract upon which such tract office is located, for a period not to exceed two years. 
p. ?Tool houses, sheds, and other similar buildings for the storage of domestic supplies. 
q. ?Water systems, individual. 
Sec. 42-167. - Conditional uses. 
    The following conditional uses may be allowed in the R-1 district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: 
(1) ?Airports and commercial heliports, including aircraft landing fields, runways, flight strips and flying schools, together with hangars, terminal buildings and other auxiliary facilities. 
(2) ?Educational institutions and boarding institutions, as follows: 
a. ?Colleges, junior colleges, and universities, including fraternity and sorority houses, dormitories and other structures and facilities necessary to the operation of a college or university, but not business colleges and trade schools. 
b. ?Nursery, elementary and junior and senior high schools, boarding facilities as well. 
(3) ?Excavations for specified purposes, as follows: 
a. ?Artificial lakes. 
b. ?Borrow pits. 
c. ?Topsoil removal. 
(4) ?Health and medical institutions, as follows: 
a. ?Convalescent, nursing and rest homes. 
b. ?Care giving institutions. 
(5) ?Philanthropic and charitable institutions. 
(6) ?Planned developments, residential, in accordance with subdivision XVIII of this division. 
(7) ?Public utility and service uses, as follows: 
a. ?Electric substations. 
b. ?Fire stations. 
c. ?Natural gas regulator stations. 
d. ?Police stations. 
e. ?Other municipal, town and county buildings. 
f. ?Railroad rights-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops other than for passenger purposes. 
g. ?Sewage treatment plants for the community. 
h. ?Telephone exchanges, telephone transmission equipment. 
i. ?Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants. 
(8) ?Accessory uses, incidental to, and on the same zoning lot as a principal use. 
Sec. 42-168. - Lot size requirements (area and width). 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-1 district, a lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the following table: 
Single-family detached dwellings
Minimum Lot Area 2 acres

Other regulations
Minimum Lot area
Minimum 
Lot 
Width , rectories, parsonages and parish houses 10,000 square feet ?90 feet Cemeteries 2 acres 175 feet Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions 40,000 square feet 150 feet Recreational and social buildings and community centers 20,000 square feet 100 feet Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages, and parish houses 20,000 square feet 100 feet  
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each principal conditional use located in the R-1 district, a lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the following table: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Airports and commercial heliports In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Educational institutions, boarding ?2 acres 175 feet Excavations for specified purposes In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Health and medical institutions 40,000 square feet 150 feet Philanthropic and charitable institutions 40,000 square feet 150 feet Planned developments, residential 10 acres none Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
(c) ?Accessory uses. Each accessory use may be established on the same lot as a principal use, provided that such lot meets the lot size requirements of the R-1 district as provided in this section; except, however, as indicated for the following accessory uses: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Boathouses, private 20,000 square feet 100 feet Guesthouses, private 20,000 square feet 100 feet Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises 20,000 square feet 100 feet Sewage disposal units, individual 20,000 square feet 100 feet Water systems, individual 20,000 square feet 100 feet  
Sec. 42-169. - Yard requirements. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-1 district, a front yard, two side yards, and a rear yard shall be provided, each of which shall be not less than the amount stipulated in the following table: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Single-family detached dwellings, rectories, parsonages and parish houses 30 feet 10 feet 20 feet 35 feet Cemeteries No Requirements Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions 50 feet ?15 feet* ?30 feet* 75 feet Recreational and social buildings and community centers 40 feet ?15 feet ?30 feet 50 feet Religious institutions—except rectories, parsonages, and parish houses 40 feet ?15 feet* ?30 feet* 50 feet  
*Plus one foot for each two feet by which the building height exceeds 15 feet. 
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each principal conditional use located in the R-1 district, a front yard, two side yards, and a rear yard shall be provided, each of which shall be not less than the amount stipulated in the following table: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Airports and commercial heliports In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Educational institutions, boarding 50 feet from the nearest property line Excavations for specified purposes 50 feet from the nearest property line Health and medical institutions 50 feet 15 feet* 30 feet* 75 feet Philanthropic and charitable institutions 50 feet 15 feet* 30 feet* 75 feet Planned developments, residential As provided in subdivision XVIII of this division Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
*Plus one foot for each two feet by which the building or structure height exceeds 15 feet. 
(c) ?Accessory buildings. Except as indicated below, the yard requirements of the principal uses in the R-1 district shall apply to their accessory buildings: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Agricultural buildings 100 feet 50 feet 50 feet 100 feet Boathouses, private No requirements Buildings accessory to single-family dwellings, other than those specified in this section ?30 feet 10 feet 20 feet ??3 feet Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses and tennis clubs Shall be located not less than 200 feet from the nearest residential property line Roadside stands on lots where the principal use is agriculture ?20 feet 50 feet 20 feet No requirements Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields Shall be located not less than 200 feet from the nearest residential property line Temporary buildings for construction purposes No yard requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property  
_____
Secs. 42-170—42-190. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - R-2 Single-Family Residence District 

Sec. 42-191. - Permitted uses. 
    Any use permitted in the R-1 district may be used in the R-2 district, except that construction of a garage shall be optional. 
Sec. 42-192. - Conditional uses. 
    Any use may be allowed as a conditional use in the R-1 district may be allowed in the R-2 district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article, except house trailer parks. 
Sec. 42-193. - Lot size requirements. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-2 district, a lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the following table: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Single-family detached dwellings, rectories, parsonages, and parish houses ?8,400 square feet ?70 feet Cemeteries 2 acres 175 feet Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions 40,000 square feet 300 feet Recreational and social buildings and community centers 20,000 square feet 100 feet Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages and parish houses 20,000 square feet 100 feet  
(b) ?Conditional uses. Lot size requirements for conditional uses allowed in the R-2 district shall be as specified in the R-1 district. 
(c) ?Accessory uses. Lot size requirements for accessory uses in the R-2 district shall be as specified in the R-1 district. 
_____
Sec. 42-194. - Yard requirements. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-2 district, a front yard, two side yards, and a rear yard shall be provided, each of which shall be not less than the amount stipulated in the following table: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Single-family detached dwellings, rectories, parsonages, and parish houses ?25 feet* ?8 feet 15 feet 30 feet Cemeteries No requirements Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions 40 feet ??15 feet** ??30 feet** 75 feet Recreational and social buildings and community centers 30 feet ??10 feet** ??25 feet** 40 feet Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages and parish houses 30 feet ??10 feet** ??25 feet** 40 feet  
*?Twenty percent of the lot depth, whichever is less. 
**Plus one foot for each two feet by which the building height exceeds 15 feet. 
_____
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each principal conditional use located in the R-2 district, a front yard, two side yards, and a rear yard shall be provided, each of which shall be not less than the amount stipulated in the R-1 district. 
Sec. 42-195. - Building bulk limitations. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the R-2 district are as follows: 
Maximum 
Building 
Height Single-family detached dwellings, rectories, parsonages and parish houses 2½ stories, but not to 
exceed 35 feet All other permitted uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio.  
Floor 
Area 
Ratio Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions 0.75 Recreational and social buildings 0.50 Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages and parish houses 0.50  
(b) ?Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-2 district are as follows: 
Floor Area 
Ratio Airports and commercial heliports In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Bed and breakfast establishments [on file] Educational institutions, boarding 0.30 Health and medical institutions 0.75 Philanthropic and charitable institutions 0.50 Planned developments, residential As provided in subdivision XVIII of this division Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
(c) ?Accessory uses. In the R-1 district, the floor area of the accessory buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on the zoning lot, as specified for the principal uses in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. However, any floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities in the R-2 district shall be exempt from floor area ratio requirements. 
Secs. 42-196—42-215. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - R-3 Single-Family Residence District 

Sec. 42-216. - Permitted uses. 
(a) ?Any use permitted in the R-1 district may be permitted in the R-3 district except that single-family residential dwellings shall have a garage. 
(b) ?Duplexes may be permitted in the R-3 district, but all new construction shall have a garage. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-27(a); Ord. No. 92-2, § 2, 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 42-217. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses permitted in the R-3 district are bed and breakfast establishments. 
Sec. 42-218. - Lot size requirements. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-3 district, a lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the following table: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Single-family detached dwellings, duplexes, rectories, parsonages and parish houses ?7,200 
square feet ?60 feet Cemeteries 2 acres 175 feet Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions 20,000 
square feet 100 feet Recreational and social buildings and community centers 15,000 
square feet ?90 feet Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages and parish houses 15,000 
square feet ?90 feet  
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each principal conditional use located in the R-3 district, a lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the following table: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Educational institutions, boarding 2 acres 175 feet Health and medical institutions ?20,000 
square feet 100 feet Philanthropic and charitable institutions ?20,000 
square feet 100 feet Planned developments, residential 100,000 
square feet none Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
(c) ?Accessory uses. Lot size requirements for accessory uses in the R-3 district shall be as specified in the R-1 district. 
Sec. 42-219. - Yard requirements. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-3 district, a front yard, two side yards, and a rear yard shall be provided each of which shall be not less than the amount stipulated in the following table: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Single-family detached dwellings, duplexes, rectories, parsonages and parish houses ?20 feet* ?8 feet 15 feet 30 feet Cemeteries No requirements Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions 30 feet ??10 feet** ??25 feet** 40 feet Recreational and social facilities, except: recreational buildings and community centers 25 feet ???8 feet** ??20 feet** 35 feet Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages, and parish houses 25 feet ???8 feet** ??20 feet** 35 feet  
*?Twenty percent of the lot depth, whichever is less. 
**Plus one foot for each two feet by which the building height exceeds 15 feet. 
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each principal conditional use located in the R-3 district, a front yard, two side yards, and a rear yard shall be provided, each of which shall be not less than the amount stipulated in the following table: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Educational institutions, boarding 50 feet from the nearest property line Health and medical institutions 30 feet ?10 feet* ?25 feet* 40 feet Philanthropic and charitable institutions 30 feet ?10 feet* ?25 feet* 40 feet Planned developments, residential As specified in subdivision XVIII of this division Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
*Plus one foot for each two feet by which the building height exceeds 15 feet. 
_____
(c) ?Accessory uses. Yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in the R-2 district. 
Sec. 42-220. - Building bulk limitations. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the R-3 district are as follows: 
Maximum Building Height Single-family detached dwellings, rectories, parsonages and parish houses 2½ stories, but not to exceed 35 feet All other permitted uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio.  
Floor Area Ratio Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions 1.00 Recreational and social buildings 0.80 Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages and parish houses 0.80  
(b) ?Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-3 district are as follows: 
Floor 
Area 
Ratio Educational institutions, boarding 0.50 Health and medical institutions 1.00 Philanthropic and charitable institutions 0.80 Planned developments, residential As provided in subdivision XVIII of this division Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
(c) ?Accessory uses. In the R-3 district, the floor area of the accessory buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on the zoning lot, as specified for the principal uses in section 42-220(a) and (b). However, any floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities shall be exempt from floor area ratio requirements. 
Secs. 42-221—42-240. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - R-4 General Residence District 

Sec. 42-241. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses in the R-4 district are as follows: 
(1) ?Single-family dwellings, except that all new construction shall have a garage. 
(2) ?Duplexes, except that all new construction shall have a garage. 
(3) ?Apartment hotels. 
(4) ?Multiple-family dwellings, except that all new construction shall have a garage or carport. 
(5) ?Boardinghouses, lodginghouses, and roominghouses. 
(6) ?Educational and cultural institutions, nonboarding. 
(7) ?Recreational and social facilities. 
(8) ?Religious institutions. 
(9) ?Only the following accessory uses and buildings incidental to, and on the same zoning lot as a principal use, shall be permitted in the R-4 district: 
a. ?Athletic fields and playgrounds. 
b. ?Boathouses, private, but not accessory to dwelling units other than single-family. 
c. ?Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses and tennis clubs. 
d. ?Garages and carports. 
e. ?Greenhouses and conservatories, private, but not accessory to dwellings having less than 5,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. 
f. ?Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields. 
g. ?Home occupations. 
h. ?Storage of building materials and equipment, and temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
i. ?Swimming pools and tennis courts, private. 
j. ?Temporary real estate tract offices for the purposes of conducting the sale of lots of the tract upon which such tract office is located, for a period not to exceed two years. 
k. ?Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings for the storage of domestic supplies. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-28(a); Ord. No. 92-2, § 3, 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 42-242. - Conditional uses. 
    The following conditional uses may be allowed in the R-4 district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: 
(1) ?Clubs and lodges, private. 
(2) ?Educational institutions, boarding. 
(3) ?Health and medical institutions. 
(4) ?Philanthropic and charitable institutions. 
(5) ?Planned developments, residential. 
(6) ?Public utility and service uses. 
(7) ?Accessory uses, incidental to, and on the same zoning lot as a principal use. 
(8) ?Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(9) ?Business and professional offices. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 9-12-2005) 
Sec. 42-243. - Lot size requirements. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-4 district, a lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the following table: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Single-family detached dwellings, rectories, parsonages and parish houses ?7,200 square feet ?60 feet Two-family detached dwellings ?7,200 square feet ?60 feet Multiple-family dwellings, including single-family and two-family attached dwellings and apartment hotels: 2 or more bedrooms ??1,500 
square feet* 
per dwelling unit ?60 feet 1 bedroom or efficiency ??1,200 
square feet* 
per dwelling unit ?60 feet Boardinghouses, lodginghouses and roominghouses ??? 900 
square feet* 
per room ?60 feet Educational and cultural institutions, nonboarding 20,000 square feet 100 feet Recreational buildings and community centers ?10,000 
square feet ?70 feet Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages and parish houses ?10,000 
square feet ?70 feet  
*However, in no case shall the lot area be less than 7,200 square feet. 
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each principal conditional use located in the R-4 district, a lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the following table: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Clubs and lodges ?10,000 
square feet ?70 feet Educational institutions, boarding ?40,000 
square feet 150 feet Health and medical institutions ?20,000 
square feet 100 feet Philanthropic and charitable institutions ?20,000 
square feet 100 feet Planned developments, residential 100,000 
square feet none Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
(c) ?Accessory uses. Each accessory use may be established on the same lot as a principal use, provided that such lot meets the lot size requirements of the R-4 district; except, however, as indicated for the following accessory uses: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Boathouses, private 20,000 square feet 100 feet Guesthouses, private 10,000 square feet ?70 feet Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises 10,000 square feet ?70 feet  
_____
Sec. 42-244. - Yard requirements. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-4 district, a front yard, two side yards, and a rear yard shall be provided, each of which shall be not less than the amount stipulated in the following table: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Single-family detached dwellings, rectories, parsonages and parish houses 20 feet ?8 feet 12 feet 30 feet Two-family and multiple-family dwellings, apartment hotels, and boardinghouses, lodginghouses and roominghouses 20 feet ??8 feet* ???12 feet*** 30 feet Educational and cultural institutions, nonboarding 25 feet ??10 feet** ???20 feet*** 40 feet Recreational and social facilities, No requirements except recreational buildings and community centers 20 feet ???8 feet** ???15 feet*** 30 feet Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages and parish houses 20 feet ???8 feet** ???15 feet*** 30 feet  
??*Plus one foot for each three feet by which the building height exceeds 25 feet. 
?**Plus one foot for each two feet by which the building height exceeds 15 feet. 
***Plus one foot for each five feet by which the building height exceeds 25 feet. 
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each principal conditional use located in the R-4 district, a front yard, two side yards and a rear yard shall be provided, each of which shall be not less than the amount stipulated in the following table: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Clubs and lodges 20 feet ??8 feet* ?15 feet* 30 feet Educational institutions, boarding 35 feet from the nearest property line Health and medical institutions 25 feet ?10 feet* ?20 feet* 40 feet Philanthropic and charitable institutions 25 feet ?10 feet* ?20 feet* 40 feet Planned developments, residential As provided in subdivision XVIII of this division Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
*Plus one foot for each two feet by which the building height exceeds 15 feet. 
(c) ?Accessory buildings. Except as indicated below, the yard requirements of the principal uses shall apply to their accessory buildings. 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Boathouses, private No requirements Buildings accessory to dwellings, except those uses specifically itemized in this section 20 feet ?8 feet 12 feet ?3 feet Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses and tennis clubs Shall be located not less than 200 feet from the nearest residential property line Guest houses, private 20 feet ?8 feet 15 feet 30 feet Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises 20 feet ?8 feet 15 feet 30 feet Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields Shall be located not less than 200 feet from the nearest residential property line Temporary buildings for construction purposes No yard requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property  
_____
Sec. 42-245. - Building bulk limitations. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each permitted use in the R-4 district the ratio of the floor area of the principal buildings to the lot area shall not exceed that stipulated in the following table: 
Maximum Building Height Single-family detached dwellings, rectories, parsonages and parish houses, and two-family detached dwellings 2½ stories, but not to exceed 35 feet All other permitted uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio.  
Floor 
Area 
Ratio Multiple-family dwellings, including single-family and two-family attached dwellings, apartment hotels and boardinghouses, lodginghouses and roominghouses 1.50 Educational and cultural institutions 1.00 Recreational and social buildings 0.80 Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages and parish houses 0.80  
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each conditional use in the R-4 district the ratio of the floor area of the principal buildings to the lot area shall not exceed that stipulated in the following table: 
Floor 
Area 
Ratio Clubs and lodges 0.80 Educational institutions, boarding 0.50 Health and medical institutions 1.00 Philanthropic and charitable institutions 0.80 Planned developments, residential As provided in subdivision XVIII of this division Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
(c) ?Accessory uses. In the R-4 district, the floor area of the accessory buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on the zoning lot, as specified for the principal uses in section 42-245(a) and (b). However, any floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities shall be exempt from floor area ratio requirements. 
Secs. 42-246—42-265. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - R-5 Agricultural and Estate District[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 

Sec. 42-266. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the R-5 district: 
(1) ?Single-family dwellings, except that all new construction shall have a garage. 
(2) ?Parks, campgrounds and open spaces. 
(3) ?Agriculture and general farming except farms feeding offal or garbage and mink farming. 
(4) ?Livestock raising. 
(5) ?Truck farming. 
(6) ?Forestry. 
(7) ?Poultry raising. 
(8) ?Golf courses. 
(9) ?Cemeteries. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-29(a); Ord. No. 92-2, § 4, 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 42-267. - Conditional uses. 
    The following conditional uses may be allowed in the R-5 district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: 
(1) ?Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions: 
a. ?Elementary and nursery schools. 
b. ?Junior or senior high schools. 
c. ?Public libraries and public art galleries. 
d. ?Public museums. 
(2) ?Recreational and social facilities: 
a. ?Athletic fields, noncommercial. 
b. ?Golf courses, but not golf driving ranges, pitch and putt or miniature golf courses. 
c. ?Grounds of recreational clubs, noncommercial. 
d. ?Parks and playgrounds. 
e. ?Recreational buildings and community centers, noncommercial. 
f. ?Swimming pools, noncommercial. 
g. ?Tennis clubs and courts. 
(3) ?Religious institutions, as follows: 
a. ?Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues. 
b. ?Convents, seminaries, monasteries and nunneries. 
c. ?Rectories, parsonages and parish houses. 
d. ?Religious retreats. 
(4) ?Signs, as regulated under division 8 of this article. 
(5) ?Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a principal use, as follows: 
a. ?Agricultural buildings and structures. 
b. ?Athletic fields and playgrounds. 
c. ?Boathouses, private. 
d. ?Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses and tennis clubs. 
e. ?Garages and carports. 
f. ?Greenhouses and conservatories, private. 
g. ?Guesthouses, private. 
h. ?Home occupations. 
i. ?Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises if occupied only by such persons and their immediate family. 
j. ?Roadside stands, for the display and sale of agricultural products on zoning lots where the principal use is agricultural. 
k. ?Sewage disposal units, individual. 
l. ?Stables, private (noncommercial). 
m. ?Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields. 
n. ?Storage of building materials and equipment, and temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
o. ?Swimming pools and tennis courts, private. 
p. ?Temporary real-estate tract offices, for the purpose of conducting the sale of lots of the tract upon which such tract office is located, for a period not to exceed two years. 
q. ?Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings for the storage of domestic supplies. 
r. ?Water systems, individual. 
(6) ?Airports and commercial heliports, including aircraft landing fields, runways, flight hangars, terminal buildings and other auxiliary facilities. 
(7) ?Excavations for specified purposes, as follows: 
a. ?Artificial lakes. 
b. ?Borrow pits. 
c. ?Topsoil removal. 
(8) ?Health and medical institutions, as follows: 
a. ?Convalescent, nursing and rest homes. 
b. ?Hospitals and sanitariums, but not including institutions for the care or treatment of the insane, feeble-minded, alcoholic or drug addict patients. 
c. ?Institutions for the care of the aged and for children. 
(9) ?Manufactured home parks, subject to other provisions of this Code of Ordinances. 
(10) ?Philanthropic and charitable institutions. 
(11) ?Planned developments, residential, in accordance with subdivision XVIII of this division. 
(12) ?Public utility and service uses, as follows: 
a. ?Electric substations. 
b. ?Fire stations. 
c. ?Gas regulator stations. 
d. ?Police stations. 
e. ?Other municipal, town and county buildings. 
f. ?Post offices. 
g. ?Railroad passenger stations. 
h. ?Railroad rights-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops other than for passenger purposes. 
i. ?Sewage treatment plants, community. 
j. ?Telephone exchanges, telephone transmission-equipment buildings and microwave relay towers. 
k. ?Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants. 
(13) ?Taverns. 
(14) ?Mink farms. 
(15) ?Landfills, disposal areas, incinerators and sewage treatment plants. 
(16) ?Service stations. 
(17) ?Resorts. 
(18) ?Commercial rental storage buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 8-11-2014) 
Sec. 42-268. - Lot side requirements (area and width). 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-5 district, a lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the following table: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Single-family detached dwellings ?2 acres 270 feet Parks, campgrounds and open spaces ?5 acres 300 feet Agriculture, general farming, livestock raising, poultry raising ?5 acres 300 feet Forestry ?5 acres 300 feet Golf courses 10 acres 300 feet Cemeteries ?2 acres 200 feet  
_____
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each principal conditional use located in the R-5 district, a lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the following table: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Educational and cultural institutions ?5 acres 300 feet Recreational and social facilities 40,000 square feet 150 feet Religious institutions 40,000 square feet 150 feet Airports and commercial heliports In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Excavations for specified purposes In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Health and medical institutions ?2 acres 200 feet Manufactured home parks 20 acres none Philanthropic and charitable institutions ?2 acres none Planned developments, residential 20 acres none Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Radio and television stations and towers ?5 acres 300 feet Taverns 10 acres 600 feet Dumps, disposal areas, incinerators and sewage treatment plants ?5 acres 400 feet Service stations 20,000 square feet 100 feet Resorts ?5 acres 300 feet Commercial rental storage buildings ?2 acres 400 feet  
(c) ?Accessory buildings. The yard requirements of the principal uses in the R-5 district shall apply to their accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 2, 8-11-2014) 
Sec. 42-269. - Yard requirements. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. For each principal permitted use located in the R-5 district, a front yard, two side yards, and rear yard shall be provided, each of which shall be not less than the amount stipulated in the following table: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Single-family detached dwellings 30 feet 90 feet 90 feet 35 feet Parks, campgrounds and open spaces No requirements Agriculture, general farming, livestock raising, poultry raising 50 feet No other requirements Forestry No requirements Golf courses 30 feet No other requirements Cemeteries 30 feet No other requirements  
(b) ?Conditional uses. For each principal conditional use located in the R-5 district, a front yard, two side yards and a rear yard shall be provided, each of which shall not be less than the amount stipulated in the following table: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Educational and cultural institutions ?75 feet ?50 feet ?75 feet 100 feet Recreational and social facilities ?50 feet ?30 feet ?50 feet ?75 feet Religious institutions ?50 feet ?30 feet ?50 feet ?75 feet Airports and commercial heliports In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Excavations for specified uses 75 feet from the nearest property line Health and medical institutions ?75 feet ?30 feet ?75 feet 100 feet Manufactured mobile home parks In accordance with other provisions of this Code of Ordinances Philanthropic and charitable institutions ?75 feet ?30 feet ?75 feet 100 feet Planned developments, residential As provided in subdivision XVIII of this division Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Radio and television stations and towers ?75 feet ?50 feet ?75 feet 100 feet Taverns ?50 feet ?30 feet ?50 feet ?75 feet Mink farming 150 feet 250 feet 250 feet 300 feet Landfills, disposal areas, incinerators and sewage treatment plants 200 feet from nearest property line Service stations ?50 feet ?30 feet ?50 feet ?50 feet Resorts 50 feet from nearest property line Commercial rental storage buildings 50 feet 30 feet 50 feet 50 feet  
(c) ?Accessory uses. Each accessory use may be established on the same lot as a principal use, provided that such lot meets the lot size requirements of the R-5 district as provided in section 42-268(a) and (b). 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 3, 8-11-2014) 
_____
Sec. 42-270. - Building bulk limitations. 
(a) ?Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the R-5 district are as follows: 
Maximum Building Height Single-family detached dwellings 2½ stories, but not to exceed 35 feet  
(b) ?Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-5 district are as follows: 
Floor Area Ratio Educational and cultural institutions 0.30 Recreational and social facilities 0.20 Religious institutions 0.20 Airports and commercial heliports In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Health and medical institutions 0.30 Manufactured home parks In accordance with other provisions of this Code of Ordinances Philanthropic and charitable institutions 0.20 Planned developments, residential As provided in subdivision XVIII of this division Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article Radio and television stations and towers 0.10 Taverns 0.20 Service stations 0.10 Resorts 0.20 Commercial rental storage buildings 0.20  
(c) ?Accessory uses. In the R-5 district, the floor area of the accessory buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted in the zoning lot, as specified for the principal uses in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. However, any floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities shall be exempt from floor area ratio requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 4, 8-11-2014) 
Secs. 42-271—42-290. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - B-1 Neighborhood Shopping District[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 

Sec. 42-291. - Purpose. 
    The B-1 neighborhood shopping district is designed for the shopping convenience of persons residing in adjacent residential areas, and to permit only such uses as are necessary to satisfy those basic shopping needs which occur daily or frequently and so require shopping facilities in relative proximity to places of residence. 
Sec. 42-292. - Permitted uses subject to conditions. 
    Uses permitted in the B-1 district are subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(2) ?All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(3) ?Establishments of the drive-in type offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted. 
(4) ?The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business listed hereafter in this division shall be limited to vehicles of not over 1½ tons capacity when located within 150 feet of a residence district boundary line. 
Sec. 42-293. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the B-1 districts: 
(1) ?Single-family dwellings. 
(2) ?Art and school supply stores. 
(3) ?Barber shops. 
(4) ?Beauty parlors. 
(5) ?Candy and ice cream stores. 
(6) ?Clothes pressing establishments. 
(7) ?Currency exchanges. 
(8) ?Drugstores. 
(9) ?Dry cleaning and laundry receiving stations, processing to be done elsewhere. 
(10) ?Foodstores, grocery stores, meat markets, fish markets, bakeries and delicatessens. 
(11) ?Hardware, domestic appliance and paint and wallpaper stores. 
(12) ?Launderettes, automatic, self-service only, or hand laundries, employing not more than two persons in addition to one owner or manager. 
(13) ?Liquor stores, package goods only. 
(14) ?Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade. 
(15) ?Restaurants, not including entertainment, dancing and serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(16) ?Shoe, clothing and hat repair stores. 
(17) ?Signs, as regulated under division 8 of this article. 
(18) ?Telephone booths and coin telephones. 
(19) ?Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
(20) ?Variety stores. 
(21) ?Wearing apparel shops. 
(22) ?Accessory uses, incidental to, and on the same zoning lot as a principal use. 
Sec. 42-294. - Conditional uses. 
    The following conditional uses may be allowed in the B-1 district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: 
(1) ?Automobile service stations. 
(2) ?Parking lots, open and other than accessory, for the storage of private passenger automobiles. 
(3) ?Parks. 
(4) ?Planned developments, business. 
(5) ?Public utility and service uses as follows: 
a. ?Bus terminals, bus turnarounds (off-street), bus garages or bus lots. 
b. ?Electric substations. 
c. ?Fire stations. 
d. ?Gas regulator stations. 
e. ?Police stations. 
f. ?Post offices. 
g. ?Radio and television towers. 
h. ?Railroad passenger stations. 
i. ?Railroad rights-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops other than for passenger purposes. 
j. ?Telephone exchanges, telephone transmission equipment buildings, and microwave relay towers. 
k. ?Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants. 
(6) ?Signs in excess of 30 feet in height from curb level. 
(7) ?Signs set back less than 15 feet from the front lot line. 
(8) ?Taverns and bars. 
(9) ?Accessory uses, incidental to, and on the same zoning lot as a principal use. 
Sec. 42-295. - Lot area requirements. 
(a) ?In the B-1 district there shall be provided not less than 2,000 square feet of lot area for each business establishment. 
(b) ?Single-family dwellings shall be located on lots of not less than 7,200 square feet in area. 
Sec. 42-296. - Yard requirements. 
(a) ?Residential yards. Single-family dwellings on residential lots shall provide front, side, and rear lots in accordance with the yard requirements established in the R-3 district. For dwellings located above business establishments, there shall be provided side and rear yards equivalent to those established in the R-2 district. Such yards shall begin at a level no higher than the level of the finished floor of the dwelling. 
(b) ?Front yard. Business uses allowed in the B-1 district shall provide a front yard not less than 30 feet in depth. 
(c) ?Transitional yards. In the B-1 district the minimum transitional yard requirements shall not be less than those specified below: 
(1) ?Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such yard shall be equal in dimensions to the minimum side yard which would be required under this article for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot. 
(2) ?Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this article for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot. 
(3) ?Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard shall be not less than that which would be required for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot. 
(4) ?Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with a front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residence district, a yard equal in depth to the minimum front yard required by this article on such adjacent residential lot shall be provided along such front or side lot lines. 
Sec. 42-297. - Floor area ratio. 
    In the B-1 districts the floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.80. 
Secs. 42-298—42-418. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VIII. - B-2 Community Service District[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 

Sec. 42-419. - Purpose. 
    The B-2 community service district is designed to accommodate the needs of a larger consumer population than is served in the neighborhood shopping district; thus, a wider range of services and goods is permitted for both daily and occasional shopping and service needs. 
Sec. 42-420. - Permitted uses subject to conditions. 
    Uses permitted in the B-2 district are subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Business uses are not permitted on any floor above the ground floor, except in those buildings or structures where dwelling units are not established. 
(2) ?All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(3) ?All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(4) ?Establishments of the drive-in type offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are permitted only by conditional use permit. 
(5) ?The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business listed hereafter in this subdivision shall be limited to vehicles of not over 1½ tons capacity when located within 150 feet of a residence district boundary line. 
Sec. 42-421. - Permitted uses. 
    Any use permitted in the B-1 district, with the exception of dwellings on solely residential lots, shall be permitted in the B-2 district; and, in addition, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1) ?Antique shops. 
(2) ?Art shops or galleries, but not including auction rooms. 
(3) ?Automobile accessory stores. 
(4) ?Banks and financial institutions. 
(5) ?Bicycle sales and rental. 
(6) ?Bicycle repair stores. 
(7) ?Blueprinting and photostating establishments. 
(8) ?Book and stationery stores. 
(9) ?Business machine sales and service. 
(10) ?Camera and photographic supply stores. 
(11) ?Carpet and rug stores, retail sales only. 
(12) ?Catering establishments. 
(13) ?China and glassware stores. 
(14) ?Clubs and lodges, nonprofit and fraternal. 
(15) ?Coin and philatelic stores. 
(16) ?Custom dressmaking. 
(17) ?Department stores. 
(18) ?Dry cleaning establishments. 
(19) ?Dry goods stores. 
(20) ?Dwellings above the ground floor. 
(21) ?Electrical and household appliance stores, including radio and television sales. 
(22) ?Employment agencies. 
(23) ?Florist shops. 
(24) ?Frozen food stores, including locker rental in conjunction therewith. 
(25) ?Furniture stores, including upholstering when conducted as part of the retail operations and secondary to the principal use. 
(26) ?Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs. 
(27) ?Garden supply, tool and seed stores. 
(28) ?Gift shops. 
(29) ?Hobby shops, for retail or items to be assembled or used away from the premises. 
(30) ?Interior decorating shops, including upholstering and making of draperies, slip covers and other similar articles, when conducted as part of the retail operations and secondary to the principal use. 
(31) ?Jewelry stores, including watch repair. 
(32) ?Leather goods and luggage stores. 
(33) ?Locksmith shops. 
(34) ?Medical and dental clinics. 
(35) ?Meeting halls. 
(36) ?Millinery shops. 
(37) ?Musical instrument sales and repair. 
(38) ?Offices, business and professional. 
(39) ?Office machine sales and servicing. 
(40) ?Office supply stores. 
(41) ?Optician sales, retail. 
(42) ?Orthopedic and medical appliance stores. 
(43) ?Pawn shops. 
(44) ?Pet shops. 
(45) ?Phonograph record and sheet music stores. 
(46) ?Photography studios, including the developing of film and pictures when conducted as part of the retail business on the premises. 
(47) ?Physical culture and health services: gymnasiums, reducing salons, massage salons and public baths. 
(48) ?Picture framing, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only. 
(49) ?Plumbing and heating sales shops. 
(50) ?Post offices. 
(51) ?Produce markets. 
(52) ?Radio and television service, sales and repair shops. 
(53) ?Restaurants, including the serving of alcoholic beverages if incidental to the serving of food as the principal activity, but not including live entertainment or dancing. 
(54) ?Sewing machine sales and service, household appliances only. 
(55) ?Shoe stores. 
(56) ?Sporting goods stores. 
(57) ?Tailor shops. 
(58) ?Taverns, but not including live entertainment or dancing. 
(59) ?Taxidermists. 
(60) ?Telegraph offices. 
(61) ?Theaters, indoor. 
(62) ?Ticket agencies, amusement. 
(63) ?Tobacco shops. 
(64) ?Toy shops. 
(65) ?Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices. 
(66) ?Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. 
(67) ?Single-family homes. 
(68) ?Multiple-family housing and condominiums. 
Sec. 42-422. - Conditional uses. 
    Any use allowed as a conditional use in the B-1 district shall be allowed in the B-2 district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article, and in addition, the following: 
(1) ?Amusement establishments (indoor), including: bowling alleys, pool halls, dancehalls, swimming pools, skating rinks and places offering live entertainment and dancing. 
(2) ?Gasoline and automobile service stations. 
(3) ?Garages, for repair and servicing of motor vehicles. 
(4) ?Motor vehicle sales. 
(5) ?Parking garages or structures, other than accessory, for the storage of private passenger automobiles only. 
(6) ?Schools: music, dance, business, commercial or trade. 
(7) ?Signs in excess of 50 feet in height from the curb level. 
(8) ?Car washes. 
(9) ?Pet/reptile wholesale shops. 
(10) ?Light manufacturing of marine and truck products (including retail sales). 
(11) ?Light manufacturing of motor vehicle equipment and parts (including retail sales and service). 
(12) ?Light plastics manufacturing, including plastic containers and lids. 
(13) ?Woodworking and wood products (including retail sales). 
(Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 5-14-2001; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 1, 3-1-2002) 
Sec. 42-423. - Lot area requirements. 
    In the B-2 district there shall be provided not less than 2,000 square feet of lot area for each business establishment, and for each dwelling unit on a lot there shall be provided 1,500 square feet of lot area, except that for one-bedroom and efficiency units the minimum lot area shall be 1,200 square feet per unit. 
Sec. 42-424. - Yard requirements. 
(a) ?Residential yards. For dwelling units located above business establishments, there shall be provided side yards equivalent to those established in the R-4 district; the rear yard setback shall be 15 feet. Such yards shall begin at a level no higher than the level of the finished floor of the lowest dwelling unit. 
(b) ?Transitional yards. The regulations governing transitional yards in the B-1 district shall apply in the B-2 district. 
Sec. 42-425. - Floor area ratio. 
    In the B-2 district the floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.00. 
Secs. 42-426—42-440. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IX. - B-3 General Commercial District[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 

Sec. 42-441. - Purpose. 
    The B-3 general commercial district is intended primarily to accommodate those commercial uses which are not compatible with the uses permitted in any other business district and, therefore, are not allowed therein. 
Sec. 42-442. - Permitted uses subject to conditions. 
    Uses permitted in the B-3 district are subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Dwelling units and rooming units, other than those located in a hotel or motel or watchmen's quarters located on the premises where employed, are not permitted. 
(2) ?The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business, shall be limited to vehicles of not over 1½ tons capacity when located within 150 feet of a residence district boundary line. 
Sec. 42-443. - Permitted uses. 
    Any use permitted in the B-2 district shall be permitted in the B-3 district, and, in addition, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1) ?Amusement establishments, including: bowling alleys, pool halls, dancehalls, swimming pools, skating rinks, archery ranges, shooting galleries and similar amusement facilities. 
(2) ?Animal hospitals and kennels. 
(3) ?Auction rooms. 
(4) ?Boat showrooms. 
(5) ?Building materials and product sales. 
(6) ?Car washes. 
(7) ?Contractor or construction offices, shops and yards. 
(8) ?Exterminating shops. 
(9) ?Farm implement sales. 
(10) ?Feed and seed stores. 
(11) ?Fuel and ice sales. 
(12) ?Reserved. 
(13) ?Greenhouses and nurseries. 
(14) ?Hotels and motels. 
(15) ?Laboratories, medical and dental. 
(16) ?Laundries: rooms containing the laundering process (washing, drying, ironing and wrapping) shall not exceed a total of 2,400 square feet in area. 
(17) ?Machinery sales. 
(18) ?Model homes and garage displays. 
(19) ?Motor vehicle and house trailer sales. 
(20) ?Parking garages or structures. 
(21) ?Restaurants and taverns, live entertainment and dancing permitted. 
(22) ?Schools: music, dance, business, commercial or trade. 
(23) ?Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and storage other than accessory to permitted retail uses. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 2-14-2011) 
Sec. 42-444. - Conditional uses. 
    Any use allowed as a conditional use in the B-2 district shall be allowed in the B-3 district (unless already permitted in section 42-443), subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article, and in addition, the following: 
(1) ?Amusement parks, including: permanent carnivals, kiddie parks, golf driving ranges, pitch and putt, miniature golf courses, and other similar outdoor amusement facilities. 
(2) ?Cartage and express facilities. 
(3) ?Printing and publishing. 
(4) ?Riding academies and commercial stables. 
(5) ?Stadiums, auditoriums and arenas, open or enclosed. 
(6) ?Theaters, drive-ins. 
(7) ?Steel and aluminum servicing and processing (including cutting and punching of materials). 
(8) ?Garages for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles, including body repair, painting and engine rebuilding. 
(9) ?Stone fabrication shop (including sawing, splitting and finishing natural stone materials). 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 1, 11-23-2009; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 2, 2-14-2011; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 42-445. - Transitional yard requirements. 
    No building or structure in the B-3 district shall be located within 100 feet of a residence district boundary line, unless such building or structure is effectively screened from such residence district property by a wall, fence, or densely planted compact hedge, not less than five feet nor more than eight feet in height; in the event of such screening, the transitional yard requirements specified in the B-1 district shall apply in the B-3 district. 
Sec. 42-446. - Floor area ratio. 
    In the B-3 district the floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.00. 
Secs. 42-447—42-465. - Reserved. 
Subdivision X. - B-4 Central Business District[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 

Sec. 42-466. - Purpose. 
    The B-4 central retail district is designed to accommodate those retail and office uses which are characteristic of the major shopping streets of the downtown area of major urban communities. The B-4 district is divided into two subdistricts for the purpose of bulk control (F.A.R.). 
Sec. 42-467. - Permitted uses subject to conditions. 
    Uses permitted in the B-4 district are subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Dwelling units and rooming units, other than those described in subsection (5), or those located in a hotel or motel or watchmen's quarters located on the premises where employed, are not permitted. 
(2) ?All business, servicing or processing, except off-street parking, off-street loading, or such drive-in facilities as are specifically authorized in this subdivision, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(3) ?Establishments of the drive-in type offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted unless specifically authorized in this subdivision. 
(4) ?Uses designated with an asterisk (*) shall not be located on the ground floor within 50 feet of any street. 
(5) ?Single-family detached dwellings are permitted only by conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, §§ 1, 2, 7-25-2005) 
Sec. 42-468. - Permitted uses. 
    Any use permitted in the B-2 district shall be permitted in the B-4 district, with the exception of dwellings and automobile service stations, and, in addition, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1) ?*Blueprinting and photostating. 
(2) ?*Clothing and costume rental stores. 
(3) ?Drive-in banks and other financial institutions. 
(4) ?Hotels and motels. 
(5) ?Machinery sales, with no repair or servicing, provided that the storage and display of machinery, except of household appliances and office machines, shall be restricted to floor samples. 
(6) ?*Physical culture and health services: gymnasiums and reducing salons. 
(7) ?*Recording studios. 
(8) ?Restaurants, including live entertainment and dancing, with the serving of liquor in conjunction therewith. 
(9) ?*Restricted production and repair, limited to the following: art needlework; clothing, custom manufacturing and alterations, for retail only; jewelry from precious metals; watches; dentures; and optical lenses. 
(10) ?*Schools: music, dance, business and trade, when not involving any danger of fire or explosion, nor offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, heat or other objectionable influences. 
(11) ?*Warehousing and wholesale establishments and storage other than accessory to permitted retail uses. 
Sec. 42-469. - Conditional uses. 
    Any use allowed as a conditional use in the B-1 district shall be allowed in the B-4 district (unless already permitted in section 42-468), subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article, and in addition, the following: 
(1) ?Auction rooms. 
(2) ?Convention and exhibition halls. 
(3) ?Parking lots, garages or structures, other than accessory, for the storage of private passenger automobiles only. 
(4) ?Radio and television stations and studios. 
(5) ?Signs in excess of 50 feet in height from the curb level. 
(6) ?Motor vehicle sales. 
(7) ?Single-family detached dwellings, but all new construction shall have a garage. 
(Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 3, 7-25-2005) 
Sec. 42-470. - Transitional yard requirements. 
    The regulations governing transitional yards in the B-1 district shall apply in the B-4 district. 
Sec. 42-471. - Floor area ratio. 
(a) ?In the B-4-1 district, the floor area ratio shall not exceed 4.0; however, where building floors which meet the established basic floor area ratio of 4.0 are set back from one or more lot lines, floor area ratio premiums may be added to such basic floor area ratio in accordance with each one of the following: 
(1) ?On any zoning lot where the first story above grade is set back at least 20 feet from the lot line for the entire frontage of the zoning lot on a public street a premium of 0.5 for each such street setback may be added to the basic floor area ratio, provided that the lot area within such 20-foot setback shall be suitably paved and/or landscaped and otherwise unobstructed except for columns or piers supporting upper stories or a roof. However, if in addition to the first story, all other stories above grade shall be so set back for at least 20 feet, such premium may be increased to 1.0 for such street setback. 
(2) ?On any zoning lot where the building from ground level up is set back from one or more lot lines, a premium equal to three times the open area of the lot at ground level divided by the gross lot area may be added to the basic floor area ratio; such open area shall include all lot area at ground level open directly to the sky and extending between exterior building walls and lot lines for a distance of at least eight feet. 
(3) ?On any zoning lot, for each floor above the ground floor which is set back from one or more lot lines a premium equal to 0.3 times the open area of the lot at the level of such floor divided by the gross lot area may be added to the basic floor area ratio; such open area shall include all area open directly to the sky and extending between exterior building walls and lot lines in a horizontal plane containing the subject floor for a distance of at least eight feet. 
(b) ?In the B-4-2 district, the floor area ratio shall not exceed 8.0; however, where building floors which meet the established basic floor area ratio of 8.0 are set back from one or more lot lines, floor area ratio premiums may be added to such basic floor area ratio in accordance with each one of the following: 
(1) ?On any zoning lot where the first story above grade is set back at least 20 feet from the lot line for the entire frontage of the zoning lot on a public street a premium of 1.0 for each such street setback may be added to the basic floor area ratio, provided that the lot area within such 20-foot setback shall be suitably paved and/or landscaped and otherwise unobstructed except for columns or piers supporting upper stories or a roof. However, if in addition to the first story, all other stories above grade shall be so set back for at least 20 feet, such premium may be increased to 2.0 for such street setback. 
(2) ?On any zoning lot where the building from ground level up is set back from one or more lot lines, a premium equal to four times the open area of the lot at ground level divided by the gross lot area may be added to the basic floor area ratio; such open area shall include all lot area at ground level open directly to the sky and extending between exterior building walls and lot lines for a distance of at least eight feet. 
(3) ?On any zoning lot, for each floor above the ground floor which is set back from one or more lot lines a premium of equal to 0.5 times the open area of the lot at the level of such floor divided by the gross lot area may be added to the basic floor area ratio; such open area shall include all area open directly to the sky and extending between exterior building walls and lot lines in a horizontal plane containing the subject floor for a distance of at least eight feet. 
(c) ?No floors exceeding the basic floor area ratio limits of 4.0 and 8.0, respectively, and added to a building by virtue of unused basic floor area ratio or by virtue of floor area ratio premiums shall in turn serve as a basis for creating additional premiums. 
Sec. 42-472. - Sign regulations. 
    General application. Please see the "Design Recommendations for Mosinee's Downtown Business District" booklet for illustrations and additional recommendations, which may be helpful in guiding you in your signage design. 
(1) ?Area: The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
(2) ?Projection: No sign shall project more than five feet into the public right of way. 
(3) ?Height: No sign shall project higher than 20 feet above curb level, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
(4) ?Amount: One (1) sign, which hands away from the building into the public right-of-way and one sign affixed flat to a building's surface shall be permitted per business, per building facade. If more than one business exists per building, two signs may be permitted per building facade. 
(5) ?Material: All exterior business and building signage shall be of painted or stained wood, or of a material that simulates painted or stained wood. 
(6) ?Illuminated signs: No internally illuminated signs will be permitted on the exterior of buildings used for business purposes within the city's downtown central business district. Exterior signs shall be illuminated by means similar to that shown in "Design Recommendations for Mosinee's Downtown Business District." This includes neon signage and any signage that has its own light source. The idea of this section is to provide lighting that is consistent with the concept of Early Mosinee. Internally illuminated signs, such as neon signs are permitted inside of the building in windows for businesses which are open during any evening hours, but may not exceed three square feet per window. 
(7) ?Approval: The design (or drawing) for new signage in the central business district must be submitted to the Mosinee BID advisory committee for review for compliance with the sign code. The Mosinee BID committee shall submit the drawing with a recommendation to the common council within 14 days. The owner/designee shall then submit a written building permit obtained from the city clerk's office. 
(8) ?Colors: The color of the signage should be compatible with exterior colors of the storefront. Color schemes should be kept simple. Day-glow paints or colors are not permitted. 
(9) ?Movable signs: Motorized or movable signs are not permitted within the BID district. 
(10) ?Location: Projecting signs should be located so they do not visually cancel each other out. Projecting signs should be located in a location so as not to interfere with the composition of the existing building facade. 
(11) ?Content: Signs shall bear thereon no lettering other than to indicate the name and kind of business conducted in the building or structure, such as "men's clothing," "drugs," "jeweler," and the like and the year the business was established and the street number thereof. No sign shall advertise any particular article of merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 98-6, § 1, 7-13-98) 
Secs. 42-473—42-490. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XI. - M-1 Limited Industrial District[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 

Sec. 42-491. - Purpose. 
    The M-1 limited industrial district is designed to provide an environment suitable for industrial activities that do not create appreciable nuisances or hazards, or that require a pleasant, hazard-and-nuisance-free environment. 
Sec. 42-492. - Permitted uses subject to conditions. 
    Uses permitted in the M-1 district are subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Dwelling units and lodging rooms, other than watchmen's quarters, are not permitted. 
(2) ?All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking and off-street loading or establishments of the drive-in type offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise indicated hereinafter. 
(3) ?All storage within 500 feet of a residence district, except of motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened by a solid wall or fence (including solid entrance and exit gates) not less than six feet or more than eight feet in height. 
Sec. 42-493. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the M-1 district: 
(1) ?Bakeries. 
(2) ?Bedding manufacturing. 
(3) ?Boot and shoe manufacturing. 
(4) ?Building materials sales and storage. 
(5) ?Carpet manufacturing. 
(6) ?Cartage and express facilities. 
(7) ?Cloth products manufacturing. 
(8) ?Contractors, architects and engineers offices, shops and yards. 
(9) ?Cosmetics production. 
(10) ?Dairy products. 
(11) ?Dwellings for watchmen and their families, located on the premises where they are employed in such capacity. 
(12) ?Electronic and scientific precision instruments. 
(13) ?Feed and seed sales. 
(14) ?Fuel and ice sales. 
(15) ?Fur processing. 
(16) ?Garages, for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles. 
(17) ?Glass products. 
(18) ?Greenhouses, wholesale. 
(19) ?Insulating materials manufacture. 
(20) ?Laboratories, research and testing. 
(21) ?Laundries. 
(22) ?Light machinery production, appliances, business machines, etc. 
(23) ?Lithographing. 
(24) ?Lodges and offices of labor organizations. 
(25) ?Medical and dental clinics. 
(26) ?Musical instruments manufacture. 
(27) ?Orthopedic and medical appliance manufacture. 
(28) ?Parking lots, other than accessory. 
(29) ?Pottery and ceramics manufacture. 
(30) ?Printing and publishing. 
(31) ?Public utility and service uses. 
(32) ?Radio and television stations and towers. 
(33) ?Restaurants. 
(34) ?Rope, cord and twine manufacture. 
(35) ?Signs, as regulated under division 8 of this article. 
(36) ?Sporting goods manufacture. 
(37) ?Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
(38) ?Trade schools. 
(39) ?Wearing apparel manufacture. 
(40) ?Weighing stations, operated by the state. 
(41) ?Accessory uses, incidental to, and on the same lot as the principal use. 
Sec. 42-494. - Conditional uses. 
    The following conditional uses may be allowed in the M-1 district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article. 
(1) ?Airports and commercial heliports, including aircraft landing fields, runways, flight strips and flying schools, together with hangars, terminal buildings and other auxiliary facilities. 
(2) ?Air, railroad and water freight terminals, railroad switching and classification yards, repair shops and roundhouses. 
(3) ?Automobile laundries. 
(4) ?Food manufacture, packaging and processing. 
(5) ?Heliports, private. 
(6) ?Institutions for the care or treatment of alcoholics, drug addict patients or the mentally disturbed. 
(7) ?Paper products manufacture. 
(8) ?Parks and playgrounds. 
(9) ?Penal and correctional institutions. 
(10) ?Planned developments, industrial. 
(11) ?Recreation buildings or community centers. 
(12) ?Sewage treatment plants, municipal. 
(13) ?Signs in excess of 50 feet in height from the curb level. 
(14) ?Soap manufacture. 
(15) ?Stadiums, auditoriums and arenas, open or enclosed. 
(16) ?Theaters, automobile drive-in. 
(17) ?Warehousing and storage (nonhazardous products). 
(18) ?Woodworking and wood products. 
(19) ?Other manufacturing, processing, storage or commercial uses determined by the plan commission to be of the same general character as the uses permitted in section 42-493, and found not to be obnoxious, unhealthful or offensive by reason of the potential emission or transmission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious matter, glare or heat, or fire or explosive hazards. 
(20) ?Accessory uses, incidental to, and on the same zoning lot as the principal use. 
Sec. 42-495. - Front yard. 
    In the M-1 district, there shall be provided a front yard of not less than 30 feet in depth along every front lot line. 
Sec. 42-496. - Corner side yard. 
    In the M-1 district, there shall be provided a side yard of not less than 30 feet in depth in every instance where the side property line is adjacent to a public street. 
Sec. 42-497. - Transitional yards. 
    Where a side or rear lot line in an industrial district coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residence or business district, a yard shall be provided along such side or rear lot line on the industrial lot. Such yard shall be not less than 30 feet in depth. 
Sec. 42-498. - Regulations along residence and business district boundaries. 
(a) ?In the M-1 district, on properties or portions thereof located directly across a street from a business or residence district, if any point on the exterior surface of any building or structure is at a greater height than 35 feet above curb level, such point projected vertically upon the ground shall, in no case, be nearer to the business or residence district boundary line than a horizontal distance equal to 1½ times the height of such point above curb level. However, stacks, tanks, bulkheads or ventilating equipment, including towers enclosing the same, shall be exempt from such limitation if not exceeding in the aggregate 25 feet in lineal dimension parallel to the street for any 100 feet of street frontage. Parapets not exceeding three feet in height shall also be exempt from such limitation. 
(b) ?In the M-1 district, on properties or portions thereof located adjacent to a side or rear property line in a business or residence district, if any point on the exterior surface of any building or structure is at a greater height than 35 feet above curb level, the vertical projection of such point upon the ground shall, in no case, be nearer to the side or rear lot line of any property in the adjacent business or residence district than a horizontal distance equal to the height of such point above the curb level. However, stacks, tanks, bulkheads or ventilating equipment, including towers enclosing the same, shall be exempt from such height limitation if not exceeding in the aggregate 25 feet in lineal dimension parallel to such business or residential lot line or lines for any 100 feet of length of such lot line or lines. Parapets not exceeding three feet in height shall also be exempt from such limitations. 
Sec. 42-499. - Floor area ratio. 
    In the M-1 district the floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.50. 
Secs. 42-500—42-520. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XII. - M-2 General Industrial District[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 

Sec. 42-521. - Purpose. 
    The M-2 general industrial district is designed to accommodate large, relatively self-contained and isolated areas intended to be used for industrial activities whose potential nuisance or hazard generation is moderately high. 
Sec. 42-522. - Permitted uses subject to conditions. 
    Uses permitted in the M-2 district are subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Dwelling units and lodging rooms, other than watchmen's quarters, are not permitted. 
(2) ?All business, servicing, production, processing or storage within 500 feet of a residence district, except motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened by a solid wall or fence (including solid entrance and exit gates) not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height. 
Sec. 42-523. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the M-2 district: 
(1) ?Any use permitted in the M-1 district. 
(2) ?Abrasives manufacture. 
(3) ?Asphalt products manufacture. 
(4) ?Automobile laundries. 
(5) ?Bottling companies. 
(6) ?Brick and structural clay products manufacture. 
(7) ?Chemical processing and manufacturing. 
(8) ?Reserved. 
(9) ?Electroplating. 
(10) ?Feed mills. 
(11) ?Food manufacture, packaging and processing. 
(12) ?Foundries and forge plants. 
(13) ?Grain storage and processing. 
(14) ?Graphite products manufacture. 
(15) ?Gypsum manufacture. 
(16) ?Heavy machinery production. 
(17) ?Leather tanning or processing. 
(18) ?Linoleum manufacturing. 
(19) ?Machine shop. 
(20) ?Meat packing. 
(21) ?Metal reduction and refinement. 
(22) ?Metal stamping. 
(23) ?Mining operations. 
(24) ?Motor freight terminals. 
(25) ?Paint products manufacture. 
(26) ?Paper products manufacture. 
(27) ?Petroleum products storage or processing. 
(28) ?Plastics manufacture. 
(29) ?Rubber processing or manufacture. 
(30) ?Sewage treatment plants, municipal. 
(31) ?Soap manufacture. 
(32) ?Steel manufacture. 
(33) ?Stone products manufacture. 
(34) ?Warehousing and storage. 
(35) ?Woodworking and wood products. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 5-8-2006) 
Sec. 42-524. - Conditional uses. 
    The following conditional uses may be allowed in the M-2 district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: 
(1) ?Any use allowed as a conditional use in the M-2 district, unless already permitted in section 42-523. 
(2) ?Landfill areas for dumping or disposal of garbage, refuse or trash. 
(3) ?Junkyards and auto graveyards. 
(4) ?Other manufacturing, processing or storage uses determined by the plan commission to be of the same general character as the uses permitted in section 42-523, and found not to be obnoxious, unhealthful or offensive by reason of the potential emission or transmission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious matter, glare or heat, or fire or explosive hazards. 
(5) ?Physical culture and health services: gymnasiums and reducing salons. 
(6) ?Concrete mixing plants. 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, § 1, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-02, § 2, 5-8-2006) 
Sec. 42-525. - Front yard. 
    In the M-2 district, there shall be no front yard requirement. 
Sec. 42-526. - Corner side yard. 
    In the M-2 district, there shall be no corner side yard requirement. 
Sec. 42-527. - Transitional yards. 
    In the M-2 district, the regulations governing transitional yards in the M-1 district shall apply. 
Sec. 42-528. - Regulations along residence and business district boundaries. 
    In the M-2 district, the regulations along residence and business district boundaries specified in the M-1 district shall apply. 
Sec. 42-529. - Floor area ratio. 
    In the M-2 district the floor area ratio shall not exceed 2.00. 
Secs. 42-530—42-550. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XIII. - Interchange Districts[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 

Sec. 42-551. - General requirements. 
(a) ?Setback from intersecting highway. Buildings and structures shall be set back at least 80 feet from the right-of-way line of intersecting highways and 150 feet from the expressway. In case of unusual changes in alignment of the highway right-of-way line or unusual topographic conditions which would cause undue hardship in the application of this requirement, a variance for a lesser setback from the intersecting highway may be granted by the board of appeals. 
(b) ?Limitation of access. Access from abutting property to an intersecting highway shall be permitted only at designated access points. Such access points shall be located as follows: 
(1) ?There shall be no access points located within 1,000 feet of the most remote end of taper of any existing or proposed entrance or exit ramp of an interchange, or at intervals of less than 1,000 feet thereafter. A lesser distance may be permitted by the board of appeals upon prior written approval by a designated representative of the agency having jurisdiction over such highway. 
(2) ?To avoid dangerous off-set intersections, public streets along opposite sides of intersecting highways shall be located either directly opposite each other or separated by at least 300 feet of lateral distance along the highway centerline, or such greater lateral distance as required by the particular circumstances to permit safe traffic movement as determined by the agency having jurisdiction over the intersecting highway. 
(3) ?The access limitations established in subsection (b)(1) of this section, may be temporarily waived subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?A temporary access permit shall be obtained from the board of appeals. The board of appeals shall grant preliminary approval of such permit and shall forward the application and preliminary approval to the agency having jurisdiction over the intersecting highway, requesting issuance of any required driveway permit. Upon the issuance of such driveway permit, the board of appeals shall grant the temporary access permit. 
b. ?Use of access shall be limited to the use described in the application for the temporary access permit. 
c. ?Wherever practical, only one point of access for each two parcels, to be located at the common property line of adjoining parcels, shall be permitted. 
d. ?This access permit shall be temporary in nature and shall be revoked by the common council upon the construction of a frontage road or an alternative internal circulation system providing a reasonable alternate means of access or when deemed necessary in the public interest. 
Sec. 42-552. - I-R interchange residence district. 
(a) ?Purpose. The I-R interchange residence district is designed to protect the residential environment at interchanges and prevent conflict between highway traffic and residential access. 
(b) ?Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the R-1 district shall be permitted in the I-R district. 
(c) ?Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be allowed in the I-R district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: 
(1) ?Health and medical institutions. 
(2) ?Philanthropic and charitable institutions. 
(3) ?Planned developments, residential. 
(4) ?Public utility and service uses. 
(5) ?Accessory uses. 
(d) ?Lot size requirements. 
(1) ?Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the I-R district shall be as follows: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Single-family dwellings in approved subdivisions 12,000 square feet ?90 feet Single-family dwellings (other than in approved subdivisions) 20,000 square feet 120 feet Agriculture 5 acres 300 feet Cemeteries 5 acres 200 feet Educational and cultural institutions 2 acres 175 feet Recreational and social buildings 40,000 square feet 150 feet Religious institutions 40,000 square feet 150 feet  
(2) ?Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the I-R district shall be as follows: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Health and medical institutions ?2 acres 175 feet Philanthropic and charitable institutions ?2 acres 175 feet Planned developments, residential 10 acres none Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
(3) ?Accessory uses. Accessory uses in the I-R district shall be as follows: 
Minimum 
Lot 
Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width Boathouses, private 20,000 square feet 120 feet Guesthouses, private 20,000 square feet 120 feet Living quarters, for persons employed on premises 20,000 square feet 120 feet Sewage disposal units, individual 20,000 square feet 120 feet Stables, private 3 acres 200 feet Water systems, individual 20,000 square feet 120 feet  
_____
(e) ?Yard requirements. 
(1) ?Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the I-R district shall be as follows: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear Yard Single-family dwellings ?30 feet* 10 feet 20 feet 35 feet Agriculture No requirements Cemeteries No requirements Educational and cultural institutions 50 feet ??20 feet** ??35 feet** 100 feet Recreational and cultural institutions 50 feet ??15 feet** ??35 feet** ?75 feet Religious institutions 50 feet ??15 feet** ??35 feet** ?75 feet  
?*Twenty percent of the lot depth, whichever is less. 
**Plus one foot for each two feet by which the building height exceeds 15 feet. 
(2) ?Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the I-R district shall be as follows: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Health and medical institutions 50 feet 20 feet* 35 feet* 100 feet Philanthropic and charitable institutions 50 feet 20 feet* 35 feet* 100 feet Planned developments, residential As provided in division 6, subdivision III of this article Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
*Plus one foot for each two feet by which the building or structure height exceeds 15 feet. 
(3) ?Accessory buildings. Except as indicated, the yard requirements of the principal uses in the I-R district shall apply to their accessory buildings: 
Front Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Rear 
Yard Agricultural buildings 100 feet 50 feet 50 feet 100 feet Boathouses, private No requirements Buildings accessory to single-family dwellings, except those uses specifically itemized in this section ?30 feet ?10 feet* 20 feet ??3 feet Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses, polo and tennis clubs Shall be located not less than 200 feet from the nearest residential property line Roadside stands on lots where the principal use is agriculture ?20 feet 50 feet 20 feet No requirements Stables, private 100 feet 75 feet 75 feet 100 feet Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields Shall be located not less than 200 feet from the nearest residential property line  
*Unless the entire structure is located on the rear 25 percent of the lot, in which case only three feet shall be required. 
_____
(f) ?Building bulk limitations. 
(1) ?Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the I-R district are as follows: 
Maximum 
Building 
Height Single-family detached dwellings, rectories, parsonages and parish houses 2½ stories, but not to exceed 35 feet All other permitted uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio.  
Floor 
Area 
Ratio Educational and cultural institutions 0.3 Recreational and social buildings 0.3 Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages and parish houses 0.3  
(2) ?Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the I-R district are as follows: 
Floor 
Area 
Ratio Health and medical institutions 0.4 Philanthropic and charitable institutions 0.3 Planned developments, residential As provided in division 6, subdivision III of this 
article Public utility and service uses In accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article  
(3) ?Accessory uses. In the I-R district, the floor area of the accessory buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on the zoning lot, as specified for the principal uses in subsection (f)(1) and (2) of this section. However, any floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities shall be exempt from floor area ratio requirements. 
Sec. 42-553. - I-B interchange business district. 
(a) ?Purpose. The I-B interchange business district is designed to ensure the desirable development of high-quality highway service facilities and related uses. 
(b) ?Permitted uses subject to conditions. Uses permitted in the I-B district are subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Dwelling units, other than those located in a hotel or motel or watchmen's quarters located on the premises where employes, are not permitted. 
(2) ?All business, servicing or processing, except off-street parking, off-street loading, or such drive-in facilities as are specifically authorized in this section, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(c) ?Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the I-B district: 
(1) ?Automobile service stations. 
(2) ?Drugstores, foodstores and other retail sales stores, limited in size to not more than 7,000 square feet of floor area per establishment. 
(3) ?Garages for service and repair of motor vehicles. 
(4) ?Hotels and motels. 
(5) ?Personal service establishments, including barber shops, beauty parlors, shoe and clothing repair stores and dry cleaning establishments. 
(6) ?Restaurants, including drive-in establishments. 
(7) ?Taverns and cocktail lounges, in conjunction with restaurants, hotels or motels. 
(8) ?Tourist information and hospitality centers. 
(d) ?Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be allowed in the I-B district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: 
(1) ?Amusement establishments: bowling alleys, swimming pools and skating rinks. 
(2) ?Offices, business and professional. 
(3) ?Planned developments, business. 
(4) ?Shopping centers and retail establishments with no limit on floor area. 
(5) ?Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and storage other than accessory to permitted uses. 
(6) ?Motor vehicle sales. 
(e) ?Lot size requirements. In the I-B district there shall be provided not less than 12,000 square feet of lot area for each business establishment, and no such lot shall be less than 100 feet in width. 
(f) ?Yard requirements. 
(1) ?Front yard. All buildings and structures shall be set back at least 30 feet from the front lot line, except when fronting upon the intersecting highway, in which case the setback shall be 80 feet. 
(2) ?Interior side yard. Each interior side yard shall be at least 20 feet in depth. 
(3) ?Corner side yard. A corner side yard shall be not less than 30 feet in depth. 
(4) ?Rear yard. Each lot shall provide a rear yard not less than 30 feet in depth. 
(5) ?Transitional yard. No building or structure in the I-B district shall be located within 75 feet of a residence district boundary line, unless such building or structure is effectively screened from such residence district property by a wall, fence or densely planted compact hedge, not less than five feet nor more than eight feet in height. 
(g) ?Floor area ratio. In the I-B district, floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.5. 
(Ord. No. 2002-12, § 1, 12-16-2002) 
Sec. 42-554. - I-M interchange industrial district. 
(a) ?Purpose. The I-M interchange industrial district is designed to accommodate large, relatively clean industrial activities requiring freeway access and prestige frontage. 
(b) ?Permitted uses subject to conditions. Uses permitted in the I-M district are subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Dwelling units and lodging rooms, other than watchmen's quarters, are not permitted. 
(2) ?All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise indicated hereinafter. 
(3) ?All storage within 500 feet of a residence district, except of motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened by a solid wall or fence (including solid entrance and exit gates) not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height. 
(c) ?Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the I-M district: 
(1) ?Any use permitted in the M-1 district. 
(2) ?The following retail or service business establishments, only when subordinate and incidental to, and on the same lot as, a permitted industrial use: 
a. ?Currency exchange. 
b. ?Drugstore. 
c. ?Foodstore. 
d. ?Restaurant. 
(3) ?Mail order houses. 
(4) ?Printing and publishing. 
(5) ?Accessory uses. 
(d) ?Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be allowed in the I-M district, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: 
(1) ?Motor freight terminals. 
(2) ?Planned developments, industrial. 
(3) ?Public utility and service uses. 
(e) ?Lot size requirements. In the I-M district each permitted or conditional use shall occupy at least 40,000 square feet of lot area; such lot shall be at least 150 feet in width. 
(f) ?Yard requirements. 
(1) ?Front yard. All buildings and structures shall be set back at least 50 feet from the front lot line. 
(2) ?Interior side yard. Each interior side yard shall be at least 25 feet in depth. 
(3) ?Corner side yard. A corner side yard shall be not less than 50 feet in depth. 
(4) ?Rear yard. Each lot shall provide a rear yard not less than 50 feet in depth. 
(5) ?Transitional yard. No building or structure in the I-M district shall be located within 125 feet of a residence district boundary line, or within 75 feet of a business district boundary line, unless such building or structure is effectively screened from such residence or business district property by a wall, fence or densely-planted compact hedge, not less than five feet nor more than eight feet in height. 
(g) ?Floor area ratio. In the I-M district, floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.75. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 
Secs. 42-555—42-575. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XIV. - VP Valley Plain District 

Sec. 42-576. - Purpose. 
    The VP valley plain district is created for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, comfort and welfare and reducing financial burdens imposed on the community and its individuals by restricting the use of those areas within the city which are subject to periodic inundation with the consequent threat to human life and property. Such areas are located generally along natural watercourses, channels, streams and creeks and are so designated on the zoning map. 
Sec. 42-577. - Permitted uses. 
    Land located in the VP district shall be used for the following purposes only: 
(1) ?Agriculture, including incidental agricultural structures. 
(2) ?Forestry. 
(3) ?Golf courses and driving ranges. 
(4) ?Nurseries (trees and shrubbery). 
(5) ?Mineral extraction and storage. 
(6) ?Outdoor rifle or trap-shooting or skeet-shooting ranges, and associated buildings and structures. 
(7) ?Parks and playgrounds. 
(8) ?Preserves and reservations. 
Sec. 42-578. - Conditional uses. 
    Subject to the conditions prescribed in division 6, subdivision III of this article, the following conditional uses may be allowed: 
(1) ?Single-family dwellings on lots not less than 40,000 square feet in area, and only if the ground upon which such dwelling is to be erected, and the land 15 feet beyond the limits of such structure shall, prior to or at the time of such construction, be raised to such level that the lowest floor of the structure, including the basement floor, shall be not less than five feet above the established regional flood. 
(2) ?Sewage treatment plants, municipal. 
Sec. 42-579. - Lot size requirements. 
    Lot size requirements in the VP district are as follows: 
(1) ?Single-family dwellings: 
Minimum lot area, 40,000 square feet 
Minimum lot width, 150 feet 
(2) ?All other uses: 
Minimum lot area, three acres 
Minimum lot width, 200 feet 
Sec. 42-580. - Setback from property lines. 
    No building or structure in the VP district shall be located closer than 50 feet from any property lines. 
Sec. 42-581. - Height limitations. 
    No building or structure in the VP district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
Sec. 42-582. - Signs. 
    The total surface area of all signs on any zoning lot in the VP district shall not exceed 200 square feet. 
Sec. 42-583. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street parking in the VP district shall be as follows: 
(1) ?Single-family dwellings: One parking space shall be provided. 
(2) ?All other uses: Parking spaces shall be provided in adequate number, as determined by the building inspector, to serve the visiting public. 
Sec. 42-584. - Off-street loading. 
    All uses allowed in the VP district shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent alley, service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. Such facilities shall be subject to review by the building inspector. 
Sec. 42-585. - Reclamation of valley land. 
    Nothing in this subdivision shall be so construed as to prohibit the lawful rehabilitation or reclamation of any land located within the VP valley plain district; provided, however, that any filling, draining, construction of levees, or other improvements intended to eliminate or reduce the danger of flood or erosion shall be subject to review by the plan commission and authorization by the common council. Authorization by the common council shall be contingent upon a favorable report and recommendation from the plan commission and the zoning administrator. 
Secs. 42-586—42-610. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XV. - MW Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay Districts[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Water utility, § 82-36 et seq. 

Sec. 42-611. - Purpose. 
    The city recognizes that consequences of certain land use activities, whether intentional or accidental, can seriously impair groundwater quality. The purpose of the MW Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District is to protect municipal groundwater resources from certain land use activities by imposing appropriate restrictions upon lands located within the approximate groundwater recharge area of the city's municipal wells. The restrictions imposed in this subdivision are in addition to those of the underlying residential, commercial or industrial zoning districts or any other provisions of this article. 
Sec. 42-612. - Overlay zones. 
    A map delineating this district is on file in the zoning administrator's office. The MW Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District No. 1 is divided into zone A and zone B as follows: 
(1) ?Zone A is identified as the primary source of water for the municipal well acquifer and as the area most likely to transmit groundwater contaminants to the municipal wells. Zone A is more restrictive than zone B. 
(2) ?Zone B is identified as a secondary source of water for the municipal well acquifer and as an area where there is a lower probability of surface contaminants reaching the municipal well fields. Zone B is less restrictive than zone A. 
Sec. 42-613. - Zone A prohibited uses. 
    The following land uses are hereby found to have a high potential to contaminate or have already caused groundwater contamination problems in the state and elsewhere. The following principal or accessory uses are prohibited within zone A of the MW Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District: 
(1) ?Areas for dumping or disposal of garbage, refuse, trash or demolition material. 
(2) ?Asphalt products manufacturing plants. 
(3) ?Service stations. 
(4) ?Building materials and products sales. 
(5) ?Cartage and express facilities. 
(6) ?Car washes. 
(7) ?Cemeteries. 
(8) ?Chemical storage, sale, processing or manufacturing plants. 
(9) ?Dry cleaning establishments. 
(10) ?Electronic circuit assembly plants. 
(11) ?Electroplating plants. 
(12) ?Exterminating shops. 
(13) ?Fertilizer manufacturing or storage plants. 
(14) ?Foundries and forge plants. 
(15) ?Garages, for the repair and servicing of motor vehicles, including body repair, painting or engine rebuilding. 
(16) ?Highway salt storage areas. 
(17) ?Industrial liquid waste storage areas. 
(18) ?Junkyards and auto graveyards. 
(19) ?Metal reduction and refinement plants. 
(20) ?Mining operations. 
(21) ?Motor and machinery service and assembly shops. 
(22) ?Motor freight terminals. 
(23) ?Paint products manufacturing. 
(24) ?Petroleum products storage or processing. 
(25) ?Photography studios, including the developing of film and pictures. 
(26) ?Plastics manufacturing. 
(27) ?Printing and publishing establishments. 
(28) ?Pulp and paper manufacturing. 
(29) ?Residential dwelling units on lots less than 15,000 square feet in area. However, in any residence district, on a lot of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, a single-family dwelling may be established regardless of the size of the lot, provided all other requirements of this article are complied with. 
(30) ?Septage disposal sites. 
(31) ?Sludge disposal sites. 
(32) ?Storage, manufacturing or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials. 
(33) ?Underground petroleum products storage tanks for industrial, commercial, residential or other uses. 
(34) ?Woodworking and wood products manufacturing. 
Sec. 42-614. - Zone A conditional uses. 
    The following conditional uses may be allowed in the MW Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: 
(1) ?Any other business or industrial use not listed as a prohibited use. 
(2) ?Animal waste storage areas and facilities. 
(3) ?Center-pivot or other large scale irrigated agriculture operations. 
Sec. 42-615. - Zone B prohibited uses. 
    The following principal or accessory uses are hereby prohibited within zone B of the MW Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District: Underground petroleum products storage tanks for industrial, commercial, residential or other uses. 
Sec. 42-616. - Zone B conditional uses. 
    The following conditional uses may be allowed in the MW Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this article: Any business or industrial use. 
Sec. 42-617. - District No. 2. 
(a) ?Municipal Well Recharge Area Overlay District No. 2 is established. 
(b) ?Municipal Well Recharge Area No. 2 is defined by the land area shown on a map on file in the zoning administrator's office. 
(c) ?The rules and regulations contained in this subdivision apply to Municipal Well Recharge Area No. 2. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, 3-25-1991) 
Secs. 42-618—42-635. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XVI. - IP-B Industrial Park Business (Reserved)[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 

Secs. 42-636—42-655. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XVII. - IP-M Industrial Park Manufacturing (Reserved)[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 

Secs. 42-656—42-675. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XVIII. - PUD Planned Unit Development 

Sec. 42-676. - Conditional use; intent. 
(a) ?The planned unit development conditional use is intended to permit developments that will, over a period of time, be enhanced by coordinated area site planning, diversified location of structures, and/or mixing of compatible uses. Such developments are intended to provide a safe and efficient system for pedestrian and vehicle traffic; to provide attractive recreation and open spaces as integral parts of the developments; to enable economic design in the location of public and private utilities and community facilities; and to ensure adequate standards of construction and planning. The planned unit development under this division will allow for flexibility of overall development design with benefits from such design flexibility intended to be derived by both the developer and the community, while at the same time maintaining insofar as possible, the land use density and other standards or use requirements as set forth in the underlying basic zoning district. 
(b) ?The unified and planned development of a site in a single, partnership or corporate ownership or control or in common ownership under the Unit Ownership Act set forth in Wis. Stats. ch. 703 (condominiums) may be permitted by the city upon specific petition under section 42-683 and after public hearing, with such development encompassing one or more principal uses or structures and related accessory uses or structures when all regulations and standards as set forth in this division have been met. 
Sec. 42-677. - Types. 
    This division contemplates that there may be residential, commercial, industrial planned unit developments and mixed compatible use developments. 
Sec. 42-678. - General requirements. 
    A planned unit development shall be consistent in all respects to the expressed intent of this division and to the spirit and intent of this article; shall be in conformity with the adopted master plan (comprehensive land use and thoroughfare plan), neighborhood plan, or any adopted component thereof; and shall not be contrary to the general welfare and economic prosperity of the community. 
Sec. 42-679. - Physical requirements. 
(a) ?Minimum area requirements. Areas designated as planned unit developments shall contain a minimum development area as follows: 
Principal Uses Minimum 
Area of 
PUD Residential PUD ?3 acres Commercial PUD ?5 acres Industrial PUD 10 acres Mixed compatible use 10 acres  
(b) ?Density requirements (lot area, width and yard requirements). The district area, width and yard requirements of the basic use district may be modified; however, in no case shall the average density in a residential district exceed the number of dwelling units that would have been permitted if the planned unit development regulations had not been utilized. 
(c) ?Building height and area requirements. 
(1) ?Buildings in a planned unit development shall not exceed the height permitted in the basic use district. 
(2) ?Buildings in a planned unit development shall have a minimum area that is equal to or greater than that required in the basic use district. 
(d) ?Single parcel, lot or tract. The planned unit development shall be considered as one tract, lot or parcel, and the legal description must define the PUD as a single parcel, lot or tract and be so recorded with the county register of deeds. 
Sec. 42-680. - Requirements as to public services and facilities. 
(a) ?The development site shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities for surface water and stormwater. 
(b) ?The site will be accessible from public roads that are adequate to carry the traffic that can be expected to be generated by the development. 
(c) ?No undue constraint or burden shall be imposed on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage, and maintenance of public areas by the developments. 
(d) ?The streets and driveways on the site of the development shall be adequate to serve the residents of the development and, in the case of public dedicated streets, will meet the minimum standards of all applicable ordinances or administrative regulations of the city. 
(e) ?Public water and sewer facilities shall be provided. 
Sec. 42-681. - Subsequent land division. 
    The division of any land or lands within a planned unit development for the purpose of change or conveyance of ownership may be accomplished pursuant to the land division/subdivision regulations of the city when such division is contemplated. 
Sec. 42-682. - Procedural requirements; intent. 
    Sections 42-676—42-681 set forth the basic philosophy and intent in providing for planned unit developments, the kinds thereof, the general requirements, physical requirements and requirements as to public services and facilities. The following sections are intended to set forth the procedures and considerations involved leading to possible approval of such developments. 
Sec. 42-683. - Procedural requirements for planned unit developments. 
(a) ?Prepetition conference. Prior to the official submission of the petition for the approval of a planned unit development, the owner or his agent making such petition shall meet with the plan commission or its staff to discuss the scope and proposed nature of the contemplated development. 
(b) ?Petition for approval. Following the prepetition conference, the owner or his agent may file a petition with the administrator for approval of a planned unit development. Such petition shall be accompanied by a review fee set by the council from time to time, as well as incorporate the following information: 
(1) ?Informational statement. A statement which sets forth the relationship of the proposed PUD to the city's adopted master (comprehensive land use and thoroughfare plan) plan, neighborhood plan, or any adopted component thereof, and the general character of and the uses to be included in the proposed PUD, including the following information: 
a. ?Total area to be included in the PUD, area of open space, residential density computations, proposed number of dwelling units, population analysis, availability of or requirements for municipal services and other similar data pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development. 
b. ?A general summary of the estimated value of structures and site improvement costs, including landscaping and special features. 
c. ?A general outline of the organization structure of a property owner's or management's association, which may be proposed to be established for the purpose of providing any necessary private services. 
d. ?Any proposed departures from the standards of development as set forth in the city zoning regulations, land subdivision ordinance, other city regulations or administrative rules, or other universal guidelines. 
e. ?The expected date of commencement of physical development as set forth in the proposal and also an outline of any development staging which is planned. 
(2) ?General development plan. A general development plan shall include: 
a. ?A legal description of the boundaries of the subject property included in the proposed PUD and its relationship to surrounding properties. 
b. ?The location of public and private roads, driveways, sidewalks and parking facilities. 
c. ?The size, arrangement and location of any individual building sites and proposed building groups on each individual site. 
d. ?The location of institutional, recreational and open space areas and areas reserved or dedicated for public uses, including schools, parks and drainageways. 
e. ?The type, size and location of all structures. 
f. ?General landscape treatment. 
g. ?The existing and proposed location of public sanitary sewer, water supply facilities and stormwater drainage facilities. 
h. ?The existing and proposed location of all private utilities or other easements. 
i. ?Characteristics of soils related to contemplated specific uses. 
j. ?Existing topography on the site with contours at no greater than two-foot intervals. 
k. ?Anticipated uses of adjoining lands in regard to roads, surface water drainage and compatibility with existing adjacent land uses. 
l. ?If the development is to be staged a staging plan. 
m. ?A plan showing how the entire development can be further subdivided in the future. 
(c) ?Referral to plan commission. The petition for a planned unit development shall be referred to the plan commission for its review and recommendation, which recommendation shall include any additional conditions or restrictions which the plan commission may deem necessary or appropriate. 
(d) ?Public hearing. Following receipt of the plan commission's recommendation, the common council shall hold public hearing on the petition, including any conditions or restrictions imposed by the plan commission, in the manner provided in division 6, subdivision III of this article. 
Sec. 42-684. - Basis for approval of the petition for planned unit development. 
(a) ?Requirements. The plan commission, in making recommendations for approval, and the common council, in making a determination approving a petition for planned unit development, shall find as follows: 
(1) ?The general requirements made and provided in section 42-678 will be met. 
(2) ?The applicable physical requirements made and provided in section 42-679 will be met. 
(3) ?The requirements as to public services and facilities made and provided in section 42-680 will be met. 
(b) ?Proposed construction schedule. The plan commission and common council, in making their respective recommendation and determination, shall consider the reasonableness of the proposed construction schedule and any staging plan for the physical development of the proposed PUD, commencement of the physical development within one year of approval being deemed reasonable. 
(c) ?Residential PUD; consideration as to. The plan commission and common council, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed residential planned unit development, shall further consider whether: 
(1) ?Such development will create an attractive residential environment of sustained desirability and economic stability, including structures in relation to terrain, consideration of safe pedestrian flow, ready access to recreation space and coordination with overall plans for the city. 
(2) ?The total net residential density within the planned unit development will be compatible with the city master plan (comprehensive land use and thoroughfare plan), neighborhood plan, or components thereof, and shall be compatible with the density of the district wherein located. 
(3) ?Structure types will be generally compatible with other structural types permitted in the underlying basic use district. To this end, structure type shall be limited as follows: 
a. ?Planned residential developments in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts shall not exceed four dwelling units per structure. 
b. ?Planned residential developments in the R-4 and R-5 districts shall not exceed 16 dwelling units per structure. 
(4) ?Provision has been made for the installation of adequate public facilities and the continuing maintenance and operation of such facilities, if privately owned. 
(5) ?Provision has been made for adequate, continuing fire and police protection. 
(6) ?The population density of the development will or will not have an adverse effect upon the city's capacity to provide needed school or other municipal service facilities. 
(7) ?Adequate guarantee is provided for permanent preservation of open space areas as shown on the general development plan as approved either by private reservation and maintenance or by dedication to the public. 
(d) ?Commercial PUD; consideration as to. The plan commission and common council in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed commercial planned unit development shall further consider whether: 
(1) ?The economic practicality of the proposed development can be justified. 
(2) ?The proposed development will be served by off-street parking and truck service facilities in accordance with this division. 
(3) ?The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and stormwater drainage, and maintenance of public areas. 
(4) ?The locations of entrances and exits have been designated to prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient movement of traffic on surrounding streets and that the development will not create an adverse effect upon the general traffic pattern of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(5) ?The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting and general site development will result in an attractive and harmonious service area compatible with and not adversely affecting the property values of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(e) ?Industrial PUD; considerations as to. The plan commission and common council, in making their respective recommendations and determination as to a proposed industrial planned unit development, shall further consider whether: 
(1) ?The operational character, physical plant arrangement of buildings will be compatible with the latest in performance standards and industrial development design and will not result in an adverse effect upon the property values of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2) ?The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and stormwater drainage and maintenance of public areas. 
(3) ?The proposed development will include provision for off-street parking and truck service areas in accordance with this division and will be adequately served by easy access rail and/or arterial highway facilities. 
(4) ?The proposed development is properly related to the total transportation system of the city and will not result in an adverse effect on the safety and efficiency of the public streets. 
(f) ?Mixed use PUD; consideration as to. The plan commission and common council, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed mixed use planned unit development, shall further consider whether: 
(1) ?The proposed mixture of uses produces a unified composite which is compatible within the zoning district and which, as a total development entity, is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2) ?The various types of uses conform to the general requirements as set forth in this subdivision, applicable to projects of such use and character. 
(3) ?The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and stormwater drainage and maintenance of public areas. 
Sec. 42-685. - Determination of disposition of the petition. 
(a) ?General. The common council, upon receipt of recommendation from the plan commission and following public hearing thereon, and after due consideration, shall either deny the petition, approve the petition as submitted, or approve the petition subject to any additional conditions and restrictions the council may impose. 
(b) ?Approval. The general and detailed approvals of a planned unit development shall be based on and include as conditions thereto the building, site and operational plans for the development as approved by the common council. 
(1) ?General approval. The general development plan submitted with the PUD application need not necessarily be completely detailed at the time of petition provided it is in sufficient detail to satisfy the common council as to the general character, scope and appearance of the proposed development. Such plan shall designate the pattern of proposed streets and the size and arrangement of individual buildings and building sites. The approval of such general development plan, by way of approval of the petition, shall be conditioned upon the subsequent submittal and approval of more specific and detailed plans as each stage of development progresses. 
(2) ?Detailed approval. Detail plans must be furnished to the plan commission and council for their consideration and the detailed approval by the council of any part or stage of the proposed development shall be required before construction of such part or stage of the development may be commenced. Before plans submitted for detailed approval within the corporate limits will be approved, the petitioner shall give satisfactory proof that he has contracted to install all improvements, or file a performance bond ensuring that such improvements will be installed within the time required by the common council. 
(c) ?Changes and additions. Any subsequent substantial change or addition to the plans or uses shall first be submitted for approval to the plan commission and if in the opinion of the plan commission, such change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plan, it shall make its recommendation to the council and further recommend further public hearing in which event the council shall schedule a notice of public hearing as for the original petition. Following such public hearing, the council shall deny, approve or approve the same subject to any additional conditions and restrictions it may impose. 
Secs. 42-686—42-705. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 42-706. - Site regulations. 
(a) ?Street frontage. All lots shall abut upon a public street or other officially approved means of access and each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 25 feet. 
(b) ?Principal structures. All principal structures shall be located on a lot. Only one principal structure shall be located, erected or moved onto a lot. The common council may permit as a conditional use more than one principal structure per lot in any district where more than one such structure is needed for the orderly development of the parcel. Where additional structures are permitted, the common council, subject to the recommendation of the plan commission, may impose additional yard requirements, landscaping requirements or parking requirements or require a minimum separation distance between principal structures. 
(c) ?Dedicated street. No zoning permit shall be issued for a lot which abuts a public street dedicated to only a portion of its proposed width and located on that side thereof from which the required dedication has not been secured. 
(d) ?Lots abutting more restrictive districts. Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and rear yards not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting district. The street yard setbacks in the less restrictive district shall be modified for a distance of not less than 60 feet from the more restrictive district boundary line so such street yard setbacks shall be no less than the average of the street yards required in both districts. 
(e) ?Site suitability. No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is held unsuitable for such use or structure by the common council and plan commission by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low percolation rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of this community. The plan commission in applying the provisions of the section, shall in writing recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such unsuitability if desired. Thereafter, the plan commission may affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability when making its recommendation to the common council. 
(f) ?Preservation of topography. In order to protect the property owner from possible damage due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands, and to aid in preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of the landscape, no change in the existing topography of any land shall be made which would result in increasing any portion of the slope to a ratio greater than one and one-half horizontal to one vertical, within a distance of 20 feet from the property line, except with the written consent of the owner of the abutting property and with the approval of the plan commission; or which would alter the existing drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect the adjoining property. In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved, and all slopes shall be protected against erosion. 
(g) ?Decks. For purposes of this article, decks shall be considered a part of a building or structure. 
Sec. 42-707. - Heights and area exceptions. 
    The regulations contained in this division relating to the height of buildings and the size of yards and other open spaces shall be subject to the following exceptions: 
(1) ?Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums and other public and quasi-public buildings may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet or five stories, provided the front, side and rear yards required in the district in which such building is to be located are each increased at least one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise established for the district in which such building is to be located. 
(2) ?Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, penthouses, stacks, scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, spires, wireless, television or broadcasting towers, masts or aerials; microwave radio relay structures; telephone, telegraph and power poles and lines and necessary mechanical appurtenances are exempted from the height regulations of this article and may be erected in accordance with other regulations or codes of the city. This exception shall not apply to accessory structures, vegetation and materials as regulated under subsection 42-786(f) of this Code. 
(3) ?Residences in the residence district may be increased in height by not more than ten feet when all yards and other required open spaces are increased by one foot for each foot which such building exceeds the height limit of the district in which it is located. 
(4) ?Where a lot abuts on two or more streets or alleys having different average established grades, the higher of such grades shall control only for a depth of 120 feet from the line of the higher average established grade. 
(5) ?Buildings on through lots and extending from street to street may have waived the requirements for a rear yard by furnishing an equivalent open space on the same lot in lieu of the required rear yard, provided that the setback requirements on both streets are complied with. 
(6) ?Where a lot has an area less than the minimum number of square feet per family required for the district in which it is located and was of record as such at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, such lot may be occupied by one family. 
(7) ?Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features projecting not more than 12 inches. 
(8) ?Open or enclosed fire escapes and fire towers may project into a required yard not more than five feet and into a required court not more than three and one-half feet, provided it is located as not to obstruct light and ventilation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-01, § 1, 1-13-2003) 
Sec. 42-708. - Height regulations in the vicinity of airports. 
    Airports and their surrounding areas are subject to the applicable federal, state, county and local regulations, as well as the following requirements: Heights of buildings and structures in areas surrounding the boundaries of airports having an established approach plan that has been approved by the above authorities shall be in accordance with requirements set forth in the approach plan and/or adopted airport zoning regulations. 
Sec. 42-709. - Obstruction of watercourse channels. 
(a) ?To prevent encroachment upon, or constriction of, river or creek channels, and thereby avoid obstruction to the natural conveyance of water flow in such rivers, creeks and other natural watercourses, there shall not be placed, erected or located within the banks of such watercourses any building or structure, pier or marina, or retaining or revetment wall, except authorized bridges or dams. In addition, there shall not be placed any filling of earth, ashes, rubbish, rubble, concrete, masonry or any other kind of fill. 
(b) ?However, subsection (a) of this section may be waived if the structure or fill is approved by the city zoning administrator and common council, the U.S. Corps of Engineers and state department of natural resources, where applicable. 
Sec. 42-710. - Traffic visibility. 
(a) ?On a corner lot in all zoning districts, no fence, wall, hedge, planting or structure shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between a height of 2½ feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining the points along the street lines 25 feet from the point of intersection. 
(b) ?In the case of arterial streets intersecting with other arterial streets or railways, the corner cutoff distances establishing the triangular vision clearance space shall be increased to 50 feet. 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; trees and shrubbery obstructing view at intersection or view of traffic signs, § 86-118. 
_____
Sec. 42-711. - Loading requirements. 
(a) ?Loading space requirements. On every lot on which a business, trade or industrial use is established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as indicated in this section for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way: 
Use Floor Area 
(Square Feet) Loading 
Space Retail, wholesale, warehouse, service, manufacturing, and industrial establishments ?2,000—10,000 
10,000—20,000 
20,000—40,000 
40,000—60,000 
Each additional 50,000 1 
1 
2 
3 
1 Hotels, offices, hospitals, places of public assembly ?5,000—?10,000 
10,000—?50,000 
50,000—100,000 
Each additional 25,000 1 
2 
2 
1 Funeral homes 2,500—4,000 
4,000—6,000 
Each additional 10,000 1 
1 
1  
_____
(b) ?Multiple or mixed uses. Where a building is devoted to more than one use or for different uses, and where the floor area for each use is below the minimum required for a loading space but the aggregate floor area of such uses is above such a minimum, then off-street loading space shall be provided as if the entire building were devoted to that use in the building for which the most loading spaces are required. 
(c) ?Location. Required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot with the principal use requiring such space. No loading space shall be located within 30 feet of the nearest point of intersection of two streets, or require any vehicle to back into a public street. 
(d) ?Design standards. Each off-street loading space shall have a width of at least 12 feet, a length of at least 40 feet, and a vertical clearance of at least 15 feet. Dimensions for loading spaces in connection with funeral homes shall be reduced to ten feet in width, 25 feet in length, and eight feet in vertical clearance. All loading berths shall be completely screened from residential properties by building walls, or a uniformly painted solid fence, wall or door, or any combination thereof, not less than eight feet in height. 
(e) ?Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches thick, surfaced with not less than two inches of asphalt or treated with some comparable all-weather dustless material. 
(f) ?Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any residence district. 
(g) ?Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof. 
(h) ?Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for loading berths on the individual zoning lots provided the following conditions are fulfilled: 
(1) ?Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the central loading area without crossing streets or alleys at grade. 
(2) ?Total berths provided shall meet the requirements based on the sum of the several types of uses served. (Areas of types of uses may be totaled before computing number of loading berths.) 
(3) ?No zoning lot served shall be more than 300 feet removed from the central loading area. 
(4) ?The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area with the zoning lot served shall be not less than seven feet in width and have a clearance of not less than seven feet. 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 42-712. - Parking requirements. 
    All new parking lots and all alterations of existing lots shall be subject to the approval of the plan commission and the public works director. Requests for such parking lots shall be accompanied with detailed plans on landscaping, parking layout, drainage provisions and driveway locations. In all districts, except those areas which are located within the fire zone as designated on the official map, there shall be provided at the time any use or building is erected, enlarged, extended or increased, off-street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the following: 
(1) ?Access. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space. 
(2) ?Design standards. Each required off-street parking space shall have a stall width of at least nine feet and a stall length of at least 18 feet. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least 6½ feet. Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for one-way traffic shall be as follows: Aisles shall be not less than 24 feet wide for 90-degree parking, 18 feet wide for 60-degree parking, 15 feet wide for 45-degree parking (angle shall be measured between centerline of parking space and centerline of aisle), and 12 feet wide for parallel parking. For parallel parking the minimum length of the parking space shall be increased to 23 feet. No parking area of more than two spaces shall be designed as to require any vehicle to back into a public street. Any parking area of more than five spaces shall be sufficiently screened in the form of a solid fence or shrubbery to protect adjacent residential uses. Large expanses of unchanneled parking areas shall be avoided by interior landscaping and safety islands. 
(3) ?Location. 
a. ?Location to be on the same lot as the principal use or not over 400 feet from the principal use. 
b. ?Off-street parking is permitted in all yards of all districts except in the front yards of single-family and multifamily residence districts, but shall not be closer than five feet to a side lot line, right-of-way line or rear lot line. 
c. ?Off-street parking in the single-family residence and multifamily residence districts is permitted in the front yard in the driveway, even though closer than five feet to a side lot line providing the driveway conforms to the requirements in section 42-713. 
(4) ?Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with a dustless, all-weather material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds (normally, a two-inch blacktop on a four-inch base or five inches of Portland cement will meet this requirement). Any parking area for more than five vehicles shall have the aisles and spaces clearly marked. 
(5) ?Landscaping. 
a. ?Generally. All public and private off-street parking areas which serve five vehicles or more and are created or redesigned and rebuilt subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be provided with accessory landscape areas totaling not less than ten percent of the surfaced area. The minimum size of each landscape area shall not be less than 100 square feet. 
b. ?Location. Location of landscape areas, plant materials, protection afforded the plantings, including curbing and provision for maintenance by the property owner shall be subject to approval by the zoning administrator. 
c. ?Plans. All plans for such proposed parking areas, at the discretion of the zoning administrator, shall include a topographic survey or grading plan which shows existing and proposed grades and location of improvements. The preservation of existing trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation in the parking area may be included in the calculation of the required minimum landscape area. 
d. ?Special residential requirements. Those parking areas for five or more vehicles if adjoining a residential use shall be screened from such use by a solid wall, fence, evergreen planting of equivalent visual density, or other effective means, built and maintained at a minimum height of five feet. Where a solidly constructed decorative fence is provided along the interior lot line, the minimum setback for the parking area shall be five feet from the lot line. The fence shall be located a minimum of one foot from the lot line. 
e. ?Street setback area. No parking shall be permitted between the street right-of-way line and the building setback line prevailing in the zone in which the proposed parking area is to be located. The resulting open area shall be planted in grass or otherwise landscaped to create a permanent green area. 
f. ?Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in association with parking facilities provided in residence districts. 
g. ?Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties and public streets in such a way as not to create a nuisance. However, in no case shall such lighting exceed three footcandles measured at the lot line. 
(6) ?Curbs. Curbs or barriers shall be installed a minimum of four feet from a property line so as to prevent the parked vehicles from extending over any lot lines. 
(7) ?Number of stalls. Number of parking stalls required are shown in the following table, except that: 
a. ?Uses, as itemized in B-1 and B-2 zoning districts, shall provide one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet, except as indicated in subsection (7)b of this section. 
b. ?Parking spaces shall not be required for uses in the B-4 district containing less than 40,000 square feet of gross floor area. Those uses containing 40,000 square feet of gross floor area or more shall provide one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 45,000 square feet. For each additional 5,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 45,000 square feet, one additional parking space shall be provided. 
Use Minimum 
Parking 
Required Dwellings: Single-family, two-family and manufactured homes 2 stalls for each dwelling unit Dwellings: Multifamily 2 stalls for each dwelling unit Housing for the elderly (nonnursing home) 0.75 space for each dwelling with one-half of these spaces to be built before occupancy and the balance of which spaces shall be reserved until such time as the common council may order them installed Hotels, motels 1 stall for each guestroom plus 
1 stall for each 3 employes Sororities, dormitories, roominghouses and boardinghouses 1 stall for each bed Retirement homes, orphanages, convents and monasteries 1 stall for each 4 beds plus 
1 stall for each 2 employes Hospitals, sanitariums, institutions, rest and nursing homes 1 stall for each 3 beds plus 
1 stall for each 2 employes Medical and dental clinics 3 stalls for each doctor Churches, theaters, auditoriums, community centers, vocational and night schools, and other places of public assembly 1 stall for each 6 seats Colleges, secondary and elementary schools 1 stall for each 2 employes plus 
1 stall for each 5 students of 16 years of age or more Restaurants, bars, clubs and lodges, places of entertainment 1 stall for each 3 seats and 
1 space for each 2 employes Manufactured home parks 1 stall for each trailer lot plus 
1 stall for every 3 lots for guest parking Manufacturing and processing plants (including meat and food processing), laboratories and warehouses 1 stall for every 2 employes; number of employes shall be construed to mean the maximum number on the premises at one time Financial institutions, business government and professional offices, retail and service establishments 1 stall for each 250 square feet of floor area and 
1 stall for each 2 employes Motor vehicle sales (new and used) 1 space for each 500 square feet of floor area used plus 
1 space for each 300 square feet of outdoor display area for each motor vehicle to be displayed. 
(This requirement does not include service garages—see above) Repair shops, retail and service stores 1 space for each 150 square feet of net floor space Automobile repair garages and service stations 1 space for each employe plus 
1 space for each 250 square feet of floor area used for repair work Bowling alleys 5 spaces for each alley  
(8) ?Uses not listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the provision for a use which is similar shall apply. Floor space or area shall mean the gross floor area inside the exterior walls, where floor space is indicated above as a basis for determining the amount of off-street parking required. 
(9) ?Combined uses. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the total of the number of stalls required for each individual use. Two or more uses may provide required off-street parking spaces in a common parking facility less than the sum of the spaces required for each use individually provided such uses are not operated during the same hours. A written agreement satisfactory to the city attorney shall accompany any joint use arrangement. 
(10) ?Handicapped parking requirements. In addition to any other requirements relating to parking spaces contained in these ordinances, the provisions contained in Wis. Stats. §§ 101.13, 346.503, and 346.56, and any Wisconsin Administrative Code sections adopted pursuant thereto, are adopted by reference and made applicable to all parking facilities whenever constructed. 
(11) ?Changes in buildings or use. Whenever a building or use is changed, structurally altered, or enlarged to create a need for an increase of 25 percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in the floor area, such building or use shall then comply with the parking requirements set forth in the district in which it is located. 
(12) ?Off-lot parking. 
a. ?Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with the principal use, or when this requirement cannot be met such parking spaces may be located off-lot provided the parking spaces are located in the same district. Off-lot parking spaces shall also be held in fee simple ownership by the owner of the use requiring such parking or be leased or rented through a written agreement satisfactory to the city attorney. 
b. ?Off-lot parking spaces for residential uses shall be within 250 feet of the principal entrance or the entrance for the individual occupants for whom the spaces are reserved while the farthest portions of a parking lot for all other uses shall be within 300 feet of the entrance of the establishment. 
c. ?Accessory parking may be located in residential districts provided that said lots or property are immediately adjacent to a commercial, business or industrial zoning district. 
d. ?All off-street parking lots adjoining lots zoned for residential use shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from any interior lot line, except if the adjoining lot is used for legally conforming parking purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 6-24-2002) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 42-713. - Driveways. 
    All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced or extended after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall meet the following requirements and must be approved as to location by the zoning administrator: 
(1) ?Islands between driveway openings shall be provided with a minimum of six feet between all driveways. 
(2) ?The maximum number of driveway openings for vehicular ingress and egress permitted for lots with a width less than 100 feet shall be one and for lots with a width greater than 100 feet shall be two. 
(3) ?Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in theaters, banks and restaurants; motels; funeral homes; vehicular sales, service, washing and repair stations; garages or public parking lots shall be not less than 200 feet from any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college, university, church, hospital, park playground, library, public emergency shelter or other place of public assembly. 
(4) ?Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed 30 feet at the property line and 35 feet at the roadway for all uses except the maximum curb opening for all residential districts shall be 25 feet at the roadway. 
(5) ?Driveways shall be at least ten feet wide for one-family and two-family dwellings, at least 18 feet for farmsteads, and a maximum of 35 feet at the roadway for all other uses except the maximum curb opening for all residential districts shall be 25 feet. 
(6) ?Driveways shall be hard surfaced with either blacktop or cement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, § 3, 6-24-2002) 
Sec. 42-714. - Highway access. 
(a) ?No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of expressways, nor to any controlled access arterial street without permission of the highway agency that has access control jurisdiction. No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of freeways, interstate highways and their interchanges or turning lanes nor to intersecting or interchanging streets within 1,500 feet of the most remote end of the taper of the turning lanes (such as exit and entrance ramps). No driveway openings shall be permitted within 100 feet of the intersection of a street right-of-way line. 
(b) ?Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping or other topographic barriers, shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the streets or highways specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c) ?Temporary access to the rights-of-way may be granted by the zoning administrator after review and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary, revocable and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 42-715. - Storage and parking of recreational vehicles. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boat means every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Length of a manufactured home means the distance from the exterior of the front wall (nearest to the exterior of the drawbar and coupling mechanism) to the exterior of the rear wall (at the opposite end of the manufactured home) where such walls enclose living or other interior space and such distance includes expandable rooms but not bay windows, porches, drawbars, couplings, hitches, wall and roof extensions, or other attachments. Width of a manufactured home means the distance from the exterior of one side wall to the exterior of the opposite side wall where such walls enclose living or other interior space and such distance includes expandable rooms but not bay windows, porches, wall and roof extensions, or other attachments. 
    Recreational vehicle means any of the following: 
(1) ?Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and on wheels; that is between ten and 36 feet long, including the hitch and eight feet or less in width; designated to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses and towed by a car, station wagon or truck. It includes so-called fifth-wheel units. 
(2) ?Pickup coach means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses. 
(3) ?Motor home means a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
(4) ?Camping trailer means a canvas or folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses. 
(5) ?Chassis mounts, motor homes and mini-motor homes means recreational structures constructed integrally with a truck or motor van chassis and incapable of being separated therefrom. 
(6) ?Converted and chopped vans means recreational structures which are created by altering or changing an existing auto van to make it a recreational vehicle. 
(7) ?Boat or snowmobile trailer means a vehicle on which a boat or snowmobile may be transported and is towable by a motor vehicle. When removed from the trailer, a boat or snowmobile, for purposes of this section is termed an unmounted boat or snowmobile. 
    Yard, front means that part of a lot between the front lot line and front of the principal building on the lot, and extended to both side lot lines. 
    Yard, rear means that part of a lot between the rear lot line and the back of the principal building on the lot, and extended to both side lot lines. 
    Yard, side means that part of a lot not surrounded by building and not in the front or rear yard. 
(b) ?Permitted parking or storage. In all residential and commercial districts provided for in this article, it is permissible to park or store a recreational vehicle or boat and boat trailer on private property in the following manner: 
(1) ?Parking is permitted inside any enclosed structure, which structure otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular zoning district where located. 
(2) ?Parking is permitted outside in the side yard or rear yard provided it is not nearer than five feet to the lot line. 
(3) ?Parking is permitted outside on a hard surfaced or well-drained gravel driveway, provided that: 
a. ?Space is not available in the rear yard or side yard, or there is no reasonable access to either the side yard or rear yard. 
b. ?A corner lot is always deemed to have reasonable access to the rear yard. 
c. ?A fence is not necessarily deemed to prevent reasonable access. 
d. ?Inside parking is not possible. 
e. ?The unit is parked perpendicular to the front curb. 
(4) ?The body of the recreational vehicle or boat must be at least 15 feet from the face of any curb. 
(5) ?No part of the unit may extend over the public sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(6) ?Parking is permitted only for storage purposes. Recreational vehicles or boats shall not be: 
a. ?Used for dwelling purposes, except for overnight sleeping for a maximum of 14 days in any one calendar year. Cooking is not permitted at any time. 
b. ?Permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines or electricity. The recreational vehicle may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries and other purposes. 
c. ?Used for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the unit or essential for its immediate use. 
(7) ?Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b)(6) of this section, a unit may be parked anywhere on the premises during active loading or unloading, and the use of electricity or propane fuel is permitted when necessary to prepare a recreational vehicle for use. 
(8) ?The recreational vehicle or boat shall be owned by the resident on whose property the unit is parked for storage. 
(c) ?Parking on the street. No person shall park, stop or leave standing any recreational vehicle, utility trailer, boat, boat trailer or other equipment upon any street except: 
(1) ?For loading and unloading purposes for 24 hours prior to use and 24 hours after use. For purposes of this chapter, "use" includes any operation of the recreational vehicle over of a period of not less than one day for recreational traveling purposes to a particular destination and does not include the mere moving of the recreational vehicle from one area within a lot or parcel to another location on such lot or parcel. 
(2) ?To allow out-of-town visitors to park their recreational vehicle in front of the residence which they are visiting, when there is no alternative parking available, for a period of no more than seven consecutive days. 
(3) ?In the event a recreational vehicle is parked on a public street, the following limitations shall apply: 
a. ?At no time shall any "slide out" component of the recreational vehicle be utilized or extended. 
b. ?At no time shall any water hose, septic hose, television attachment or other attachment be extended from the recreation vehicle over or upon any street, public sidewalk or right-of-way. 
c. ?At no time shall a public safety hazard be permitted to exist on or across any street, public sidewalk or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 12-10-2012) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Secs. 42-716—42-735. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; industrial discharge regulations, § 82-306 et seq. 

Sec. 42-736. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this division to use performance standards for the regulation of industrial uses to facilitate a more objective and equitable basis for control, and to ensure that the city is adequately protected from potential hazardous and nuisance-like effects. 
Sec. 42-737. - Noise; prohibited hours; exemptions. 
    No operation or activity shall transmit any noise exceeding 75 dBA from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and 65 dBA from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. beyond the property line. The following noises are exempt from this section: 
(1) ?Noises not directly under the control of the property user. 
(2) ?Noises from temporary construction or maintenance activities during daylight hours. 
(3) ?Noises from emergency, safety or warning devices. 
Cross reference— Loud unnecessary noise, § 54-193. 
Sec. 42-738. - Vibration. 
(a) ?No operation or activity shall transmit any physical vibration that is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property line of the source. Vibration perception threshold means the minimum ground- or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. 
(b) ?Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user and vibrations from temporary construction or maintenance activities shall be exempt from the standard of subsection (a) of this section. 
Sec. 42-739. - External lighting. 
    No operation or activity shall produce any intense glare or lighting with the source directly visible beyond the M-1 and M-2 industrial districts' boundaries. 
Sec. 42-740. - Odor. 
    No operation or activity shall emit any substance or combination of substances in such quantities that create an objectionable odor as defined in Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 154.18. 
Sec. 42-741. - Particulate emissions. 
    No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 415. 
Sec. 42-742. - Visible emissions. 
    No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 154.11(6). 
Sec. 42-743. - Hazardous pollutants. 
    No operation or activity shall emit any hazardous substances in such a quantity, concentration or duration as to be injurious to human health or property, and all emissions of hazardous substances shall not exceed the limitations established in Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 154.19. 
Secs. 42-744—42-765. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - USE REGULATIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 42-766. - Uses allowed in districts. 
    Only the following uses and their essential services may be allowed in any district: 
(1) ?Permitted uses. Permitted uses, being the principal uses, specified for a district. 
(2) ?Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures as specified are permitted in any district but not until their principal structure is present or under construction. 
(3) ?Conditional uses. 
a. ?Classes. Conditional uses may be either denominated "regular" or "limited." 
b. ?General provisions. Provisions applicable to conditional uses generally are as follows: 
1. ?Conditional uses and their accessory uses are considered as special uses requiring, for their authorization, review, public hearing and approval by the common council in accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article excepting those existent at time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
2. ?Those existing uses which are classified as conditional uses for the districts in which they are located at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived require no action by the common council for them to continue as valid conditional uses, and the same shall be deemed to be regular conditional uses. 
3. ?Proposed change from permitted use in a district to conditional use shall require review, public hearing and approval by the common council in accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article. 
4. ?Conditional uses, when replaced by permitted uses, shall terminate. In such cases, the reestablishment of any previous conditional uses, or establishment of new conditional uses shall require review, public hearing and approval by the common council in accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article. 
5. ?Provisions in this article relating generally to conditional uses shall, except when in conflict with specific provisions relating to either regular or limited conditional uses (which specific provisions would then control) shall be deemed to be applicable to both regular and limited conditional uses. 
c. ?Specific regular conditional use provisions. Provisions applicable specifically to regular conditional uses are as follows: 
1. ?Regular conditional uses, either allowed by action of the common council, or existent at time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall be nonlapsing, shall survive vacancies and change of ownership of the properties where located and be subject to substitution with other conditional uses of same or similar type without council approval. Change to conditional use of other than same or similar type shall require procedures and approval in accordance with these land use regulations. 
2. ?See subsection (3)b.1 above as to conditional uses existent at time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived being deemed to the regular conditional uses. 
d. ?Specific limited conditional use provisions. Provisions applicable specifically to limited conditional uses are as follows: 
1. ?Limited conditional uses authorized by common council resolution shall be established for a period of time to a time certain or until a future happening or event at which the same shall terminate. 
2. ?Limited conditional uses authorized by the common council shall not be subject to substitution with other conditional uses, either regular or limited, whether similar type or not, without council approval and the procedures required in division 6, subdivision III of this article. 
(4) ?Uses not specified in article. 
a. ?Uses not specified in this article which are found by the plan commission to be sufficiently similar to specified permitted uses for a district shall be allowed by the zoning administrator. 
b. ?Uses not specified in this article and which are found sufficiently similar to specified conditional uses permitted for a district, may be permitted by the common council after consideration and recommendation by the plan commission, public hearing and approval in accordance with division 6, subdivision III of this article. 
Secs. 42-767—42-785. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Accessory Uses or Structures; Fences and Hedges 

Sec. 42-786. - Accessory uses or structures. 
(a) ?Principal use to be present. An accessory use or structure in any zoning district shall not be established prior to the principal use or structure being present or under construction. 
(b) ?Placement restrictions. An accessory use or structure in a residential district may be established subject to the following regulations: 
(1) ?Accessory building number limits. In any residential district, in addition to the principal building, a detached garage or attached garage and one additional accessory building may be placed on a lot. 
(2) ?Accessory building size limits. No detached accessory building or structure shall exceed the height of the principal building or structure. 
(3) ?Attached accessory buildings. All accessory buildings which are attached to the principal building shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building and shall be constructed and finished in a complimentary architectural style and with complimentary materials to the principal residential building. 
(4) ?Detached accessory buildings. No detached accessory building shall occupy any portion of the required front yard, and no detached accessory building shall occupy more than 40 percent of the required rear yard, or be located within five feet of an alley right-of-way or be located within three feet of any other accessory building or lot line. An accessory building shall not be nearer than ten feet to the principal structure unless the applicable building code regulations in regard to one-hour, fire-resistive construction are complied with. In no event can the accessory uses or structures be forward of the front line of the principal structure. Framing and construction of a detached garage shall be of the same type as that of the principal building and shall be constructed and finished in a complimentary architectural style as that of the principal building. 
(5) ?Accessory building setbacks. Accessory building setbacks shall be as prescribed for each zoning district. 
(c) ?Use restrictions; residential district. Accessory uses or structures in residential districts shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry except for home occupations, and shall not be occupied as a dwelling unit. 
(d) ?Placement restrictions; nonresidential districts. An accessory use or structure in a business or manufacturing district may be established in the rear yard or side yard and shall have setbacks as prescribed in each zoning district. 
(e) ?Reversed corner lots. When an accessory structure is located on the rear of a reversed corner lot, it shall not be located beyond the front yard required on the adjacent interior lot to the rear, nor nearer than five feet to the side line of the adjacent structure. 
(f) ?Landscaping and decorative uses. Accessory structures, vegetation and materials used for landscaping and decorating purposes or uses may be placed in any required yard area. No accessory structures and materials used for landscaping and decorating purposes shall be constructed to a height greater than 15 feet from ground level without a conditional use permit, except for typical flagpoles consisting of a single pole no larger than two inches in diameter. Permitted accessory structures, vegetation and materials include flagpoles, ornamental light standards, lawn furniture, sundials, bird baths, bird houses, trees, shrubs and flowers and gardens. 
(g) ?Temporary uses. Temporary accessory uses such as real estate sales field offices or shelters for materials and equipment being used in the construction of a permanent structure, may be permitted by the zoning administrator. 
(h) ?Garages in embankments in front yards. Where the mean natural grade of a front yard is more than eight feet above the curb level, a private garage may be erected within the front yard, provided that: 
(1) ?Such private garage shall be located not less than five feet from the front lot line; 
(2) ?The floor level of such private garage shall be not more than one foot above the curb level; and 
(3) ?At least one-half the height of such private garage shall be below the mean grade of the front yard. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, §§ 2, 3, 4-9-2001; Ord. No. 2003-01, § 2, 1-13-2003) 
Sec. 42-787. - Outside storage of firewood. 
(a) ?No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned property, except that firewood may be temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of 30 days, from the date of its delivery. 
(b) ?Firewood should be neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than two feet to any lot line and not higher than six feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. Fences as used in this section shall not include hedges and other vegetation. 
(c) ?All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly and properly disposed of and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises. 
(d) ?Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(e) ?Not more than 15 percent of the side or rear yard may be used for storage of firewood at any one time. 
Sec. 42-788. - Fences and hedges. 
(a) ?Fences defined. For the purpose of this section, a fence is defined as an enclosed barrier consisting of vegetation, wood, stone or metal intended to prevent ingress or egress. For the purpose of this section, the term "fence" shall include plantings, such as hedges and shrubbery. 
(b) ?Fences categorized. Fences shall be categorized into two classifications: 
(1) ?Boundary fence. A fence which is placed in a location such that it effectively defines all or a portion of a boundary of a property. Such fences, unless the fence is constructed as a chainlink fence, must be placed not closer than three feet from any property line except it shall not be placed within five feet of an alley, if applicable. If the fence is a chainlink fence, it must be constructed not less than one foot from any property line except it shall not be placed within five feet of an alley, if applicable. 
(2) ?Protective fence. A fence constructed to enclose a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(3) ?Architectural or aesthetic fence. A fence constructed to enhance the appearance of the structure or the landscape. 
(c) ?Location regulations. 
(1) ?Except as provided in section 42-710, a fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery may be erected, placed, maintained or grown on property in accordance with the location provisions of this section to a height not exceeding six feet above the ground level, except that no such fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery which is located in a corner side yard shall exceed a height of three feet. Where such lot line is adjacent to nonresidentially zoned property, there shall be an eight foot limit on the height of a fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery along such lot line. 
(2) ?No fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall be erected, placed, maintained or grown along a lot line on any nonresidentially zoned property, adjacent to residentially zoned property, to a height exceeding eight feet. 
(3) ?In any residence district no fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall be erected, constructed, maintained or grown to a height exceeding three feet above the street grade nearest thereto, within 25 feet of the intersection of any street lines or of street lines projected. 
(4) ?Fences in or adjacent to a residential property shall have a minimum three-foot setback. 
(5) ?Front yard fences. In any residence district, all fences located within a required front yard shall be decorative only and limited to a maximum of 50 percent in opacity. Decorative fences located within any potion of a required front yard shall have a minimum three-foot setback from the front property line and shall also have a minimum three-foot setback from any driveway. No decorative fence located within any portion of a required front yard shall exceed a height of four feet above the ground level, except that decorative fence post caps shall not exceed more than 12 inches above the maximum fence height of four feet. Day-glow paints or colors are not permitted on a decorative fence located within any portion of a required front yard. Chain-link, wire-mesh and privacy fences are not permitted within any portion of a required front yard. 
(6) ?The finished side of a fence shall face outward from the property on which the fence is located. The side of a fence containing the posts or poles and other bracing appurtenances shall face inward to the property being fenced in or on which the fence is located. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-142(b)(1), (c)(1); Ord. No. 91-11, §§ 1, 2, 7-15-1991; Ord. No. 2000-06, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 2002-07, § 1, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 1, 3-25-2008) 
Sec. 42-789. - Swimming pools. 
(a) ?Definition. A private or residential swimming pool is an outdoor structure containing a body of water in a receptacle or other container having a depth for water at any point greater than 1½ feet located above or below the surface of ground elevation, used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his family, and by friends, invited to use it, and includes all structural facilities, appliances and appurtenances, equipment and other items used and intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of a private or residential swimming pool. 
(b) ?Exempt pools. Storable children's swimming or wading pools, with a maximum dimension of 15 feet and a maximum wall height of 15 inches and which are so constructed that it may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its original integrity, are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(c) ?Permit required. Before work is commenced on the construction or erection of private or residential swimming pools or on any alterations, additions, remodeling or other improvements, an application for a swimming pool building permit to construct, erect, alter, remodel or add must be submitted in writing to the building inspector. Plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data should be submitted to the building inspector at the time of application. No work or any part of the work shall be commenced until a written permit for such work is obtained by the applicant. A fee as set by the council from time to time shall accompany such application. 
(d) ?Construction requirements. In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably imposed by the building inspector, the building inspector shall not issue a permit for construction as provided for in subsection (c), unless the following construction requirements are observed: 
(1) ?All materials and methods of construction in the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvements and pool installation shall be in accord with all state regulations and code and with any and all ordinances of the city now in effect or hereafter enacted. 
(2) ?All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the city and all state codes. Every private or residential swimming pool shall be provided with a suitable draining method, and in no case shall waters from any pool be drained into the sanitary sewer system, onto lands of other property owners adjacent to that on which the pool is located or in the general vicinity thereof. 
(3) ?All electrical installations, including lighting and heating, but not limited thereto, which are provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a private swimming pool shall be in conformance with the state laws and city ordinances regulating electrical installations. 
(e) ?Setbacks and other requirements. 
(1) ?Private swimming pools shall be erected or constructed on rear or side lots only and only on a lot occupied by a principal building. No swimming pool shall be erected or constructed on an otherwise vacant lot. A lot shall not be considered vacant if the owner owns the contiguous lot and said lot is occupied by a principal building. 
(2) ?No swimming pool shall be located, constructed or maintained closer to any side or rear lot line than is permitted for an accessory building, and in no case shall the water line of any pool be less than six feet from any lot line. 
(f) ?Fence. 
(1) ?Pools within the scope of this section which are not enclosed within a permanent building shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall of sufficient strength to prevent access to the pool. Such fence or wall shall not be less than six feet in height and so constructed as not to have voids, holes or openings larger than four inches in one dimension. Gates or doors shall be kept locked while the pool is not in actual use. 
(2) ?The pool enclosure may be omitted where portable pools are installed above the ground and have a raised deck around the entire pool perimeter with an attached enclosed railing a minimum of 36 inches high on the top. 
Secs. 42-790—42-810. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Conditional Uses 

Sec. 42-811. - Statement of purpose. 
    The development and execution of this subdivision is based upon the division of the city into districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings, and bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land, are mutually compatible and substantially uniform. However, there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as unrestricted permitted uses in any particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land or public facilities, and of the public need for the particular use at a particular location. Such uses, nevertheless, may be necessary or desirable to be allowed in a particular district provided that due consideration is given to location, development and operation of such uses. Such uses are classified as conditional uses. 
Sec. 42-812. - Authority of the plan commission and council; requirements. 
(a) ?The common council may by resolution authorize the zoning administrator to issue a conditional use permit for either regular or limited conditional use after review, public hearing and advisory recommendation from the plan commission, provided that such conditional use and involved structures are found to be in accordance with the purpose and intent of this article and are further found to be not hazardous, harmful, offensive or otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of the neighborhood or the city. In the instance of the granting of limited conditional use, the council in its findings shall further specify the delimiting reasons or factors which resulted in issuing limited rather than regular conditional use. Such council resolution, and the resulting conditional use permit, when for limited conditional use, shall specify the period of time for which effective, if specified, the name of the permittee, the location and legal description of the affected premises. Prior to the granting of a conditional use, the plan commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented that the standards in this section prescribed are being complied with. 
(b) ?Any development within 500 feet of the existing or proposed rights-of-way of freeways, expressways and within one-half mile of their existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights-of-way shall be specifically reviewed by the highway agency that has jurisdiction over the traffic way. The plan commission shall request such review and await the highway agency's recommendation for a period not to exceed 20 days before taking final action. 
(c) ?Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operation control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access restrictions, increased yards or parking requirements, may be required by the common council upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this article. 
(d) ?Compliance with all other provisions of this article, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic, highway access and performance standards, shall be required of all conditional uses. 
(e) ?Any need for a zoning variance as part of a proposed conditional use that was, or under the circumstances reasonably should have been, anticipated by the applicant prior to the rendering of a recommendation by the plan commission on the proposed conditional use shall be prohibited as set forth in section 42-819(7), if not brought to the attention of the plan commission prior to the rendering of a recommendation by the plan commission on the proposed conditional use. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-813. - Initiation of conditional use. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or organization having a freehold interest or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, or an exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable in the land for which a conditional use is sought may file an application to use such land for one or more of the conditional uses provided for in this subdivision in the zoning district in which such land is located. 
Sec. 42-814. - Application for conditional use. 
    An application for a conditional use shall be filed on a form prescribed by the city. The application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the location, size and shape of the lots involved and of any proposed structures, the existing and proposed use of each structure and lot, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed conditional use shall conform to the standards set forth in section 42-817. The applicant is responsible for identifying all variances that may be needed related to the proposed use and shall list them in the application. The plan commission may require such other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for an enforcement of this article, including a plan showing contours and soil types; high-water mark and groundwater conditions; bedrock, vegetative cover, specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading and lagooning; location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, open spaces and landscaping; and plans of buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems and arrangements of operations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 12-14-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, adopted Dec. 14, 2015, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 42-815. - Hearing on application. 
    All requests for conditional uses shall be to the plan commission or the plan commission can on its own motion apply conditional uses when applications for rezoning come before it. Nothing in this division shall prohibit the common council on its own motion from referring the request for conditional use to the plan commission. Upon receipt of the application and statement referred to in section 42-814, the plan commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a conditional use at such time and place as shall be established by such plan commission. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of the proceedings shall be preserved in such manner and according to such procedures as the plan commission, shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time. 
Sec. 42-816. - Notice of hearing; report of plan commission. 
(a) ?Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication as a class 2 Notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985 in the official city paper. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such public hearing shall also be sent to the applicant, the zoning administrator, members of the common council and plan commission, and the owners of record, as listed in the office of the city assessor, who are owners of property in whole or in part situated within 100 feet of the boundaries of the properties affected; such notice to be sent at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing. 
(b) ?The plan commission shall report its advisory recommendations to the common council within 30 days after a matter has been referred to it. If such action has not been reported by the plan commission within 30 days, the common council can act without such recommendation. 
Sec. 42-817. - Standards. 
    No application for a conditional use shall be recommended for approval by the plan commission or granted by the common council unless such commission and council shall find that all of the following conditions are present: 
(1) ?The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare. 
(2) ?The uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use and the proposed use is compatible with the use of adjacent land. 
(3) ?The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district. 
(4) ?Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been or are being provided. 
(5) ?Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. 
(6) ?The conditional use shall, except for yard requirements, conform to all applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(7) ?The proposed use does not violate floodplain regulations governing the site. 
(8) ?When applying such standards to any new construction of a building or an addition to an existing building, the plan commission and council shall bear in mind the statement of purpose for the zoning district such that the proposed building or addition at its location does not defeat the purposes and objective of the zoning district. 
(9) ?In addition in passing upon a conditional use permit, the plan commission and council shall also evaluate the effect of the proposed use upon: 
a. ?The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions. 
b. ?The prevention and control of water pollution, including sedimentation. 
c. ?Existing topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover on the site. 
d. ?The location of the site with respect to floodplains and floodways of rivers and streams. 
e. ?The erosion potential of the site based upon degree and direction of slope, soil type and vegetative cover. 
f. ?The location of the site with respect to existing or future access roads. 
g. ?The need of the proposed use for a shoreland location. 
h. ?Its compatibility with uses on adjacent land. 
i. ?The amount of liquid wastes to be generated and the adequacy of the proposed disposal systems. 
Sec. 42-818. - Denial of application for conditional use permit. 
    When an advisory recommendation of denial of a conditional use application is made, the plan commission shall furnish the applicant, in writing, when so requested, those standards that are not met and enumerate the reasons the plan commission has used in determining that each standard was not met. 
Sec. 42-819. - Conditions and guarantees. 
    The following conditions shall apply to all conditional uses: 
(1) ?Conditions. Prior to the granting of any conditional use, the common council may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as deemed necessary to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in section 42-817 above. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the council shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration: 
a. ?Landscaping; 
b. ?Type of construction; 
c. ?Construction commencement and completion dates; 
d. ?Sureties; 
e. ?Lighting; 
f. ?Fencing; 
g. ?Operational control; 
h. ?Hours of operation; 
i. ?Traffic circulation; 
j. ?Deed restrictions; 
k. ?Access restrictions; 
l. ?Setbacks and yards; 
m. ?Type of shore cover; 
n. ?Specified sewage disposal and water supply systems; 
o. ?Planting screens; 
p. ?Piers and docks; 
q. ?Increased parking; or 
r. ?Any other requirements necessary to fulfill purpose and intent of this article. 
(2) ?Site review. In making its recommendation, the plan commission shall evaluate each application and may request assistance from any source which can provide technical assistance. The plan commission shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems and the proposed operation/use. 
(3) ?Alteration of conditional use. No alteration of a conditional use shall be permitted unless approved by the common council, after recommendation from the plan commission. 
(4) ?Architectural treatment. Proposed architectural treatment will be in general harmony with surrounding uses and the landscape. To this end the common council may require the use of certain general types of exterior construction materials and/or architectural treatment. 
(5) ?Sloped sites; unsuitable soils. Where slopes exceed six percent and/or where a use is proposed to be located on areas indicated as having soils which are unsuitable or marginal for development, onsite soil tests and/or construction plans shall be provided which clearly indicate that the soil conditions are adequate to accommodate the development contemplated and/or that any inherent soil condition or slope problems will be overcome by special construction techniques. Such special construction might include, among other techniques, terracing, retaining walls, oversized foundations and footings, drain tile, etc. 
(6) ?Conditional uses to comply with other requirements. Conditional uses shall comply with all other provisions of this article such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking and loading. 
(7) ?Variances . For a period of five years after a conditional use permit is granted, the applicant and its successors shall not apply for any variances, including use, area and dimensional variances related to the conditional use approved by the city that were not identified in the application for the conditional use but should reasonably have been anticipated under the circumstances. The approval of any such variance shall render the conditional use permit void. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 3, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-820. - Validity of conditional use permit. 
    Where the common council has approved or conditionally approved an application for a conditional use, such approval shall become null and void within 12 months of the date of the council's action unless the use is commenced, construction is underway or the current owner possesses a valid building permit under which construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance and which shall not be renewed unless construction has commenced and is being diligently prosecuted. Approximately 45 days prior to the automatic revocation of such permit, the zoning administrator shall notify the holder by certified mail of such revocation. The council may extend such permit for a period of 90 days for justifiable cause, if application is made to the common council at least 30 days before the expiration of such permit. 
Sec. 42-821. - Complaints. 
    The common council shall retain continuing jurisdiction over all conditional uses for the purpose of resolving complaints against all previously approved conditional uses. Such authority shall be in addition to the enforcement authority of the zoning administrator to order the removal or discontinuance of any unauthorized alterations of an approved conditional use, and the elimination, removal or discontinuance of any violation of a condition imposed prior to or after approval or violation of any other provision of this article. Upon written complaint by any citizen or official and after seeking an advisory recommendation from the plan commission, the council shall initially determine whether such complaint indicates a reasonable probability that the subject conditional use is in violation of either one or more of the standards set forth in section 42-817, a condition of approval or other requirement imposed under this subdivision. Upon reaching a positive initial determination, a hearing shall be held upon notice, as provided in section 42-816. Any person may appear at such hearing and testify in person or represented by an agent or attorney. The common council may, in order to bring the subject conditional use into compliance with the standards set forth in section 42-817 or conditions previously imposed by the council, modify existing conditions upon such use and impose additional reasonable conditions upon the subject conditional use. If no reasonable modification of such conditional use can be made in order to ensure that section 42-817(1) and (2) will be met, the common council may revoke the subject conditional approval and direct the zoning administrator and the city attorney to seek elimination of the subject use. Following any such hearing, the decision of the common council shall be furnished the current owner of the conditional use in writing stating the reasons therefor. 
Sec. 42-822. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(a) ?Conditional use. Bed and breakfast establishments shall be considered conditional uses and may be permitted in residence districts R-1, R-3 and R-4. 
(b) ?State standards. Bed and breakfast establishments shall comply with the standards of Wis. Adm. Code HSS ch. 197. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 
Secs. 42-823—42-845. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Nonconforming Uses and Structures 

Sec. 42-846. - Existing nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a) ?The lawful nonconforming use of a structure or land including, but not limited to, fences, parking and zoning setbacks, existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be continued although the use does not conform with the provisions of this article. However, only that portion of the land in actual use may be so continued and the structure may not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, substituted, moved or structurally altered except when required to do so by law or order or so as to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to any use permitted in the same use district as that in which the use existing is permitted according to the provisions of this article; provided, however, that when a use district is changed, any existing, nonconforming use in such changed district may be continued or changed to a use permitted in the same use district as that in which the existing use is permitted; provided all other regulations governing the new use are complied with. 
(c) ?Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the board of zoning appeals if such equipment will reduce the incompatibility of the nonconforming use with the neighboring uses. 
Sec. 42-847. - Abolishment or replacement. 
(a) ?Termination. If such nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a period of 12 months, any future use of the structure or land shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?Building destroyed by fire. Where a building located in a district restricted against its use has been destroyed by fire or other calamity to the extent of not more than 50 percent of its fair market value, the building may be rebuilt, but where such a building is destroyed to the extent of more than 50 percent of its fair market value, a permit may be granted for its reconstruction within 12 months from the date of such fire or other calamity, except any public utility located in a restricted district shall be permitted to rebuild, alter or enlarge in any business or industrial district as the interest of the public demands. 
Sec. 42-848. - Existing nonconforming structures. 
    The lawful nonconforming structure existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be continued although its size or location does not conform with the lot width, lot area, yard, height, parking and loading, and access provisions of this article. However, it shall not be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except when required to do so by law or order or so as to comply with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 42-849. - Changes and substitutions. 
    Once a nonconforming use or structure has been changed to conform, it shall not revert back to a nonconforming use or structure. Once the board of zoning appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming use for an existing nonconforming use, the substituted use shall lose its status as a legal nonconforming use and become subject to all the conditions required by the board of zoning appeals. 
Secs. 42-850—42-870. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Satellite Dishes, Telecommunication Towers and Wind Energy Systems 

Sec. 42-871. - Satellite earth stations. 
(a) ?Permit required. No owner shall, within the city, build, construct, use or place any type of satellite dish until a permit shall have first been obtained from the common council. 
(b) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ground-mounted satellite dish means a satellite dish not exceeding ten feet in height, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the dish. 
    Owner means the holder of record of an estate in possession in fee simple, or for life, in land or real property, or a vendee of record under a land contract for the sale of an estate in possession in fee simple or for life but does not include the vendor under a land contract. A tenant in common or joint tenant shall be considered such owner to the extent of his interest. The personal representative of at least one owner shall be considered an owner. 
    Roof-mounted satellite dish means a satellite dish not exceeding eight feet in height above the surrounding roofline, as measured from the lowest point of the existing roofline. 
    Satellite television dish or earth station means an apparatus over 18 inches in diameter capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. They are also commonly referred to as "disks," "satellite communications systems" or "home earth stations." A ground-mounted satellite dish may not exceed ten feet in height, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the dish. 
(c) ?Application. Application for a satellite earth station permit shall be made in writing to the building inspector. With such application there shall be submitted a fee set by the council from time to time and a complete set of plans and specifications, including a plot plan showing the location of the proposed satellite earth station with respect to adjoining alleys, lot lines and buildings. If such application meets all requirements of this section, the application shall be referred to the common council for approval. 
(d) ?Installation restrictions. Satellite earth stations installed in any zoning district within the city shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1) ?Number of units. Not more than one satellite earth station may be allowed per individual recorded lot except additional stations may be permitted upon application for a variance in nonresidential zones. 
(2) ?Location and setbacks. 
a. ?Any satellite dish shall only be located in the rear yard of a residential lot and at least 15 feet from any property line. Placement of a satellite dish in a business (B-1, B-2, B-3 or B-4-1) or industrial district (M-2) shall not be allowed unless a special exception is granted by the common council. 
b. ?If the dish cannot receive a usable satellite signal in the rear yard of any residential lot, but can receive such a signal while located in a side yard, it may be located only in a side yard after receiving approval from the common council. For corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not face a street. 
c. ?If the dish cannot receive a usable satellite signal from either the rear or side yards, it may be located only on the roof of any main or accessory building on the lot. Attachment to the roof shall be subject to engineering calculations being prepared by a registered professional engineer certifying that the proposed satellite dish installation is structurally sound and will not interfere with the use of adjoining property. 
d. ?No dish shall be placed in the front yard of any residential, business or industrial lot in the city. 
e. ?The common council shall determine whether a signal constitutes a usable satellite signal, based on evidence provided by the person seeking a permit to erect or construct the dish. 
(3) ?Mounting. Satellite earth stations located in agricultural or residential districts shall be ground-mounted only. Satellite earth stations may be wall- or roof-mounted in business or industrial districts only. Satellite earth stations attached to the wall or roof of any principal or accessory structure shall be subject to the structure being constructed to carry all imposed loading. The building inspector may require engineering calculations. 
(4) ?Diameter. The diameter of the satellite television dish shall not exceed eight feet for the ground-mounted dish and six feet for the roof-mounted dish, except for stations used to provide community antenna television services. 
(5) ?Wind pressure. All satellite earth stations shall be permanently mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for installation. All such installations shall meet a minimum wind load design velocity of 80 mph. 
(6) ?Electrical installations. Electrical installations in connection with earth satellite receiving stations, including grounding of the system, shall be in accordance with National Electrical Safety Code, the state electrical code and the instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of conflict the stricter requirements shall govern. All cable used to conduct current or signals from the satellite earth station to the receivers shall be installed underground unless installation site conditions preclude underground. If a satellite earth station is to be used by two or more residential property owners, all interconnecting electrical connections, cables and conduits must also be buried. The location of all such underground lines, cables and conduits shall be shown on the application for permit. All satellite earth stations shall be grounded against direct lightning strikes. 
(7) ?Temporary placement. No portable or trailer-mounted satellite earth station shall be allowed, except for temporary installation for onsite testing and demonstration purposes for periods not exceeding five days. However, such trial placement shall be in accordance with all provisions of this section. Failure to comply shall result in a citation being issued for violation of this section. Any person making such temporary placement shall give written notice to the building inspector of the date when such placement shall begin and end. 
(8) ?Advertising. No form of advertising or identification, sign or mural are allowed on the dish or framework other than the customary manufacturer's identification plates. 
(9) ?Interference with broadcasting. Satellite earth stations shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission or reflection of an electromagnetic radiation that would cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or television broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful interference is caused subsequent to its installation, the owner of the satellite earth stations shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission Regulations. 
(10) ?Compliance with federal regulations. The installation and use of every satellite earth station shall be in conformity with the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and regulations adopted thereunder. 
(11) ?Color. The color of any satellite dish shall be such that it blends into its surroundings and shall be approved by the common council as part of the application. 
(e) ?Variances. Requests for variances from the standards established by this section may be made to the zoning board of appeals pursuant to section 42-119. 
(f) ?Enforcement. 
(1) ?It shall be unlawful to construct, use, build or locate any satellite dish in violation of any provisions of this section. In the event of any violation, the common council or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this section. 
(2) ?Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty found in section 1-13. 
Sec. 42-872. - Radio or television antenna towers. 
(a) ?No radio or television antenna tower shall be erected or installed within the front yard or side yard. The rear setback and the side setback in rear yards shall be that for the principal structure within the respective zoning district. The exact location of the antenna tower shall be subject to approval by the common council. 
(b) ?No radio or television tower shall exceed a height of 20 feet above the roofline of the building on the property upon which the antenna is located or 60 feet above the ground measured at grade level, whichever is the minimum. 
(c) ?Radio or television antenna towers shall be erected and installed in accordance with the state electrical code, National Electrical Safety Code and the instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of conflict the stricter requirements shall govern. 
Sec. 42-873. - Conditional use permits required; wind energy systems. 
(a) ?Approval required. No owner shall, within the city, build, construct, use or place any type or kind of wind energy system without holding the appropriate conditional use permit for such system. 
(b) ?Separate permit required for each system. A separate conditional use permit shall be required for each system or windmills or for any additions to the original system. Such permit shall be applicable solely to the systems, structures, use and property described in the permit. 
(c) ?Basis of approval. The common council shall base their determination on general consideration as to the effect of such grant on the health, general welfare, safety and economic prosperity of the city and specifically of the immediate neighborhood in which such use would be located, including such considerations as the effect on the established character and quality of the area, its physical attractiveness, the movement of traffic, the demand for related services, the possible hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or nuisance effect and such other factors as would be appropriate to carrying out the intent of this article. 
(d) ?Fees. The common council shall by resolution establish fees for the processing and issuance of conditional use permits under this subdivision. 
(e) ?Definition. The term "wind energy systems" shall mean windmills, which are used to produce electrical power. 
Sec. 42-874. - Permit procedure for wind energy systems. 
(a) ?Application. The conditional use permit application for a wind energy system shall be made to the administrator on forms provided by the city. The application shall include the following information: 
(1) ?The name and address of the applicant. 
(2) ?The address of the property on which the system will be located. 
(3) ?Applications for the erection of a wind energy conversion system shall be accompanied by a plat of survey for the property to be served showing the location of the generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to structures. If the system is intended to provide power to more than one premises, the plat of survey shall show all properties to be served and the means of connection to the wind energy conversion system. A copy of all agreements with system users off the premises shall accompany the application. The application shall further indicate the level of noise to be generated by the system, and provide assurances as to the safety features of the system. Energy easements shall accompany the application. 
(4) ?An accurate and complete written description of the use for which a special grant is being requested including pertinent statistics and operational characteristics. 
(5) ?Plans and other drawings showing proposed development of the site and buildings including landscape plans, location of parking and service areas, driveways, exterior lighting, type of building material, etc., if applicable. 
(6) ?Any other information which the common council or administrator may deem necessary to the proper review of the application. 
(b) ?Review. The administrator shall review the conditional use application and, if the application is complete and contains all required information, shall refer it to the common council. 
(c) ?Hearing. Upon referral of the conditional use application the common council shall schedule a public hearing as soon as practical, and the common council shall notice such hearing as deemed appropriate. 
(d) ?Determination. Following a public hearing and any necessary study and investigation, the common council shall as soon as practical render its decision in writing and a copy shall be made a permanent part of the council's minutes. Such decision shall include an accurate description of the special use permitted, of the property on which permitted, and any and all conditions made applicable thereto, or if disapproved, shall indicate the reasons for disapproval. The common council may impose any conditions or exemptions necessary to minimize any burden on any persons affected by granting the special use permit. 
(e) ?Termination. When a conditional use does not continue in conformity with the conditions of the original approval, or where a change in the character of the surrounding area or of the use itself cause it to be no longer compatible with surrounding areas, or for similar cause based upon consideration for the public welfare, the special grant may be terminated by action of the common council following a public hearing thereon. 
(f) ?Changes. Subsequent change or additions to the approved plans or conditional use shall first be submitted for approval to the common council, and, if in the opinion of the council, such change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration, a public hearing before the council shall be required and notice thereof be given. 
(g) ?Approval does not waive permit requirements. The approval of a conditional use permit under this subdivision shall not be construed to waive the requirement to obtain electrical, building or plumbing permits prior to installation of any system. 
Sec. 42-875. - Specific requirements regarding wind energy systems. 
(a) ?Additional standards. Wind energy conversion systems, commonly referred to as "windmills," which are used to produce electrical power, shall also satisfy the requirements of this section, in addition to those found elsewhere in this subdivision. 
(b) ?Construction. Wind energy conversion systems shall be constructed and anchored in such a manner to withstand wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square foot in area. 
(c) ?Noise. The maximum level of noise permitted to be generated by a wind energy conversion system shall be 50 decibels, as measured on a dB(A) scale, measured at the lot line. 
(d) ?Electro-magnetic interference. Wind energy conversion system generators and alternators shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission of radio frequency energy that would cause any harmful interference with radio and/or television broadcasting or reception. If harmful interference is caused subsequent to the granting of a conditional use permit, the operator of the wind energy conversion system shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(e) ?Location and height. Wind energy conversion systems shall be located in the rear yard only and shall meet all setback and yard requirements for the district in which they are located and, in addition, shall be located not closer to a property boundary than a distance equal to their height. Wind energy conversion systems are exempt from the height requirements of this article; however, all such systems over 75 feet in height shall submit plans to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to determine whether the system is to be considered an object affecting navigable air space and subject to FAA restrictions. A copy of any FAA restrictions imposed shall be included as a part of the wind energy conversion system conditional use permit application. 
(f) ?Fence required. All wind energy conversion systems shall be surrounded by a security fence not less than six feet in height. A sign shall be posted on the fence warning of high voltages. 
(g) ?Utility company notification. The appropriate electric power company shall be notified, in writing, of any proposed interface with that company's grid prior to installing such interface. Copies of comments by the appropriate utility company shall accompany and be part of the application for a conditional use permit. 
Secs. 42-876—42-900. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MANUFACTURED HOMES[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Manufactured homes generally, ch. 50. 

Sec. 42-901. - Intent of division. 
(a) ?Nonresidential use. A manufactured home shall not be considered to be permissible as an accessory building. However, a manufactured home may be used as a temporary office or shelter incidental to construction on or development of the premises on which the trailer is located only during the time construction or development is actively underway. 
(b) ?Location. No person shall park, store or occupy a manufactured home for living purposes except as follows: 
(1) ?Not more than one manufactured home shall be permitted on the same lot as an agricultural use. However, this restriction shall not be construed as precluding temporary, seasonal housing for migrant farm laborers. 
(2) ?In connection with, and on the same lot as, a single-family dwelling, for a period not to exceed 15 days in duration. Not more than one manufactured home shall be allowed on such lot at any one time. No such residential lot shall be occupied by a manufactured home for more than a total of 30 days in any one year. 
(3) ?In an approved manufactured home park, in accordance with the following conditions: 
a. ?Manufactured home parks shall be allowed only as conditional uses in the R-1 district and shall abut a business or industrial district or be separated from such business or industrial district only by a street or an alley. 
b. ?Each manufactured home park shall have direct access to a principal county, township, city or state highway or arterial street or road. 
Sec. 42-902. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Foundation siding means a fire- and weather-resistant, prefinished material surrounding the entire perimeter of a home and completely enclosing the space between the exterior wall of such home and the ground. Foundation siding shall be properly vented, harmonious and compatible with the house and installed within 60 days from the date of placement on the site. 
    Manufactured home communities (parks) means those distinguished from subdivisions lacking common facilities and continuing management services. The latter would be controlled by general subdivision regulations, which would apply also to manufactured home subdivisions without common open space or continuing management. 
    Manufactured home subdivision means a parcel of land platted for subdivision according to all requirements of the comprehensive plan, designed or intended for lots to be conveyed by deed to individual owners for residential occupancy primarily by manufactured homes. 
    Primary exposure means open areas adjacent to the front wall (or main entrance) of a dwelling unit. 
    Residential manufactured home means a single-family dwelling built on or after October 1, 1974, in accordance with the ANSI Code (American National Standards Institute) or in accordance with the HUD Code (Housing & Urban Development) both of which govern the heating and cooling systems, electrical systems, fire safety, body and frame construction, thermal protections and plumbing systems. All such homes shall bear the proper approved state insignia as required by the Wis. Adm. Code ILHR §§ 20.12—20.17. 
    Secondary exposure means open areas adjacent to side and rear walls of a dwelling unit. 
    Statutory definitions. In addition to the definitions of this section, definitions contained in Wis. Stats. § 66.058 shall also be applicable. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-903. - Manufactured home park regulations. 
(a) ?Size. Manufactured home parks shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1) ?No permit shall be issued for the establishment of a new manufactured home park unless such park contains at least 20 acres of area. 
(2) ?The average individual manufactured home lot size shall not be less than 4,000 square feet in area, and no lot shall be smaller than 3,200 square feet in area. 
(3) ?Each individual mobile home lot shall be at least 44 feet in effective width. Effective width shall mean the distance between side lot lines, measured at the rear line of the required front yard. On diagonal lots, it shall be measured at right angles across the lot from one diagonal side line to the other. 
(b) ?Yards and setbacks. The following minimum setback regulations shall apply: 
(1) ?No building, structure or manufactured home shall be located closer than 50 feet to any property line of the manufactured home park, nor closer than 75 feet to any principal county, township, city, or state highway or arterial street or roadway right-of-way. 
(2) ?Manufactured homes shall be set back at least 15 feet from the pavement of streets or roadways within the park. 
(3) ?No part of any manufactured home, or any addition or appurtenance thereto shall be placed within 20 feet of any other manufactured home, addition, or appurtenance thereto, nor within 50 feet of any accessory or service building or structure. 
(c) ?Height. No building, structure or trailer located in a manufactured home park shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(d) ?Parking. There shall be at least one off-street parking space available to each individual manufactured home lot and located within 100 feet of such lot. However, the total number of parking spaces provided in each manufactured home park shall be equal to not less than 1 1/3 times the maximum number of manufactured homes to be accommodated. 
(e) ?Landscaping. Along each property line of a manufactured home park there shall be provided, within the 50-foot setback area, screened fencing or landscape planting which shall be so designed and/or planted as to be 50 percent or more opaque when viewed horizontally between two feet and eight feet above average ground level. 
(f) ?Design and improvements. The design and improvements to be provided in the proposed manufactured home park, including street widths and construction of approach streets or ways, shall conform to the requirements of the city subdivision regulations for conventional residential subdivisions; however, the street width and construction requirements in the subdivision regulations shall be applied only to those streets which would be necessary to service a future conventional residential subdivision on such tract of land, and need not be applied to secondary manufactured home site access streets or ways. 
(g) ?Common space. Each manufactured home park shall provide at least three acres of common space, exclusive of the required 50-foot peripheral setback, for use by recreational or service facilities. An additional 200 square feet of common space shall be provided for each manufactured home in excess of 160 contained within the park. 
Secs. 42-904—42-925. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 42-926. - Purpose of division. 
    The purpose of this division is to establish minimum standards to safeguard life and property and promote public welfare and community aesthetics by regulating the appearance, construction, location and maintenance of all signs and billboards. 
Sec. 42-927. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Awning means a temporary hood or cover which projects from the wall of the building, which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting structure. 
    Billboard means a sign which advertises goods, products or facilities, or services not necessarily on the premises where the sign is located or directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located. 
    Blanketing means the unreasonable obstruction of view of a sign caused by the placement of another sign. 
    Sign means a sign shall include anything that promotes, calls attention or invites patronage (or anything similar to the aforementioned) to a business, location or product. 
    Directly illuminated sign means any sign designed to give any artificial light directly through any transparent or translucent material from a source of light originating within or on such sign. 
    Directory sign means a sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building is given. This shall include offices and church directories. 
    Electronic message unit sign means any sign whose message may be changed by electronic process, including such messages as copy, art, graphics, time, date, temperature, weather or information concerning civic, charitable or the advertising of products or services for sale on the premises. This also includes traveling or segmented message displays. 
    Flashing sign means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign on which artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
    Ground and/or pole sign means any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building; also referred to as "freestanding sign." 
    Identification sign means any sign which carries only the name of the firm, major enterprise, institution or principal products offered for sale on the premises or combination of these. 
    Indirectly illuminated sign means a sign that is illuminated from a source outside of the actual sign. 
    Marquee sign means any sign attached to and made part of a marquee. A marquee is defined as a permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building's wall and generally designed and constructed to provide protection against weather. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the regulations of this division. 
    Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground, which is designed to be easily moved from one location to another. 
    Projecting sign means any sign extending more than 18 inches, but less than five feet, from the face of a wall or building. 
    Real estate sign means any sign which is used to offer for sale, lease or rent the property upon which the sign is placed. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any building. 
    Temporary sign means any sign intended to be displayed for a short period of time, including real estate, political or construction site signs, and banners, decorative type displays or anything similar to the aforementioned. 
    Wall sign means any sign attached to, erected on, or painted on the wall of a building or structure and projecting not more than 18 inches from such wall. 
    Window sign means any sign located completely within an enclosed building and visible from a public way. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-928. - Exceptions to division regulations. 
    The following signs and related items shall not be included in the application of the regulations contained in this division: 
(1) ?Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers or names of occupants of premises. 
(2) ?Flags and insignia of any government. 
(3) ?Legal notices, identification information or directional signs erected by governmental bodies. 
(4) ?Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights. 
(5) ?Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no advertising matter. 
Sec. 42-929. - Sign permits. 
(a) ?Required. No persons shall erect, relocate, reconstruct or maintain or cause the aforementioned within the city any signs without first having obtained and having in force and in effect a permit therefor from the zoning inspector. 
(b) ?Application. Applications for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by such zoning inspector as discussed for all fees. The applicant shall file with the application plans and specifications and provide information about the sign, including dimensions, materials, illumination, wiring, height above grade, distance from lot line, and by whom it shall be erected. Permits are not required for a copy change when no change in business name is involved. 
(c) ?Fees. A permit fee shall be paid to the administrator for each sign permit issued under this division; provided, however, that a fee shall not be charged for putting an existing sign in conformance with this division, or for a copy change when no change in business name is involved. The permit fee shall be in accordance with the following: 
Sign Valuation Required Fee* Up to $300.00 As set by the council from time to time Over $300.00 As set by the council from time to time Over $1,000.00 As set by the council from time to time  
*The fees do not include electrical permit fees, which shall be in addition to the above. 
(d) ?Inspection. The applicant shall, upon completion of the installation, relocation or alteration of the sign, notify the building inspector who will ensure the sign complies with the regulations of this division. 
(e) ?Revocation of permit; appeal. The building inspector may at any time for a violation of this article revoke a permit or require changes so the sign conforms with this article. The holder of a revoked permit shall be entitled to an appeal before the zoning board of appeals. 
(f) ?Exceptions. 
(1) ?Temporary signs. Permits are not required for such temporary signs as real estate (which advertises sale or rental of the premises upon which it is posted), political and construction site or similar type signs provided such signs do not exceed 25 square feet of display surface. 
(2) ?Window signs. Window signs directing attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises or to a product, service or entertainment sold or offered on such premises shall be permitted without a permit. 
Sec. 42-930. - Dangerous and abandoned signs; violations. 
(a) ?Removal. All signs shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when a business which it advertises has not been conducted for a period of six months or when in the judgment of the building inspector such sign is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous or unsafe, whichever occurs first. If the owner or lessee fails to remove it, the building inspector may remove the sign at cost of the owner, following adequate written notice. The owner may appeal the building inspector's decision to the board of appeals. 
(b) ?Alterations. Any sign which was erected before the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall not be rebuilt or relocated without conforming to all of the requirements of this division. 
(c) ?Violations. All signs constructed or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this division are declared public nuisances within the meaning of this Code of Ordinances. In addition to the penalty in section 42-67, the zoning inspector may bring an action to abate the nuisance in the manner set forth in the statute. 
Sec. 42-931. - Variances or exceptions. 
    Variances or exceptions may be granted by the board of appeals and decisions by the building inspector may be appealed to the board of appeals. 
Secs. 42-932—42-950. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Regulations and Requirements 

Sec. 42-951. - Construction and maintenance regulations for signs. 
(a) ?Installation. All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced and shall be kept in reasonable structural condition and shall be kept clean and well painted at all times. Bolts or screws shall not be fastened to window frames. Every sign and its framework, braces, anchors and other supports shall be constructed of such material and with such workmanship as to be safe and satisfactory to the building inspector. 
(b) ?General requirements. 
(1) ?Awnings. The lowest part of any awning shall be seven feet above the sidewalk. Signs are allowed directly on the awning or hanging on the frame, but not below seven feet. 
(2) ?Animated signs. Signs with any moving parts, beacon lights or moving lights shall not be permitted, except revolving signs are permitted. 
(3) ?Flashing signs. Flashing signs will be permitted, but the intensity of the bulb cannot exceed 25 watts. Bare reflecting types bulbs of any kind are not allowed for a flashing or nonflashing sign unless they are properly shaded so as not to interfere with surrounding properties. 
(4) ?Roof signs. No sign shall be located so as to project above the parapet line, unless approved by the building inspector. 
(5) ?Illuminated signs. Any illuminated signs shall not interfere with surrounding properties or traffic. 
(6) ?Projection. Signs including supports shall not project beyond five feet of the face of the wall to which attached. 
(7) ?Blanketing. Blanketing of signs shall not be allowed. 
(8) ?Maintenance. All signs, including supports and attachments, shall be properly maintained and have an appearance that is neat and clean. 
(c) ?Requirements per zoning district. 
(1) ?Exceptions to height and setback requirements. Signs may be allowed in the setback area if they are below three feet or are pole mounted and above 12 feet to the bottom of the sign. The pole diameter of pole-mounted signs shall not exceed 12 inches and shall be located so as to project above the parapet line, unless approved by the zoning inspector. 
(2) ?Prohibitions. 
a. ?No sign shall be erected so that any portion of the sign or its supports attach to or interfere with the free use of any fire escape, exit, any required stairway, door, ventilator or window. 
b. ?No sign shall be erected that will interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead traffic. 
(d) ?Residential development identification signs. Residential development identification signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area. A maximum of two such signs are permitted per development after review and approval by the building inspector. 
(e) ?Searchlights. The common council may permit the temporary use of a search light for advertising purposes in any district provided that the searchlight will not be located in any public right-of-way, will not be located closer than ten feet to an adjacent property and will not cause a hazard to traffic or adjoining properties. Searchlight permits shall not be granted for a period of more than five days in any six-month period. 
(f) ?Signs on public rights-of-way. Signs shall not be permitted on public rights-of-way except for traffic control, parking and directional signs and as otherwise specified in this article. A sign in direct line of vision of any traffic signal, from any point in the traffic lane from a position opposite the near sidewalk line to a position 150 feet before such sidewalk line, shall not have red, green or amber illumination. 
Sec. 42-952. - Specific requirements. 
(a) ?Temporary sign limitations. 
(1) ?All temporary signs such as real estate, construction site and political signs shall be removed within ten days after their use has discontinued. 
(2) ?Temporary signs may be placed on a property, but shall not be located on a right-of-way terrace, and shall not interfere with driveway vision clearance. 
(b) ?Electronic message unit signs. 
(1) ?Such signs may be used only to advertise activities conducted on the premises or to present public service information. 
(2) ?Segmented messages must be displayed for not less than one-half second and more than ten seconds. 
(3) ?Traveling messages may travel no slower than 16 light columns per second and no faster than 32 columns per second. 
(c) ?Portable signs. Permits for the installation of portable signs shall be granted under the following conditions: 
(1) ?The property must be zoned commercial and the existing land use must be commercial. Placement of a sign on vacant land requires a conditional use permit. 
(2) ?One sign shall be permitted per lot except that on lots with greater than 100 feet of frontage, a minimum distance of 100 feet shall separate the signs. 
(3) ?Lighted signs shall be properly wired with underground or overhead wire. Lighted and/or flashing signs must conform to the requirements of section 42-951. 
(4) ?The physical appearance of the sign must reflect that the sign is well maintained, clean and in good repair and that the area immediately surrounding the sign shall be maintained. 
(5) ?Signs shall be of a standard size not to exceed five feet high and ten feet in length. 
(6) ?The permit fee for portable signs and an annual inspection fee per sign as set by the council from time to time. 
(d) ?Location by limited access highway. No advertising device shall after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived be erected or relocated within 300 feet of the right-of-way line of any limited access highway if the face thereof is visible therefrom, and advertising devices located at a greater distance than 300 feet from the right-of-way line of any limited access highway and visible therefrom shall not exceed, in gross area in square feet, 1/200 times the square of the distance of such advertising device from such limited access highway. All outdoor advertising structures, post signs, accessory signs or advertising statuary which are declared to be a traffic hazard by the building inspector after a recommendation from the zoning administrator, and which do not conform to the provisions of this section, shall be relocated or rearranged in accord with safety standards. 
(e) ?Location by park. No advertising sign, when viewed from a public park of ten or more acres in area, shall after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived be erected or relocated within 300 feet of such public park of ten acres or more in area; unless such sign is screened from the park by a building, wall or solid fence, and advertising devices located at a greater distance than 300 feet from such public park shall not exceed, in gross area of square feet, 1/200 times the square of the distance of such advertising sign from such park unless the sign is screened from the park by a building, wall or solid fence. 
(f) ?Location adjacent to residence district. No advertising signs shall be permitted within 75 feet of any residence district boundary line unless such sign is completely screened from such residence district by a building, solid fence, or an evergreen planting, which planting shall be not more than two feet shorter than the height of the sign at the time such evergreens are planted; such evergreens shall be spaced not more than one-half the height of the tree for regular varieties and one-third the height of the tree for columnar varieties of trees. Such evergreen planting shall be continuously maintained, or such sign shall be facing away from the residence district and the back is screened as provided in subsection (g) of this section. 
(g) ?Sign mounting. All signs shall be mounted in one of the following manners: 
(1) ?Flat against a building or wall. 
(2) ?Back to back in pairs, so that the back of the sign will be screened from public view. 
(3) ?In clusters in an arrangement which will screen the back of the signs from public view. 
(4) ?Or otherwise mounted so that the backs of all signs or sign structures showing to public view shall be painted and maintained a neutral color or a color that blends with surrounding environment. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 1, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 42-953. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a) ?Signs eligible for characterization as legal nonconforming. Any sign located within the city limits on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or located in an area annexed to the city thereafter, which does not conform with the provisions of this division is eligible for characterization as a legal nonconforming sign and is permitted, providing it also meets the following requirements: 
(1) ?The sign was covered by a proper sign or building permit prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(2) ?If no permit was required under the applicable law for the sign in question and the sign was in all respects in compliance with applicable law on the date of adoption of the sign ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b) ?Loss of legal nonconforming status. A sign loses its nonconforming status if one or more of the following occurs: 
(1) ?The sign is structurally altered in any way, except for normal maintenance or repair, which tends to or makes the sign less in compliance with requirements of this division than it was before alteration. 
(2) ?The sign is relocated. 
(3) ?The sign fails to conform to this article regarding maintenance and repair, abandonment or dangerous or defective signs. 
(4) ?On the date of occurrence of any of the above, the sign shall be immediately brought in compliance with this article with a new permit secured or shall be removed. 
(c) ?Legal nonconforming sign maintenance and repair. Nothing in this division shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign or the owner of the property in which the sign is located from the provisions of this division regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs. 
Sec. 42-954. - Billboard permit. 
(a) ?Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter or relocate or maintain within the city any billboard without first obtaining a billboard erection permit from the building inspector and making payment of a fee as set by the council from time to time. All illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the electric code, and the permit fees required thereunder. 
(b) ?Application. Application for erection permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the building inspector, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1) ?Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2) ?Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected. 
(3) ?Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures. 
(4) ?Two blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground. 
(5) ?Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(6) ?Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting the structure. 
(7) ?Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the structure is to be erected. 
(8) ?Any electrical permit required and issued for such sign. 
(9) ?Such other information as the building inspector shall require to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 42-955. - Annual billboard inspection fee. 
    The zoning inspector shall inspect annually, or at such other times as he deems necessary, each billboard regulated by this division for the purpose of ascertaining whether the billboard is secure or insecure, and whether it is in need of removal or repair; and to meet the expense of such inspection the permittee shall pay to the administrator the sum set by the council from time to time. However, no inspection fee other than the permit fee shall be charged during the calendar year in which the sign or other advertising structure is erected. 
Sec. 42-956. - Wind pressure and dead load requirements. 
    All billboards, signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of area; and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the building code or other ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 42-957. - Billboard indemnity requirements. 
    Every application for a billboard permit shall, before the permit is granted, file with the building inspector, a continuing bond in the penal sum of $5,000.00, executed by the applicant and a surety company to be approved by the city attorney and conditioned for the faithful observance of the provisions of this article and all amendments thereto, and of all laws and ordinances relating to billboards, signs and other advertising structures, and which shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all damages, judgments, costs or expenses which the city may incur or suffer by reason of the granting of the permit. 
Sec. 42-958. - Limitations on billboards. 
(a) ?A billboard shall only be erected in areas that are zoned commercial or industrial. 
(b) ?No billboard shall be allowed within the fire zone as described on the official map. 
(c) ?No more than one billboard back-to-back shall be erected upon one lot. 
(d) ?The maximum size of billboards shall be 360 square feet. 
(e) ?No billboards may be erected within 800 feet of another existing billboard measured along or across the same right-of-way. 
(f) ?No billboard may be erected within 125 feet of a residential or multiple-family zoning district. 
(g) ?The maximum height of billboards shall be 30 feet. In no event shall the maximum height of any billboard exceed the height requirements for buildings in the underlying zoning district regulations. The minimum height shall be 12 feet above grade. 
(h) ?Roof-mounted billboards (off-premises signs) shall be prohibited. 
(i) ?Wis. Stats. § 84.30 and Wis. Adm. Code Trans. ch. 201 are adopted by reference in this section and shall be applied only to that property bordering I-39 in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1-113; Ord. No. 90-12, § 1, 9-10-1990) 
Sec. 42-959. - Billboard location to prevent traffic hazard. 
    No billboards shall be erected within 100 feet of the intersecting right-of-way of signalized intersections, and no billboards shall be erected within 50 feet of the intersecting right-of-way of all other streets. 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 42-960. - Abandoned billboards and signs. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, all billboards and/or sign messages shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which an off-premises sign/billboard is located when the business it advertised is no longer conducted where advertised. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign/billboard, the building inspector shall give the owner 60 days' written notice to remove the sign/billboard, and, thereafter, upon the owner's or lessee's failure to comply, may remove such sign/billboard, any costs for which shall be charged to the owner of the property or may be assessed as a special assessment against the property, and/or the building inspector may take any other appropriate legal action necessary to attain compliance. 
Secs. 42-961—42-980. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Standards for Specific Districts 

Sec. 42-981. - Residential districts. 
    In the residence districts and I-R interchange residence district, the following nonflashing, nonilluminated signs are permitted under the conditions specified: 
(1) ?Nameplate and identification signs. Nameplate and identification signs are subject to the following: 
a. ?Area and content; residential. There shall be not more than one nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area, for each dwelling unit, indicating the name or address of the occupant or a permitted occupation. On a corner lot, two such nameplates for each dwelling unit, one facing each street, shall be permitted. 
b. ?Area and content; nonresidential. For nonresidential buildings, a single identification sign, not exceeding nine square feet in area and indicating only the name and address of the building, may be displayed. On a corner lot, two such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. 
c. ?Projection. Such signs shall be affixed flat against the wall of the building. 
d. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than one story or 15 feet above curb level, whichever is lower. 
(2) ?For sale and to rent signs. For sale and to rent sign shall be subject to the following: 
a. ?Area and number. There shall be not more than one such sign per zoning lot, except that on a corner zoning lot two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area, nor be closer than eight feet to any other zoning lot. 
b. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than one story or 15 feet above curb level, whichever is lower, when attached to a building; detached or freestanding signs shall be not more than four feet in height. 
(3) ?Signs accessory to parking area. Signs accessory to parking areas shall be subject to the following: 
a. ?Area and number. Signs designating parking area entrances or exits are limited to one sign for each such exit or entrance, and to a maximum size of two square feet each. One sign per parking area, designating the conditions of use or identity of such parking area and limited to a maximum size of nine square feet, shall be permitted. On a corner lot two such signs—one facing each street—shall be permitted. 
b. ?Projection. No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public way. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than seven feet above curb level. 
(4) ?Signs accessory to roadside stands. Signs accessory to roadside stands shall be subject to the following: 
a. ?Content. The signs shall be only for the purpose of identification of the roadside stand and advertising the agricultural products for sale therein. 
b. ?Area and number. The signs shall be on the same zoning lot as the roadside stand, and there shall be not more than two signs per lot. No sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area nor be closer than 50 feet from any other zoning lot. 
c. ?Projection. No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public way. 
d. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 15 feet above curb level. 
(5) ?Temporary signs accessory to subdivision developments or other permitted improvements in residential districts. Temporary signs accessory to subdivision developments or other permitted improvements in residential districts shall be subject to the following: 
a. ?Content. The signs shall be only for the purpose of identification of homes for sale or rent in the subdivision under construction, or for the identification of other nonresidential uses under construction. 
b. ?Area, number and setback. Such signs shall not exceed two in number for each subdivision nor 200 square feet each in area. They shall observe the front yard requirement of the principal use and shall be located at least 50 feet from all other boundaries of the site. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 15 feet above the curb level. 
d. ?Time limitations. The signs shall be removed by the applicant or property owner within two years of the date of the issuance of the zoning certificate. 
(6) ?Subdivision identification signs are subject to the following: 
a. ?Content. The signs shall bear only the name of the subdivision or development. 
b. ?Area and number. There shall be not more than one sign located at each entrance to a subdivision. No sign shall exceed 200 square feet in area. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 15 feet above curb level. 
(7) ?Nonflashing, illuminated church bulletins are subject to the following: 
a. ?Area and number. There shall be not more than one sign per lot, except that on a corner lot, two signs—one facing each street—shall be permitted. No sign shall exceed 16 square feet in area nor be closer than eight feet from any other zoning lot. 
b. ?Projection. No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public way. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than one story or 15 feet above the curb level, whichever is lower. 
Sec. 42-982. - Business districts. 
(a) ?B-1 district. In the B-1 district, nonflashing signs shall be permitted, in accordance with the following: 
(1) ?General application. 
a. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of all nonilluminated signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed three times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. However, the gross surface area of all illuminated, nonflashing signs shall not exceed 1½ times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. 
b. ?Projection. No sign shall project into the public way. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 30 feet above curb level, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
(2) ?Integrated centers. For integrated centers in single ownership or under unified control, or individual uses with a minimum frontage of 150 feet, one additional sign on each street frontage, other than those regulated in subsection (a)(1) of this section, shall be permitted, subject to the following: 
a. ?Content. Such sign shall advertise only the name and location of such center or individual use and the name and type of business of each occupant of the center. 
b. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of the additional sign on a zoning lot shall not exceed two times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. However, the gross surface area of such additional sign, if illuminated nonflashing, shall not exceed the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. 
c. ?Setback. Such sign shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front lot line of such center or individual use, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
d. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 30 feet above curb level, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
(b) ?B-2 and B-3 districts. In the B-2 and B-3 districts, business signs and advertising devices are permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?General application. 
a. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed five times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. However, the gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed two times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. 
b. ?Projection. No sign shall project more than 18 inches into the public way. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 50 feet above curb level, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
(2) ?Integrated centers. For integrated centers in single ownership or under unified control or individual uses with a minimum frontage of 150 feet, one additional sign on each street frontage, other than those regulated in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be permitted, subject to the following: 
a. ?Content. Such sign shall advertise only the name and location of such center or individual use and the name and type of business of each occupant of the center. 
b. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of the additional sign on a zoning lot shall not exceed three times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. However, the gross surface area of such additional sign, if flashing, shall not exceed 1½ times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. 
c. ?Setback. Such sign shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front lot line of such center or individual use, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
d. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 50 feet above curb level, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
(c) ?B-4 district. In the B-4 district nonflashing business signs are permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Area. The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed four times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. 
(2) ?Content. Signs shall bear no lettering other than to indicate the name and kind of business conducted in the building or structure, such as "men's clothing," "drugs," "jeweler," and the like, and the year the business was established and the street number thereof. No sign shall advertise any particular article of merchandise. 
(3) ?Projection. No sign shall project more than six feet from the face of the wall of any building. 
(4) ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 50 feet above the curb level, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 
Sec. 42-983. - Industrial districts. 
(a) ?M-1 district. In the M-1 district, business signs and advertising devices are permitted subject to the following conditions. 
(1) ?General application. 
a. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of all signs on a lot shall not exceed two times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. However, the gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. 
b. ?Setback. All signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the front lot line. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 50 feet above the curb level, except as may be allowed by conditional use permit. 
(2) ?Industrial parks. For industrial parks, one additional sign on each street frontage, other than those regulated in subsection (a)(1)a of this section shall be permitted, subject to the following: 
a. ?Content. Such sign shall advertise only the name and location of such industrial park and the name and type of business of each occupant of the park. 
b. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of the additional sign on a lot shall not exceed 1½ times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. However, the gross surface area of such additional sign, if flashing, shall not exceed the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. 
c. ?Setback. Such sign shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front lot line of such industrial park. 
d. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 50 feet above curb level, except as may be allowed by conditional use permit. 
(b) ?M-2 district. In the M-2 district, business signs and advertising devices are permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?General application. 
a. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of all signs on a lot shall not exceed four times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. However, the gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed two times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. 
b. ?Projection. No sign shall project into the public way. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 50 feet above the curb level, except as may be allowed by conditional use permit. 
(2) ?Industrial parks. For industrial parks, one additional sign on each street frontage, other than those regulated in subsection (a)(1)a of this section shall be permitted, subject to the following: 
a. ?Content. Such sign shall advertise only the name and location of such industrial park and the name and type of business of each occupant of the park. 
b. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of the additional sign on a lot shall not exceed three times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. However, the gross surface area of such additional sign, if flashing, shall not exceed 1½ times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. 
c. ?Setback. Such sign shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the front lot line of such industrial park. 
d. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 50 feet above the curb level, except as may be allowed by conditional use permit. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 
Sec. 42-984. - Interchange districts. 
(a) ?I-R district. The regulations governing signs in the residence districts shall apply to the I-R district. 
(b) ?I-B district. In the I-B district nonflashing business signs are permitted, subject to the following conditions, but advertising devices are expressly prohibited: 
(1) ?General application. 
a. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of all nonilluminated signs on a lot shall not exceed four times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. However, the gross surface area of all illuminated, nonflashing signs shall not exceed two times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. 
b. ?Setback. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front lot line. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 30 feet above curb level, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
(2) ?Integrated centers. For integrated centers in single ownership or under unified control, or individual uses with a minimum frontage of 300 feet, one additional sign on each street frontage, other than those regulated in subsection (b)(1)a of this section shall be permitted, subject to the following: 
a. ?Content. Such sign shall advertise only the name and location of such center or individual use and the name and type of business of each occupant of the center. 
b. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of the additional sign on a lot shall not exceed two times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. However, the gross surface area of such additional sign, if illuminated nonflashing, shall not exceed the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. 
c. ?Setback. Such sign shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the front lot line of such center or individual use, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
d. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 30 feet above the curb level, except as may be provided by conditional use. 
(c) ?I-M district. In the I-M district, nonflashing business signs are permitted, subject to the following conditions. Advertising devices are expressly prohibited: 
(1) ?General application. 
a. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of all signs on a lot shall not exceed four times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. However, the gross surface area of all illuminated signs shall not exceed two times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. 
b. ?Setback. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front lot line. 
c. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 50 feet above the curb level. 
(2) ?Industrial parks. For industrial parks, one additional sign on each street frontage, other than those regulated in subsection (c)(1)a of this section shall be permitted, subject to the following: 
a. ?Content. Such sign shall advertise only the name and location of such industrial park and the name and type of business of each occupant of the park. 
b. ?Area. The gross area in square feet of the additional sign on a lot shall not exceed two times the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. However, the gross surface area of such additional sign, if illuminated, shall not exceed the lineal feet of frontage of such lot. 
c. ?Setback. Such sign shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the front lot line of such industrial park. 
d. ?Height. No sign shall project higher than 50 feet above the curb level. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 
Secs. 42-985—42-1015. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS[17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(8). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-1016. - Introduction and purpose. 
(a) ?Introduction. In accordance with the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 236.45 and for the purposes listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.01 and 236.45, the common council does ordain as follows: 
(1) ?The provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted to promote the health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the city. 
(2) ?This article shall not repeal, impair or modify private covenants or public ordinances, except that it shall apply whenever it imposes stricter restrictions on land use. 
(b) ?Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. The regulations of this article are designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to foster the orderly layout and use of land; to ensure safety from fire, flooding, panic and other dangers; to provide optimum light and air; to discourage overcrowding of the land; to lessen concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provision of transportation, public water and sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public necessities; and to facilitate the further division of large tracts of land into smaller parcels. The regulations are made with reasonable consideration of, but not limited to, the present character of the city and its environs, with the objectives of conserving the value of the land and improvements placed thereon, providing the most appropriate environment for human habitation, encouraging commerce and industry, and providing for the most appropriate use of land in the city. 
Sec. 42-1017. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a public right-of-way usually not less than 20 feet in width which normally affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property. 
    Arterial street means a street which provides for the movement of relatively heavy traffic to, from or within the city. It has a secondary function of providing access to abutting land. An arterial street system is designated on the city's master plan. 
    Certified survey map/minor subdivision means a map intending to create not more than four parcels of land as provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.34. Certified survey maps shall, in addition to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 236.34, bear a certificate of approval of the common council, certified by the administrator. 
    Collector street means a street which collects and distributes internal traffic within an urban area such as a residential neighborhood, between arterial and local streets. It provides access to abutting property. 
    Cul-de-sac means a short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround. 
    Easement means the area of land set aside or over or through which a liberty, privilege or advantage in land, distinct from ownership of the land, is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public. 
    Local street means a street of little or no continuity designed to provide access to abutting property and leading into collector streets. 
    Lot means a piece, parcel or plot of land intended for building development or as a unit for transfer of ownership, and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area, and other open space provisions, pursuant to article II of this chapter, except as specifically authorized by the common council. 
    Lot, area means the total area in a horizontal plane within the peripheral boundaries of a lot. 
    Lot, corner means a lot abutting intersecting streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, reversed corner means a corner lot which is oriented so that it has its rear lot line coincident with or parallel to the side lot line of the interior lot immediately to its rear. 
    Lot, through means a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
    Lot lines means the peripheral boundaries of a lot. 
    Lot width means the width of a parcel of land measured along the front building line. 
    Major thoroughfare means a street used or intended to be used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. Major thoroughfares shall include freeways, expressways and other highways and parkways, as well as arterial streets. 
    Marginal access street means a street which is parallel to and adjacent to major thoroughfares and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from traffic on the major street. 
    Owner means the plural as well as the singular and may mean either a natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasipublic corporation or combination of these. 
    Pedestrian pathway means a public way, usually running at right angles to streets, which is intended for the convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public right-of-way for utilities. 
    Plat means the map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the common council for approval. 
    Subdivision means a division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner thereof or his agent for the purpose of sale or building development, where: 
(1) ?The act of division creates two or more parcels or building sites of two acres each or less in area; or 
(2) ?Two or more parcels or building sites of two acres each or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of five years. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-1018. - General provisions. 
(a) ?Compliance with article provisions. No person shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits of this article which results in a subdivision, land division or a replat; no such subdivision, land division or replat shall be entitled to record; and no street shall be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of this article and the following: 
(1) ?The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and Wis. Stats. § 80.08. 
(2) ?The rules of the division of health contained in Wis. Adm. Code for Subdivisions H65 not served by public sewer. 
(3) ?The rules of the state department of transportation contained in Wis. Adm. Code Trans. ch. 233, which abut a state trunk highway or connecting street. 
(4) ?The rules of the state department of natural resources contained in Wis. Adm. Code for Floodplain Management Program. 
(b) ?Jurisdiction. Jurisdiction of this article shall include all lands within the corporate limits of the city as well as the unincorporated area within 1½ miles of the corporate limits as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.10 and 62.32. The provisions of this article, as they apply to divisions of tracts of land into less than five parcels, shall not apply to: 
(1) ?Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order; 
(2) ?Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements; and 
(3) ?The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this article or other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(c) ?Certified survey. Any division of land other than a subdivision as defined in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12), shall be surveyed and a certified survey map prepared as provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(d) ?Permits. No building permit shall be issued by the city authorizing the building on or improvement of any parcel of land not on record as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived until the provisions and requirements of this article have been met. 
(e) ?Standards for subdivisions and minor subdivisions in the extraterritorial area. In addition to complying with all other standards and requirements of this chapter, subdivisions and minor subdivisions within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the city shall comply with the following procedures and standards: 
(1) ?At the start of city review of such subdivisions, the city attorney or legal counsel shall advise the plan commission as to the regulatory standards of this chapter that can legally be applied in light of current statutory and case law and only those regulatory standards shall be applied. 
(2) ?The following standards addressing appropriateness of land use shall apply to all subdivisions and land divisions in the extraterritorial jurisdiction established by this chapter: 
a. ?Based upon consideration of applicable plans and zoning, the stated intent of the applicant, and other relevant information, the plan commission shall adopt a finding of probable use for the lots, outlots and land dedications proposed to be created. 
b. ?As a mandatory precondition of approval, the common council, upon advice from the plan commission, shall affirmatively find that the probable use or uses identified by the plan commission are compatible with present and projected uses of nearby lands, and reasonably consistent with planned land use patterns, and that the projected development represents logical, sequential land use transition, and that agreements are in place between the subdivider-developer and all relevant agencies and entities that have responsibility for providing the proposed development with public services and utility services by which services will be extended and public and utility costs within and beyond the proposed subdivision will be recovered. 
c. ?If the findings called for in subsection (2)b. cannot be made, the city shall deny approval of the proposed subdivision or minor subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1, 12-22-2003) 
Sec. 42-1019. - Procedure for submitting subdivisions. 
(a) ?Subdivisions. 
(1) ?Preliminary meetings. Before filing a preliminary plat, or certified survey, the subdivider is encouraged to consult with the plan commission and/or its consulting staff for advice regarding general subdivision requirements. The preliminary plat should be drawn on a topographic survey map to be submitted to the plan commission. The subdivider shall also submit a location map showing the relationship to the plan commission of the proposed subdivision to traffic arteries and existing community facilities. 
(2) ?Preliminary plat. 
a. ?The subdivider shall submit to the common council and to those agencies having the authority to object to plats under provisions in Wis. Stats. ch. 236, a preliminary plat (or certified survey) based upon an accurate exterior boundary survey by a registered land surveyor which shall show clearly the proposed subdivision at a scale of not more than one inch per 100 feet having two-foot contour intervals, shall identify the improvements (grading, tree planting, paving, installation of facilities and dedications of land), easements which the subdivider proposes to make and shall indicate by accompanying letter when the improvements will be provided. Any proposed restrictive covenants for the land involved shall be submitted. 
b. ?The common council shall submit a copy of the preliminary plat to the plan commission, and, at its option to the zoning administrator for review and written report of their recommendations and reactions to the proposed plat. 
c. ?After review of the preliminary plat or survey map and negotiations with the subdivider on changes being advisable and the kind and extent of public improvements which will be required, the plan commission shall reject or approve conditionally the preliminary plat within 20 days, as provided by statute. 
d. ?If the plan commission rejects the plat or map, it shall return it to the owner. If it approves or conditionally approves the plat or map, it shall so notify the common council. 
e. ?If the plan commission approves the preliminary plat, the common council shall, within 40 days of the date the plat was filed with the administrator, approve conditionally or reject such plat and shall state, in writing, any conditions of approval or reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. Failure of the common council to act within 40 days or extension thereof shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat, unless other authorized agencies object to the plat. The administrator shall communicate to the subdivider the action of the common council. If the plat or map is approved, the administrator shall endorse it for the common council. 
f. ?Upon filing the preliminary plat or map with the city, the owner shall pay a fee as set by the council from time to time. 
g. ?Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the subdivider to final approval of the layout shown by such plat, provided the final plat conforms substantially to such layout and conditions of approval have been met. 
(3) ?Public improvements, plans and specifications. Simultaneously with the filing of the preliminary plat or map, the owner shall file with the administrator five complete sets of preliminary plans and specifications for the construction of any public improvements required by section 42-1045. 
(4) ?Property owners association. The plan commission may require submission of a draft of the legal instruments and rules for proposed property owners associations when the subdivider proposes that common property within a subdivision would be either owned or maintained by such an organization of property owners. 
(5) ?Affidavit. The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and features and that he has fully complied with the provisions of this article. 
(6) ?Final plat. 
a. ?Final plats shall be submitted to the city within six months of preliminary plat acceptance unless this requirement is waived in writing by the common council. 
b. ?The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and to the requirements of all applicable ordinances and state laws and shall be submitted for certification of those agencies having the authority to object to the plat as provided by Wis. Stats. § 236.12(2). 
c. ?Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat or map, the owner shall file with the administrator four copies of the final plans and specifications of public improvements required by section 42-1045. 
d. ?The administrator shall forward the plat or map and plans and specifications of public improvements to the plan commission and forward copies of the plat to the director of local affairs and development, as provided by Wis. Stats. § 236.12(2). 
e. ?The plan commission shall refer the final plat or map and final plans and specifications of public improvements to the zoning administrator for review. 
f. ?The zoning administrator shall examine the plat or map and final plans and specifications of public improvements for technical details and, satisfactory, shall so certify in writing to the plan commission. 
g. ?If the plat or map or the plans and specifications are not satisfactory, the zoning administrator shall return them to the owner and so advise the plan commission. 
h. ?If the plat or map and plans and specifications of public improvements are satisfactory to the plan commission, it shall so notify the common council; if they are not satisfactory to the plan commission, they shall be rejected in writing and returned to the owner. If recommended by the plan commission, and if permitted by the common council, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the owner proposes to record at that time. 
i. ?The final plat shall be accepted or rejected by the common council within 60 days of its submission, unless the time is extended by an agreement with the subdivider. Reasons for rejection shall be stated in the minutes of the common council meeting and a copy thereof or a written statement of such reasons supplied to the subdivider. If the common council fails to act within 60 days and the time has not been extended by agreement and if no unsatisfied objections have been filed within that period, the plat shall be deemed to be approved. Following the approval of the plat as certified by all necessary officials, the plat shall be recorded in accordance with the requirements of statute. The plat shall be recorded prior to the time that lots are offered for sale, reference is made to the map for sales purposes, or use is made of lot and block numbers on the plat. 
j. ?If the original of the final plat has been filed with another approving authority, the subdivider may file a true copy of such plat in lieu of the original. However, before approval of the common council will be inscribed on the original of the final plat, the surveyor or subdivider shall certify the respects in which the original of the final plat differs from the true copy and all modifications must first be approved. 
(b) ?Minor subdivisions. 
(1) ?Certified survey required. When it is proposed to divide land into two parcels or building sites, any one of which is less than five acres, or when it is proposed to divide a block, lot or outlot into not more than four parcels or building sites within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of the block, lot or outlot, the subdivider shall subdivide by use of a certified survey map, prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(2) ?Procedure. 
a. ?The subdivider shall first meet with the zoning administrator regarding the requirements for minor subdivisional certified surveys before submission of the final map. Following such meeting, a copy of the final map in the form of a certified survey map shall be submitted to the plan commission. The certified survey shall be reviewed, approved or disapproved pursuant to the procedures used for preliminary plats found in subsection (a)(2)a through d of this section. 
b. ?If the plan commission approves the certified survey, the common council shall, within 40 days of the filing, approve conditionally or reject the map and shall notify the subdivider of its decision. 
c. ?The subdivider shall record the map with the applicable county register of deeds within 30 days of its approval by the common council and any other approving agencies. Failure to do so shall necessitate reapproval of the map by the common council. 
(3) ?Requirements. To the extent reasonably practicable, the certified survey/minor subdivision plat shall comply with the provisions of this article relating to general requirements, design standards and required improvements. 
(c) ?Technical details. 
(1) ?Preliminary plat. A preliminary plat (or certified survey map) shall be a legible print made from a drawing that shows correctly the following: 
a. ?Date, scale and north point. 
b. ?Proposed name of the subdivision, if a plat. 
c. ?Name and post office address of owner or his agent. 
d. ?Small drawing showing the location of the land to be divided. 
e. ?Location and names of adjoining subdivisions and the owners of undivided lands. 
f. ?Present zoning of land to be divided and adjoining lands. 
g. ?Reference to special requirements if the plat is located in a floodplain zoning district. 
h. ?Location, width and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and public utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges and other pertinent data, as required by the plan commission, within 300 feet of the proposed division of land or of property owned or controlled by the owner. 
i. ?Water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of survey and the approximate high and low water levels thereof. All elevations shall be referred to city datum. 
j. ?Layout, width, and approximate grades of all streets and rights-of-way such as alleys, highways, easements for sewers, water mains and other public utilities. 
k. ?Direction and distance to nearest water mains and sewer mains. 
l. ?Approximate dimensions of and areas of all lots and parcels. 
m. ?Proposed building setback lines, if different from that required by article II of this chapter. 
n. ?Contour lines at an interval of not more than 2½ feet, with reference to city datum. 
(2) ?Construction plans. As required by sections 42-1041—42-1045, the owner shall furnish with the preliminary plat or map necessary construction plans of public improvements. If the owner so chooses, he may obtain approval of a preliminary plat as to layout only. If only a portion of the preliminary plat is to be improved and submitted for final approval, construction plans and specifications need be prepared for only such portion. However, the design of public improvements shall be based on the needs of the whole area and such additional area as in the judgment of the plan commission is necessary. 
(3) ?Final plat. A final plat of a subdivision shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(4) ?Final certified survey map. A final certified survey map of a division of land not requiring a plat shall comply in all respects to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34. 
(5) ?Deed restrictions. The common council shall require that all deed restrictions and covenants be filed with the final plat. 
(6) ?Property owners association. The common council shall require the legal instruments creating a property owners association for the ownership and/or maintenance of common lands be filed with the final plat. 
(d) ?Engineering fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the city for all engineering work incurred by the city in connection with the plat or certified survey map. 
(e) ?Administrative fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any legal, administrative or fiscal work which may be undertaken by the city in connection with the plat or certified survey map. 
Secs. 42-1020—42-1040. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 42-1041. - Streets. 
(a) ?Compliance with statutes. In laying out a subdivision, the owner shall conform to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236, and all applicable code sections. In all cases where the requirements of the code section are different from the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 236, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(b) ?Dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate land and improve streets as provided in this section. Streets shall be located with due regard for topographical conditions, natural features, existing and proposed streets, utilities and land uses and public convenience and safety. Streets shall conform to the official map of the city. 
(c) ?Sufficient frontage. All lots shall have sufficient frontage on a public street to allow access by emergency and service motor vehicles. 
(d) ?Areas not covered by official map. In areas not covered by the official map, the layout of streets shall conform to the plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas of the neighborhood. Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and officially planned streets, topography and natural terrain, streams and lakes, and existing tree growth, public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
(e) ?Street requirements. 
(1) ?Collector streets. Collector streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready collection of traffic from residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the major street and highway system and shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as schools, churches and shopping centers and other concentrations of population and to the major streets into which they feed. 
(2) ?Minor streets. Minor streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage systems, and to require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting property. 
(3) ?Proposed streets. Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the common council, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision or land division or for the advantageous development of the adjacent tracts. 
(4) ?Reserve strips. Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control access to streets or alleys, except where control of such strips is placed with the city under conditions approved by the common council. 
(5) ?Alleys. Alleys may be provided in commercial and industrial districts for off-street loading and service access, but shall not be approved in residential districts. Dead-end alleys shall not be approved and alleys shall not connect to a major thoroughfare. 
(f) ?Extraterritorial streets. Streets located in the extraterritorial plat jurisdiction of the city must also comply with the minimum town road standards of Wis. Stats. § 86.26. 
(g) ?Continuation. Streets shall be laid out to provide for possible continuation wherever topographic and other physical conditions permit. Provision shall be made so that all proposed streets shall have a direct connection with, or be continuous and in line with, existing, planned or platted streets with which they are to connect. Dead-end streets not over 500 feet in length will be approved when necessitated by the topography. 
(h) ?Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic. 
(i) ?Number of intersections. The number of intersections of minor streets with major streets shall be reduced to the practical minimum consistent with circulation needs and safety requirements. 
(j) ?Frontage roads. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial highway, the common council may require a frontage road, nonaccess reservation along the rear of the property contiguous to such highway, or such other treatment as may be necessary to ensure safe, efficient traffic flow and adequate protection of residential properties. 
(k) ?Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be encouraged where their control is definitely placed in the city under conditions approved by the plan commission. 
(l) ?Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be required between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(m) ?Visibility. Streets shall afford maximum visibility and safety and shall intersect at right angles, where practicable. 
(n) ?Grades. The grade of major thoroughfares and collector-distributor streets shall not exceed six percent unless necessitated by exceptional topography and approved by the plan commission. Grades of local streets shall not exceed ten percent. The minimum grade of all streets shall be four-tenths of one percent. 
(o) ?Horizontal curves. A minimum sight distance with clear visibility, measured along the centerline, shall be provided of at least 500 feet on major thoroughfares, 200 feet on collector-distributor streets, and 120 feet on all other streets. 
(p) ?Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length in feet equivalent to 30 times the algebraic difference in grade for major thoroughfares and 20 times this algebraic difference for all other streets. 
(q) ?Half streets. Where a half street is adjacent to the subdivision, the other half street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. 
(r) ?Intersections. Intersecting streets should not be less than an angle of 85 degrees. 
(1) ?Property lines at street intersections of major thoroughfares shall be rounded with a radius of 15 feet or of a greater radius where the plan commission considers it necessary. 
(2) ?Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. 
(3) ?Provisions of article II of this chapter with respect to traffic visibility at street intersections shall also apply here. 
(s) ?Alleys. 
(1) ?Alleys shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts, except that the plan commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provisions are made for service access, such as off-street loading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. No alley shall connect with a major thoroughfare. 
(2) ?Width of alleys shall be not less than 21 feet. 
(3) ?Dead-end alleys are prohibited. 
(t) ?Street names. New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, but streets that are continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names shall be subject to approval by the plan commission. 
(u) ?Street design standards. The minimum right-of-way and roadway width of all proposed streets and alleys shall be as specified by the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component, official map or neighborhood development study; or if no width is specified therein, the minimum widths shall be as follows: 
(1) ?Street widths. 
Type of Street R.O.W. 
Width 
To Be 
Dedicated Pavement 
Width 
(Face of 
Curb to 
Face of 
Curb) Arterial streets 80 feet 44 to 48 feet Collector 
streets 66 feet 40 to 44 feet Minor streets 60 feet 36 to 40 feet Alleys 21 feet 21 feet Pedestrian 
ways 10 feet ?5 feet  
(2) ?Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall not exceed 500 feet in length. All cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet and a minimum inside curb radius of 45 feet. 
(3) ?Temporary dead-ends or cul-de-sacs. All temporary dead-ends shall have a maximum length of 800 feet and a temporary cul-de-sac shall have a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet and a minimum inside curb radius of 45 feet. 
Sec. 42-1042. - Block design. 
(a) ?Length. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be appropriate for the topography and the type of development contemplated, but block length in residential areas shall not exceed 1,500 feet nor have less than sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth between street lines. As a general rule, blocks shall not be less than 600 feet in length. 
(b) ?Right angle intersections. Wherever possible, right angle street intersections should be encouraged. 
(c) ?Pedestrian pathways. Pedestrian pathways, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the plan commission through the center of a block more than 900 feet long, where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(d) ?Trees. The common council may require that certain species of trees be planted on both sides of all streets. 
Sec. 42-1043. - Lots. 
(a) ?Size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development contemplated, provided that no residential lot shall be smaller in area than the minimum lot size for the appropriate zone as established by article II of this chapter. 
(b) ?Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of article II of this chapter, but in no case shall have a frontage of less than 60 feet at the building line or a depth of less than 100 feet. 
(c) ?Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated, as required by article II of this chapter. 
(d) ?Residential lots fronting on major streets and highways shall be platted with extra depth or designed to alleviate the effect of major street traffic on residential occupancy. 
(e) ?Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit building setback from both streets, as required by article II of this chapter. 
(f) ?Every lot shall abut or face a public street. Lots outside the corporate limits may abut or face a private street, if permitted by the common council. 
(g) ?Butt lots will be permitted by the plan commission only in exceptional cases. 
(h) ?Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to abutting street lines. 
(i) ?In case a tract is divided into parcels of more than one and one-half acres in area, such parcels shall be so arranged to permit redividing into parcels in accordance with this article and article II of this chapter. 
(j) ?Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(k) ?Every lot within the extraterritorial area shall be a minimum of five acres in area and shall also have a minimum lot width and frontage of not less than 300 feet. Size and width standards for lots committed to nonresidential uses by deed restriction enforceable by the city shall be determined on a case-by-case basis in the course of city review, upon consideration of the intended use, and other relevant factors. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, § 2, 12-22-2003; Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-23-2004) 
Sec. 42-1044. - Flood protection. 
(a) ?Filling of all lots in each subdivision is required to a point not less than one foot above the flood protection elevation for the particular area as specified on the flood profile appended to article V of this chapter. 
(b) ?Areas to be filled shall also include all street rights-of-way and other appropriate areas, such as park and open space lands, so that they bear a reasonable relationship to adjoining properties. 
Cross reference— Floodplain zoning, § 42-1151 et seq. 
Sec. 42-1045. - Drainage system. 
(a) ?Required. A drainage system shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider to provide for the proper drainage of the surface water of the subdivision and the drainage area of which it is a part. A final plat shall not be approved until the subdivider shall submit plans, profiles and specifications as specified in this section, which have been prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved by the zoning administrator. 
(b) ?Plans. 
(1) ?The subdivider shall submit to the zoning administrator and plan commission a report on the ability of existing watercourse channels, storm sewers, culverts and other improvements pertaining to drainage or flood control within the subdivision to handle the additional runoff which would be generated by the development of the land within the subdivision. Additional information shall be submitted to adequately indicate that provision has been made for disposal of surface water without any damage to the developed or undeveloped land downstream below the proposed subdivision. The report shall also include: 
a. ?Estimates of the quantity of stormwater entering the subdivision naturally from areas outside the subdivision. 
b. ?Quantities of flow at each inlet or culvert. 
c. ?Location, sizes and grades of required culverts, storm drainage sewers and other required appurtenances. 
(2) ?A grading plan for the streets, blocks and lots shall be submitted by the subdivider for the area within the subdivision. 
(3) ?The design criteria for storm drainage systems shall be based upon information provided by the zoning administrator. 
(4) ?Materials and construction specifications for all drainage projects (i.e., pipe, culverts, seed, sod, etc.) shall be in compliance with specifications provided by the common council or zoning administrator. 
(c) ?Grading. The subdivider shall grade each subdivision in order to establish street, block and lot grades in proper relation to each other and to topography as follows: 
(1) ?The subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all proposed streets in accordance with the approved plans. 
(2) ?Block grading shall be completed by one or more of the following methods: 
a. ?A ridge may be constructed along the rear lot lines which provides for drainage onto the streets. 
b. ?Parts of all lots may be graded to provide for drainage to the street or to a ditch along the rear lot line. 
c. ?Draining across rear or side lot lines may be permitted, provided that drainage onto adjoining properties is skillfully controlled. 
(3) ?Lot grading shall be completed so that water drains away from each proposed building at a minimum grade of two percent and provisions shall be made to prevent excessive drainage onto adjacent properties. 
(4) ?The topsoil stripped by grading shall not be removed from the site and shall be uniformly spread over the lots when rough grading is finished. 
(d) ?System requirements. The subdivider shall install all the storm drainage facilities indicated on the plans required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(1) ?Street drainage. All streets shall be provided with an adequate storm drainage system. The street storm system shall serve as the primary drainage system and shall be designed to carry street, adjacent land and building stormwater drainage. No stormwater shall be permitted to be run into the sanitary sewer system within the proposed subdivision. 
(2) ?Off-street drainage. The design of the off-street drainage system shall include the watershed affecting the subdivision and shall be extended to a watercourse or ditch adequate to receive the storm drainage. When the drainage system is outside of the street right-of-way, the subdivider shall make provisions for dedicating an easement to the city to provide for the future maintenance of such system. Easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet, but the city may require larger easements if more area is needed due to topography, size of watercourse, etc. 
(e) ?Protection. The subdivider shall adequately protect all ditches to the satisfaction of the common council and zoning administrator. Ditches and open channels shall be seeded, sodded or paved depending upon grades and soil types. (Generally ditches or channels with grades up to one percent shall be seeded; those with grades up to four percent shall be sodded and those with grades over four percent shall be paved.) 
Sec. 42-1046. - Extra-size or off-site improvements. 
(a) ?Design capacity. All improvements shall be installed to satisfy the service requirements for the service or drainage area in which the subdivision is located and the improvements shall be of sufficient capacity to handle the expected development of the overall service or drainage area involved. 
(b) ?Extra-size improvements. Where improvements in excess of the size needed to serve just the proposed subdivision are required, the subdivider shall pay for the total cost of improvements he is required to install to serve his subdivision. The additional costs which result from the extra-size improvement shall be paid for by the city. Thus, when conditions within the whole drainage area will require an 18-inch sanitary sewer, for example, and a 12-inch sewer will adequately serve the subdivision involved, the subdivider shall construct the 18-inch utility and bill the city for the difference in material costs between a 12-inch and 18-inch sewer pipe. 
(c) ?Off-site extensions. When streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of the proposed subdivision, the city, or its duly authorized representative, shall require, as a prerequisite to approval of a final plat, assurances that such improvement extensions shall be provided as follows: 
(1) ?Extensions of utilities onto the property involved shall be adequate to serve the total development requirements of the service or drainage area. Utilities leaving the property shall be constructed in such a manner as to make their extension practical for servicing the adjacent areas of the service or drainage area. 
(2) ?If the city, or its duly authorized representative, find that extensions across undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or as a governmental expense until some future time, the developer shall be required, if he wishes to proceed with the development, to obtain necessary easements or rights-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions. Such improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining land and the subdivider may contract with adjacent property owners and/or subdividers of adjacent land for reimbursement of the oversize and/or off-site improvements constructed. 
(d) ?Lift stations and force mains. Where sanitary sewer lift stations and force mains are required to lift sewage to the gravity system, the subdivider shall have plans, profiles and specifications prepared for the installation of such facilities. The installation, inspection supervision and engineering fees for lift stations and/or force mains shall be paid for by the subdivider unless otherwise determined and agreed upon by the common council. 
Sec. 42-1047. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
(a) ?General. 
(1) ?If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to such land shall make such provisions as the city may require. 
(2) ?A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in article II of this chapter. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the city, and shall conform to the proposed land use standards established in the comprehensive plan, official map and article II of this chapter. 
(b) ?Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in this division, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1) ?Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
(2) ?Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
(3) ?Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction. 
(4) ?Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and stormwater drainage. 
(5) ?Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisances from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
(6) ?Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
Sec. 42-1048. - Requirements and design standards for public improvements. 
(a) ?Improvements completed. All improvements required under this article shall be constructed in accordance with its provisions prior to filing the final plat with the administrator for approval by the common council. In lieu of construction of any of the public improvements, the owner may furnish a surety bond as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b) ?Financing options for required improvements. The subdivider shall install street and utility improvements and other improvements as provided in this subsection, or the subdivider shall elect to have the city make the required improvements: 
(1) ?If the subdivider elects to make required improvements: 
a. ?The subdivider shall enter into a contract pursuant to subsection (c) of this section with the city agreeing to install all required improvements. 
b. ?With such contract the subdivider will file a bond or certified check in the amount equal to the estimate of costs prepared by the zoning administrator pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
c. ?The contractors and/or subcontractors who are engaged in the construction of improvements shall be designated as qualified by the zoning administrator. 
(2) ?If the subdivider petitions the city to make required improvements: 
a. ?The subdivider shall enter into a written contract pursuant to subsection (c) of this section agreeing to pay the city for such improvements. 
b. ?With such contract, the subdivider will file a bond or certified check in the amount equal to the estimate of costs prepared by the zoning administrator pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
c. ?The city will bill the subdivider for costs of making such improvements as they become due. 
d. ?The subdivider shall pay the city within 30 days of such billings. 
e. ?If the subdivider fails to pay the city within 30 days of such billings, the city may proceed against the surety company on the bond or add the amount unpaid to the roll to be collected as real property taxes, or both. 
(c) ?Financing. Before a final plat is approved by the common council, the subdivider shall submit an agreement and performance bond under the options provided in subsection (b) of this section to ensure the following: 
(1) ?The subdivider shall pay for the cost of all improvements required in the subdivision by this article. 
(2) ?Guaranteed completion of the required improvements within a two-year period. 
(3) ?Payment by the subdivider for all costs incurred by the city for review and inspection. This would include preparation and review of plans and specifications by the zoning administrator, planner and attorney, as well as other costs of a similar nature. 
(4) ?The performance bond or cash escrow agreement shall be equal to 1¼ times the zoning administrator's estimated cost of the required improvements. 
(5) ?If the required improvements are not complete within the two-year period, all amounts held under the escrow agreement or performance bond shall be turned over and delivered to the city and applied to the cost of the required improvements. Any balance remaining after such improvements have been made shall be returned to the owner or subdivider. The common council at its option, may extend the bond period for an additional period not to exceed two years. 
(d) ?Procedure. 
(1) ?Plans and specifications. Simultaneously with the filing of the preliminary plat with the administrator or as soon thereafter as practicable, two copies of the construction plans and specifications shall be furnished for the following public improvements: 
a. ?Street grading and surfacing. 
b. ?Sanitary sewerage. 
c. ?Water mains and laterals. 
d. ?Curbs, gutters and sidewalks. 
(2) ?Action by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review or cause to be reviewed the plans and specifications for conformance with the requirements of this article. If he rejects the plans and specifications, he shall notify the owner, who shall modify the plans and specifications or both accordingly. When the plans and specifications are corrected, the zoning administrator shall approve them in writing and so notify the plan commission so that it may approve the plans and specifications for transmittal to the common council. The common council shall approve the plans and specifications before the improvements are installed. 
(3) ?Construction and inspection. 
a. ?Prior to starting any of the work covered by the plans approved above, written authorization to start the work shall be obtained from the zoning administrator upon receipt of all necessary permits and in accordance with the construction methods of this subsection. 
b. ?Construction of all improvements required by this article shall be completed within two years from the date of approval of the preliminary plat by the plan commission, unless good cause can be shown for the mayor and common council to grant an extension. 
c. ?During the course of construction, the zoning administrator shall make such inspections deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the plans and specifications as approved. The owner shall pay the actual cost incurred by the city for such inspections. This fee shall be the actual cost to the city of inspectors, engineers and other parties necessary to ensure satisfactory work. 
(4) ?As-built plans. After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of such improvements, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made a map showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewers and water mains, and such other facilities as the city engineer shall require. This map shall be in black pencil on tracing paper and shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in this state. The presentation of the map shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the surety bond assuring their completion. 
(e) ?Required improvements. 
(1) ?The subdivider shall, at its sole expense, provide the following facilities: 
a. ?Water and sanitary sewer mains and laterals to the lot line where connection to existing systems can be reasonably provided. 
b. ?Streets graded to full width and the roadway graded to subgrade; streetlamps; street signs. 
c. ?Adequate facilities to provide surface water drainage. 
d. ?Curbs and gutters. 
e. ?Final grade and submaterial. 
f. ?Final surface. 
g. ?Sidewalks, if required. 
(2) ?The adequacy of such facilities shall be subject to approval of the plan commission. 
(f) ?Street design standards. 
(1) ?General requirements. The subdivider shall provide streets to meet the specifications of this article and inspection of the zoning administrator or petition the city to provide such streets. The subdivider shall also provide streets from where they now exist to the subdivision in question. The subdivider need not blacktop immediately the streets but will be required to grade the full width of the right-of-way of the street proposed to be dedicated. The subdivider shall grade the bed for the roadway and the street right-of-way, subgrade and surface with not less than six inches of fresh granite. The time schedule involved in laying the streets will be up to the discretion of the city. Property owners should be aware there may be some delay in the city blacktopping any streets under this article. The time schedule for blacktopping will be dependent on city's resources. 
(2) ?Grading. After the installation of temporary block corner monuments by the subdivider and establishment of street grades by the common council, the subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all streets proposed to be dedicated in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the common council. The subdivider shall grade the roadbeds in the street right-of-way to subgrade. 
(3) ?Surfacing. After the installation of all utility improvements and pursuant to this section, the subdivider shall surface all roadways in streets proposed to be dedicated to the widths prescribed by these regulations of the city. Such surfacing shall be done in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the common council. 
(4) ?Streetlamps. The common council shall require the subdivider to install streetlamps along all streets proposed to be dedicated of a design comparable with the neighborhood and type of development proposed. Such lamps should be placed at each street intersection and at such interior block spacing as may be required by the common council. 
(5) ?Street signs. The subdivider shall install at the intersection of all streets proposed to be dedicated, a street sign of a design specified by the zoning administrator. 
(g) ?Sidewalks. 
(1) ?If required by the city, the subdivider shall install sidewalks and alleys to meet the specifications and inspection of the zoning administrator or petition the city to install the sidewalks and alleys. Sidewalks shall be constructed pursuant to the standards found in section 70-73. 
(2) ?Wider than standard sidewalks may be required by the common council in the vicinity of schools, commercial areas and other places of public assemblage and the common council may require the construction of sidewalks in locations other than those required under the preceding provisions of this article if such walks are necessary, in their opinion, for safe and adequate pedestrian circulation. 
(3) ?Alternative pedestrian ways may be approved in lieu of sidewalks where the proposed alternative pedestrian ways are constructed of all-weather material, are dedicated to the city, or are owned and maintained by a properly registered homeowners association and have frontage on each parcel otherwise required to be provided with a sidewalk. 
(h) ?Curbs and gutters. The subdivider shall provide concrete curbs and gutters on all streets in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the common council. Wherever possible, provision shall be made at the time of construction for driveway access curb cuts. 
(i) ?Sanitary sewer system design standards. There shall be provided a sanitary sewer system in conformity with the master plan of sewers, as approved by the common council. The subdivider shall either install adequate sanitary sewer facilities and connect them to city sewer mains, subject to specifications and inspection of the zoning administrator, or petition the city to install sanitary sewer facilities and connect them to city sewer mains. The subdivider shall pay all the costs of all sanitary sewer work including the bringing of the sanitary sewer from where it exists to the subdivision in question as well as providing all sanitary sewer work within the subdivision. The cost of providing and installing sewer pipe of sizes larger or at a greater depth than required to serve the area shall be borne by the city, as agreed upon between the land owner and the common council prior to approval of the preliminary plat or certified survey map. 
(j) ?Water supply system design standards. There shall be provided a water supply system in conformity with the master plan of the water system as approved by the common council. The subdivider and/or property owner shall either install and connect city water to serve all lots subject to specifications and inspection of the zoning administrator, or shall petition the city for installation and connection of city water to serve all lots. The subdivider shall pay all costs of installing and connecting city water including the bringing of water from where it exists to the subdivision in question as well as providing all waterworks within the subdivision. The cost of providing and installing water pipe of sizes larger than required to serve the area shall be borne by the city, as agreed upon prior to the approval of the preliminary plat or certified survey map. Hydrants and valves will be furnished by the city at no cost to the owner. 
(k) ?Stormwater drainage facilities. Pursuant to section 42-1045, the subdivider shall provide stormwater drainage facilities which may include curbs and gutters, catchbasins and inlets, storm sewers, road ditches and open channels, as may be required. All such facilities are to be of adequate size and grade to hydraulically accommodate the 25-year storm. Storm drainage facilities shall be so designed as to present no hazard to life or property, and the size, type and installation of all stormwater drains and sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the common council. The subdivider shall pay all costs of all storm sewer work, except that the subdivider shall not be required to pay for any storm sewers that are required to bring the storm sewers to the subdivision nor shall they be required to install any storm sewers that are more than 18 inches in diameter. 
(l) ?Other utilities. No electrical or telephone service shall be located on overhead poles except where impossible due to exceptional topography or other physical barrier. Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power and telephone distribution and transmission lines required to service the plat shall be approved by the common council and a map of such shall be filed with the administrator. 
(m) ?Final construction plans. Final construction plans shall be legible prints of a size acceptable to the zoning administrator and shall include the following: 
(1) ?Map of plat or subdivision of lands, including title of plat or map. 
(2) ?Layout of streets. 
(3) ?Layout of sanitary sewers. 
(4) ?Layout of water supply system. 
(5) ?Plans and profiles of streets and sewers at a scale of not more than 40 feet per inch horizontal and four feet per inch vertical. 
(6) ?All necessary details. 
(n) ?Material standards. All improvements constructed under this article shall be of the standards, where applicable, established by the state highway commission's "Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges." Where the state highway commission's specifications do not apply, the standards shall be as approved by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 42-1049. - Easements. 
(a) ?Utility easements. The common council, on the recommendation of the plan commission and other appropriate agencies of the city, shall require utility easements for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and head mains or other utility lines. It is the interest of this article to protect all established easements so as to ensure proper grade, ensure maintenance of the established grade, prohibit construction of permanent fences or retaining walls over underground installations and prevent the planting of trees in easement areas. 
(b) ?Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream: 
(1) ?There shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and as may be necessary to comply with this section; or 
(2) ?The watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream may be relocated in such a manner that the maintenance of adequate drainage will be assured and the same provided with a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming to the lines of the relocated watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and may be necessary to comply with this section. 
(3) ?Wherever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. In all cases, such watercourse shall be of a minimum width established at the high water mark, or in the absence of such specification, not less than 30 feet. 
(c) ?Easement locations. Such easements shall be at least 12 feet wide and may run across lots or alongside of rear lot lines. Such easements should preferably be located along rear lot lines. Evidence shall be furnished the plan commission that easements and any easement provisions to be incorporated in the plat or in deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility companies or the organization responsible for furnishing the services involved. 
Sec. 42-1050. - Public sites and open spaces. 
(a) ?Purpose. The requirements of this section are established to ensure that adequate parks, open spaces and sites for other public uses are properly located and preserved as the city grows. It has also been established to ensure that the costs of providing the park and recreation sites and facilities necessary to serve the additional people brought into the community by land development may be equitably apportioned on the basis of the additional needs created by the development. The requirements shall apply to all lands proposed for all residential development. 
(b) ?Design. In the design of a subdivision, land division, planned unit development or development project, provision shall be made for suitable sites of adequate area for schools, parks, playgrounds, open spaces, drainageways and other public purposes. Such sites as are shown on the official map, master plan or parks and open space plan, if applicable, shall be made a part of the design. Consideration shall be given to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of trees, marshes, lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, watersheds and ravines and woodland, prairie and wetland plant and animal communities. 
(c) ?Dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate adequate developable land for the park, recreation and open space needs of the development, subject to a determination of acceptability by the plan commission. The subdivider shall dedicate sufficient land area that is suitable and readily developable to provide adequate park, playground, recreation and open space to meet the needs to be created by and to be provided for the subdivision, land division, group housing project or planned community development project. These public lands shall be made a part of the plat and shall be dedicated to the public at the minimum rate of one acre for each 25 proposed dwelling units. 
(d) ?Fee in lieu of dedication. 
(1) ?Where, in the discretion of the plan commission, there is no land suitable for parks within the proposed subdivision or the dedication of land would not be compatible with the city's comprehensive development plan, or the plan commission determines that a cash contribution would better serve the public interest, the plan commission shall recommend to the common council that the subdivider pay a fee in lieu of making the required land dedication. Where the proposed subdivision consists of 15 or more lots, the plan commission may require either a land dedication or a fee in lieu of dedication. Where the proposed subdivision consists of less than 15 lots, a parcel assessment fee pursuant to subsection (e) of this section shall be utilized. 
(2) ?Where a fee in lieu of land system is used, the subdivider shall pay to the city a fee equivalent to the fair market value of one acre for each 25 proposed dwelling units. The fair market of such a residential lot shall be determined by the city assessor. 
(3) ?If the amount of land required to be dedicated, other than for streets and drainageways as indicated on the master plan, comprehensive plan component or official map of the city totals less than the ratio of one acre for each 25 proposed dwelling units, the subdivider shall pay to the city a fee equivalent to the fair market value of the amount of land representing the difference between the amount of land required to be dedicated, other than the streets and drainageways, as indicated on such plans or maps and the rate of dedication established in this section. Such fees required in lieu of dedication shall be paid to the administrator at the time of first application for approval of a final plat of such subdivision. 
(4) ?All funds so collected by the city shall be deposited as "Special Fund for the Acquisition and Development of Public Sites, Recreation Areas, Open Spaces and Greenways" (park special fund), and that such funds so levied and collected shall be used for such purposes at such places and in such manner as shall be approved, ordered and directed by the city upon recommendation by the plan commission. Any and all interest accumulated upon such funds shall be added to the special fund and be used only for acquisition and developments for such purposes. 
(e) ?Assessment per unit fee. Where a subdivision consists of less than 15 lots, a one-time fee as set by the council from time to time per dwelling unit or lot, whichever is greater, will be assessed for park development. These fees are to be placed in the park special fund for park development. 
(f) ?Dedication and fee. The plan commission may recommend the subdivider satisfy the requirements by combining land dedication with fee payments. The fee, in such cases, shall be determined by subtracting the fair market value of the dedicated land, from the total fee which would have been imposed had no land been dedicated by the subdivider. The fair market value shall be determined by the city assessor. 
(g) ?Development of area. 
(1) ?When park land is dedicated, the subdivider is required to bring the dedicated land up to the contours established in the approved street and utility plans, topsoiled with a minimum of four inches of quality topsoil, seeded as specified by the common council, fertilized with 16-6-6 fertilizer at the rate of seven pounds per 1,000 square feet and mulched as specified in the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, sections 627 and 629. The topsoil furnished for the park site shall consist of the natural loam, sandy loam, silt loam, silty clay loam or clay loam humus-bearing soils adapted to the sustenance of plant life, and such topsoil shall be neither excessively acid nor excessively alkaline. Fine grading and seeding must occur within one year following issuance of the first building permit within that subdivision unless otherwise authorized by the plan commission. 
(2) ?It shall be the duty of the city to maintain the dedicated areas, and the owner who dedicated the land shall in no way be responsible for its maintenance or liability thereon except that such owner shall not develop the surrounding area in a manner which would unduly depreciate the purpose, use or value of the dedicated property and except if such owner shall reside on one of the subdivided parcels, in which case he shall be responsible for the maintenance of adjacent public property as may be required in other laws of the city. 
(h) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fair market value (market value) means the highest price in terms of money which a property will bring in a competitive and open market under all conditions requisite to a fair sale, the buyer and seller, each acting prudently, knowledgeably and assuming the price is not affected by undue stimulus. 
    Land use regulation means, broadly, any legal restriction, such as zoning ordinances which control the uses to which land may be put. A land use regulation may include such controls as those established by restrictive covenants or by redevelopment or urban renewal plans approved by local governing bodies. 
    Phase means a phase ends with the completion of public improvements (as shown in the final plat documents) and a new phase begins with the start of public improvements (as shown in the final plat documents) in the portion of the plat being developed. 
    Public improvements means installation of streets, electric service, sewer and water, gas lines and telephone lines. 
    Subdivider means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, estate or other legal entity using land for residential development. This shall include all residential development whether or not there is an actual subdivision of land. Property which does not require subdivision but will be used for residential development shall be included. 
Sec. 42-1051. - Variations and exceptions. 
(a) ?Where the plan commission finds that extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may recommend to the common council variations or exceptions to the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variation or exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this article. 
(b) ?The plan commission shall not recommend variations or exceptions to the regulations of this article unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
(1) ?The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; 
(2) ?The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property; and 
(3) ?Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out. 
(c) ?Any recommendations by the plan commission shall be so endorsed by the secretary and transmitted to the common council. The common council, if it approves, shall do so by motion or resolution and instruct the administrator to notify the plan commission and the owner. 
Sec. 42-1052. - Enforcement, penalties and remedies. 
(a) ?Violations. It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record or monument any land in violation of this article or statute and no person shall be issued a building permit by the city authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any subdivision, land division or replat within the jurisdiction of this article not of record as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived until the provisions and requirements of this article have been fully met. The city may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this article or the applicable statutes. 
(b) ?Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, forfeit no less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and the costs of prosecution for each violation and in default of payment of such forfeiture costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. Recordation improperly made has the penalties provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.30. Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats has the penalties provided for in Wis. Stats. § 236.31. Monuments disturbed or not placed have the penalties as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 236.32. 
Sec. 42-1053. - Standardized address system. 
(a) ?Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assist the ambulance, fire and police departments to quickly locate correct addresses at which to provide emergency services by requiring numbers to be placed in prominently visible locations on buildings citywide. 
(b) ?Specifications. 
(1) ?Content. The standard number shall be no less than three inches in height and shall be of the approved type available from the administrator's office. 
(2) ?Display requirement. The standard assigned number shall be placed on every house and building in the city. 
(3) ?Placement. The number shall be placed immediately above or at the side of the main door of the building facing the street upon which it fronts. If the number is not visible from the street in this location, it shall be placed in such a location that it is visible. 
(4) ?Placement; building not visible. If no part of the building is visible from the street or if the building is more than 75 feet back from the street line, the number shall be placed on a gate post, fence, post, tree or other approved place near the street line so that it is visible from the street. Approval shall be granted by the city police department. 
(5) ?New buildings; incomplete. In the case of new buildings, the number along with the building permit shall be placed on a temporary post or tree in front of the construction site where it is visible from the street. When the building is completed, the number shall be moved to the permanent location specified above. 
(6) ?Number assignment. All address numbers for addresses in the city shall be assigned by the city. 
(c) ?Numbers required. No permit for the construction of a building shall be issued until the assigned number has been obtained from the administrator's office. No permit for the repair or alteration of a building shall be issued unless the proper number is affixed to the building in accordance with this section. 
(d) ?Penalty. The owner or lessee of any property who fails to comply with the provisions of this section within 90 days of its enactment shall be subject to a fine of $25.00 along with the costs of prosecution. In addition, the department of public works shall be directed to install address numbers on buildings which are not in compliance with the provisions of this section. The costs of the address numbers and installation shall be billed to the property owner and should the bill remain unpaid, the unpaid bill shall be added to the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 10-7-17, 7-27-1992) 
Secs. 42-1054—42-1085. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SHORELAND-WETLAND[18] 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference— Floodplain zoning, § 42-1151 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-1086. - Statutory authorization. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 144.26. 
Sec. 42-1087. - Findings of fact. 
    Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and the pollution of the navigable waters of the city would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare and impair the tax base. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; and preserve shore cover and natural beauty. 
Sec. 42-1088. - Purpose of article. 
    To promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, this article has been established to: 
(1) ?Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; 
(2) ?Prevent and control water pollution by filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters and to maintain stormwater and floodwater capacity; 
(3) ?Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other fish and aquatic habitat; 
(4) ?Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; 
(5) ?Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earthmoving activities; and 
(6) ?Maintain safe and healthful conditions, to prevent and control water pollution, to protect fish spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life and wildlife habitat, to preserve shore cover and natural beauty and to control building and development in wetlands whenever possible. When development is permitted in a wetland, the development should occur in a manner which minimizes adverse impacts upon the wetland. 
Sec. 42-1089. - Compliance with article provisions. 
    The use of wetlands, and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland area of the city shall be in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. However, see section 42-1097 for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses. All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this article. 
Sec. 42-1090. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the state department of transportation are exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.12(4)(a) applies. 
Sec. 42-1091. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a) ?This article supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 or 87.30, which relate to shoreland-wetlands, except that where another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than the provisions contained in this article, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. 
(b) ?This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
Sec. 42-1092. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the statute. Where a provision of this article is required by a standard in Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 117, and where the article provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wis. Adm. Code, ch. NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article. 
Sec. 42-1093. - Official shoreland-wetland zoning maps. 
    The following maps are hereby adopted and made a part of this article and are on file in the office of the administrator: Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map(s), stamped "final" on November 25, 1987. 
Sec. 42-1094. - District boundaries. 
(a) ?The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the city which are five acres or more and are shown on the final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this article in section 42-1093 and which are: 
(1) ?Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the city shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the department publication "Surface Water Resources of Marathon County" or are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this article in section 42-1093. 
(2) ?Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this article in this section. Flood hazard boundary maps, flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary-floodway maps, county soil survey maps or other existing city floodplain zoning maps used to delineate floodplain area which have been adopted by the city, shall be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas in the city. 
(b) ?Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark shall initially be made by the zoning administrator. When questions arise, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark. 
(c) ?When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps and the actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the zoning administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped, is in error. If the department staff concur with the zoning administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny land use or building permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps, the zoning administrator shall be responsible for initiating a shoreland-wetland map amendment within a reasonable period. 
Sec. 42-1095. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted, subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable: 
(1) ?Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs: 
a. ?Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating; 
b. ?The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops; 
c. ?The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber; 
d. ?The pasturing of livestock; 
e. ?The cultivation of agricultural crops; and 
f. ?The construction and maintenance of duck blinds. 
(2) ?Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning/land use/building permit and which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided as follows: 
a. ?The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected; 
b. ?The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries; 
c. ?The maintenance and repair of existing drainage ditches, where permissible under Wis. Stats. § 30.20, or of other existing drainage systems (such as tiling) to restore preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is permissible under Wis. Stats. ch. 30, and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible; 
d. ?The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
e. ?The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance; 
f. ?The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district, provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in section 42-1130(3); and 
g. ?The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction. 
(3) ?Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below: 
a. ?The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted in this section, provided that: 
1. ?The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
2. ?The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 42-1130(3); 
3. ?The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross sectional area practical to serve the intended use; 
4. ?Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and 
5. ?Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road. 
b. ?The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings, provided that: 
1. ?The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals; 
2. ?The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
3. ?The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and 
4. ?Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed. 
c. ?The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that: 
1. ?Any private development allowed under this section shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose; 
2. ?Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed; 
3. ?The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this section are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in subsection (3)a of this section; and 
4. ?Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values. 
d. ?The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines and water, gas and sewer distribution lines, and related facilities, provided that: 
1. ?The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
2. ?Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and 
3. ?Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 42-1130(3). 
e. ?The construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that: 
1. ?The railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland; 
2. ?Only limited wetland alteration necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and 
3. ?Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland as listed in section 42-1130(3). 
Sec. 42-1096. - Prohibited uses. 
(a) ?Any use not listed in section 42-1095 is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this ordinance in accordance with section 42-1130. 
(b) ?The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited. 
Sec. 42-1097. - Nonconforming structures and uses. 
    The existing lawful use of a structure, building or property, or its accessory use, on the effective date of the ordinance or amendment from which this article is derived, which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Notwithstanding Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h), the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure in existence at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived adopted under Wis. Stats. § 62.231, or of an environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to that structure, is permitted under Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23(7)(h), 62.231(5), applies to any environmental control facility that was not in existence on May 7, 1982, but was in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or amendment. 
(2) ?If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to the appropriate provisions of this article. 
(3) ?Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived adopted under Wis. Stats. § 62.231 or 61.351, may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of this article. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended. 
(4) ?The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121. 
(5) ?Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
Secs. 42-1098—42-1120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 42-1121. - Definitions. 
(a) ?For the purpose of administering and enforcing this article, the terms or words used in this article shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number; words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally. 
(b) ?The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Accessory structure or use means a detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principal structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use. 
    Boathouse, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 130.01(1d), means a permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any combination of structural parts. 
    Department means the state department of natural resources. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials. 
    Drainage system means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge. 
    Environmental control facility means any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities. 
    Fixed houseboat, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.01(1R), means a structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway. 
    Navigable waters means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within the state, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the state portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. Under Wis. Stats. § 144.26(2)(d), notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Wis. Stats. § 62.231, and Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 117, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if: 
(1) ?Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river; 
(2) ?Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching; and 
(3) ?Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use. 
    Ordinary high-water mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Planning agency means the city plan commission created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(1). 
    Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have generally occurred in the state and which may be expected to occur or be exceeded on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics, once in every 100 years. 
    Shoreland-wetland district means the zoning district, created in this article, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a party of this article as described in section 42-1090. 
    Shorelands means lands within the following distances from the ordinary highwater mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. 
    Special exception or conditional use means a use which is permitted by this article, provided that certain conditions specified in the article are met and that a permit is granted by the board of appeals or, where appropriate, the planning agency designated by the common council. 
    Unnecessary hardship means that circumstance where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purpose of this article. 
    Variance means an authorization granted by the board of appeals to construct, alter or use a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards of this article. 
    Wetlands means those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions. 
    Wetland alteration means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-1122. - Zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1) ?Advise applicants as to the provisions of this article and assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms. 
(2) ?Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this article. 
(3) ?Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions. 
(4) ?Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties. 
(5) ?Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments within ten days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate district office of the department. 
(6) ?Investigate and report violations of this article to the appropriate city planning agency and the district attorney, corporation counsel or city attorney. 
Cross reference— Officers and employes, § 2-176 et seq. 
Sec. 42-1123. - Zoning permits. 
(a) ?When required. Unless another section of this article specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator before any new development, as defined in section 42-1121(b), or any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated. 
(b) ?Application. An application for a permit shall be made to the zoning administrator upon forms furnished by the city and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of this article, the following information: 
(1) ?General information. 
a. ?Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner and contractor, where applicable. 
b. ?Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed use or development. 
c. ?Whether or not a private water or sewage system is to be installed. 
(2) ?Site development plan. The site development plan shall be drawn to scale and submitted as a part of the permit application form and shall contain the following information: 
a. ?Dimensions and area of the lot; 
b. ?Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and centerline of all abutting streets or highways; 
c. ?Location of any existing or proposed onsite sewage systems or private water supply systems; 
d. ?Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable waterways; 
e. ?Location and landward limit of all wetlands; 
f. ?Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover; 
g. ?Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from floodplain zoning maps used to delineate floodplain areas; 
h. ?Location of existing or future access roads; and 
i. ?Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration. 
(c) ?Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
Sec. 42-1124. - Certificates of compliance. 
(a) ?Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required, no land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced after the effective date of the ordinance or amendment thereof, from which this article is derived shall be occupied, until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, subject to the following provisions: 
(1) ?The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, conform to the provisions of this article. 
(2) ?Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a zoning or conditional use permit. 
(3) ?The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after the completion of the work specified in the zoning or conditional use permit, providing the building or premises or proposed use thereof conforms with all the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?The zoning administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and regulations established therefore, by the common council. 
(c) ?Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, certifying after inspection, the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 42-1125. - Conditional use permits for wetland areas. 
(a) ?Application. Any use listed as a conditional use in this article shall be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the zoning administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the board of appeals, following the procedures in sections 42-1129(c), (d) and (e) for hearing and deciding appeals. 
(b) ?Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the standards applicable to the permitted uses in section 42-1095(3), the board of appeals shall attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this article, as are necessary to further the purposes of this article as listed in section 42-1087. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion potential; increased side yard setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon which to base its determination, the board of appeals may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent information which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purposes of this article. 
Sec. 42-1126. - Fees. 
    The common council establishes fees to be set by the council from time to time for the following permits and administrative procedures under this article: 
(1) ?Zoning permits; 
(2) ?Certificates of compliance; 
(3) ?Public hearings; 
(4) ?Legal notice publications; and 
(5) ?Conditional use permits. 
Sec. 42-1127. - Recording of approvals of permits. 
    Where a zoning permit or conditional use permit is approved, an appropriate record shall be made by the zoning administrator of the land use and structures permitted. 
Sec. 42-1128. - Revocation. 
    Where the conditions of a zoning permit or conditional use permit are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the board of appeals. 
Sec. 42-1129. - Board of appeals. 
(a) ?Appointment. The mayor shall appoint a board of appeals under section 2-436 of this Code and Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), consisting of five members subject to confirmation by the common council. The board of appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of the business of the board of appeals as required by Wis. Stats. § 63.23(7)(e)3. 
(b) ?Powers and duties. The board of appeals shall: 
(1) ?Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(2) ?Hear and decide applications for conditional use permits under this article. 
(3) ?May authorize upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the ordinance as shall not be contrary to the public interest, where owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. In the issuance of a variance, the spirit of the article shall be observed and substantial justice done. No variance from the terms of this article shall be granted which is contrary to the public interest. The granting of a variance shall not have the effect of granting or extending any use of property which is prohibited in that zoning district by this article. 
(c) ?Appeals. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any order, requirement decision, or determination of the zoning administrator or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board of appeals by filing with the official from whom the appeal is taken, and with the board of appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons therefor. The zoning administrator or other official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the board of appeals all the papers constituting the record on which the appeal action was taken. 
(d) ?Public hearings. 
(1) ?Before making a decision on an appeal, the board of appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The board of appeals shall give public notice of the hearing by publishing a class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board of appeals. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney and present testimony. 
(2) ?A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the department at least ten days prior to all public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning. 
(e) ?Decisions. 
(1) ?The final disposition of an appeal, or application for a conditional use permit, to the board of appeals shall be in the form of a written decision, made within a reasonable time after the public hearing, signed by the board of appeals chairperson. Such decision shall state the specific facts which are the basis of the board's determination and shall either affirm, reverse or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or persecution, or grant the application for a conditional use. 
(2) ?A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate district office of the department within ten days after the decision is issued. 
Sec. 42-1130. - Amending shoreland-wetland zoning regulations. 
    The common council may, from time to time, alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this article in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2, and the following: 
(1) ?A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the department within five days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the city planning agency. 
(2) ?All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning regulations shall be referred to the city plan commission, and a public hearing shall be held as required by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2. The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
(3) ?In order to ensure that the shoreland protection objectives in Wis. Stats. § 144.26, will be accomplished by the amendment, the common council may not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following: 
a. ?Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity; 
b. ?Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland; 
c. ?Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters; 
d. ?Shoreline protection against soil erosion; 
e. ?Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds; 
f. ?Wildlife habitat; or 
g. ?Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species. 
(4) ?Where the district office of the department determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (3) of this section, the department shall so notify the city of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment. 
(5) ?The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided with: 
a. ?A copy of the recommendations and report, if any, of the city plan commission on the proposed text or map amendment, within ten days after the submission of those recommendations to the common council; and 
b. ?Written notice of the common council's action on the proposed text or map amendment within ten days after the action is taken. 
(6) ?If the department notifies the city plan commission in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in subsection (3) of this section, that proposed amendment, if approved by the common council, may not become effective until more than 30 days have elapsed since written notice of the common council approval was mailed to the department, as required by subsection (5) of this section. If within the 30-day period, the department notifies the common council that the department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the city under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6), the proposed amendment may not become effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6), is completed or otherwise terminated. 
Sec. 42-1131. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use or accessory use established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived in violation of the provisions of this article, by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation. The zoning administrator shall refer violations to the city plan commission and the city attorney who shall prosecute such violations. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture as specified in section 1-13, together with the taxable costs of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the city, the state or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30(2). 
Secs. 42-1132—42-1150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOODPLAIN ZONING[20] 
Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivision regulations for flood protection, § 42-1044; shoreland-wetland zoning, § 42-1086 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-1151. - Statutory authorization. 
    This article for floodplain protection is adopted pursuant to the authorization contained in Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23 and 87.30. 
Sec. 42-1152. - Finding of fact. 
    The uncontrolled use of the floodplains, rivers or streams of the city would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, and impairs its tax base. 
Sec. 42-1153. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide a uniform basis for the preparation, implementation and administration of sound floodplain regulations for all floodplains within the city to: 
(1) ?Protect life, health and property; 
(2) ?Minimize expenditures of public monies for costly flood control projects; 
(3) ?Minimize rescue and relief efforts, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4) ?Minimize business interruptions which usually result in the loss of local incomes; 
(5) ?Minimize damage to public facilities on the floodplains such as water mains, sewer lines, streets and bridges; 
(6) ?Minimize the occurrence of future floodblight areas on floodplains; and 
(7) ?Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers. 
(8) ?Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners. 
(9) ?Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 1, 2, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1154. - Definitions. 
(a) ?Unless specifically defined in subsection (b) of this section, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have at common law and to give this article its most reasonable application. Words used in the present tense include the future. Words used in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular. The word "may" is permissive. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(b) ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A zones means those areas shown on the city's "Official Floodplain Zoning Map" (see definition) which would be inundated by the base flood or regional flood. These areas may be numbered as A0, A1 to A30, A99, or be unnumbered A zones. The A zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area. 
    Accessory structure or use means a detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal structure or use to which it is related, and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM. 
    Base flood elevation means an elevation equal to that which reflects the height of the base flood. 
    Basement means any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
    Board of appeals/adjustment means the body established under Wis. Stats. ch. 62.23, and designated "board of appeals." 
    Building. See Structure. 
    Bulkhead line means a geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the department pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this article. 
    Campground means any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. 
    Camping unit means any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or other mobile recreational vehicle. 
    Certificate of compliance means a certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct the normal flow of water. 
    Crawlways or crawl space means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities. 
    Deck means an unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation. 
    Department means the state department of natural resources. 
    Development means any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Dryland access means a vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles. 
    Encroachment means any fill, structure, building, accessory use, use or development in the floodway. 
    Equal degree of hydraulic encroachment means the effect of any encroachment into the floodway is computed by assuming an equal degree of hydraulic encroachment on the opposite side of a river or stream for a significant hydraulic reach. This computation ensures that property owners up, down or across the river or stream will have the same rights of hydraulic encroachment. (Also see Hydraulic reach and floodway lines. ) 
    Equal degree of hydrologic encroachment means the effect of any development on the storage capacity of a floodplain area, particularly upstream from urban areas, is analyzed assuming an equal loss of flood storage for all property owners and subdivided lots in the storage area of a floodplain on both sides of a river or stream for a significant hydrologic reach. 
    Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a parcel (or continuous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Expansion to existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring if concrete pads. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. This agency was previously known as the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA). The Division of Insurance and Mitigation is contained within FEMA. (Should it be necessary to contact FEMA for information or assistance, the Region V Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Division of Insurance and Mitigation should be contacted.) 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions: 
    The overflow or rise of inland waters; 
    The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
    The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event. 
    Flood frequency means the probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway, which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood; it is generally associated with standing water rather than rapidly flowing water. 
    Flood hazard boundary map means a map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means a map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood insurance study means a technical engineering examination, evaluation and determination of city flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and regional flood elevations as well as floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered A zones. Flood insurance study maps form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood profile means a graph or a longitudinal profile showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations along a stream or river. 
    Flood protection elevation means an elevation that corresponds to a point two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile associated with the regional flood. (Also see Freeboard. ) 
    Flood storage means those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodplain means the land which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwaters during the regional flood. The floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe. 
    Floodplain island means a natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood. 
    Floodplain management means a policy and procedures to insure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to reduce or eliminate flood damage to unimproved or improved real estate, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge. 
    Floodway encroachment lines means the limits of obstruction to flood flows. These lines are designated on both sides of, and generally parallel to, the channel of a river or stream. They are established by assuming that the area landward (outside of the encroachment lines) will ultimately be developed in such a way that it will not convey flood flows, but the development will not cause an increase to regional flood elevations upstream. It is assumed that any development riverward of these lines will cause an obstruction and will require a detailed analysis (equal degree of hydraulic encroachment) to determine its effect on the regional flood elevations upstream. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors include, but are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development and the sedimentation of a river or stream bed. 
    Habitable structure means any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation. 
    Hearing notice means a publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. ch. 985. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums. 
    High flood damage potential means any danger to human life or public health or the potential for any significant economic loss to a structure or its contents. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is either: 
• Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
• Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
• Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
• Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Hydraulic reach means that portion of the river or stream extending from one significant change in the hydraulic character of the river or stream to the next significant change. These changes are usually associated with breaks in the slope of the water surface profile, and may be caused by bridges, dams, expansions and contraction of the water flow, and changes in stream bed slope or vegetation. 
    Hydrologic reach means a designated length of river, stream or lake where the storage of floodwaters therein has been taken into account to reduce the regulatory flood discharge. Major manmade or natural changes in the river character, limits of political jurisdiction, or a change in the flood-routing technique used to determine the storage and translation of a flood wave through the area of interest may be used to define the end of a hydrologic reach (e.g., a dam may be considered a major manmade change in the river character or a change from channel routing to reservoir routing may be considered a major change in the flood-routing technique). 
    Increase in regional flood height means a calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge. 
    Land use means any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see Development. ) 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For the purpose of this article it does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    Mobile recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles." 
    Municipality or municipal means the City of Mosinee which is enacting, administering and enforcing this article. 
    NAVD or North American Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. 
    New construction means for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    NGVD or National Geodetic Vertical Datum means elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment. 
    Nonconforming structure means an existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this article for the area of floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the flood fringe district is a conforming use. However, if the first floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.) 
    Nonconforming use means an existing lawful use of a structure, building or accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. 
    Obstruction to flow means any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height. 
    Official floodplain zoning map means that map, adopted and made part of this article, which has been approved by the state department of natural resources and FEMA. 
    Open space use means those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures. 
    Ordinary highwater mark means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. 
    Person means an individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency. 
    Private sewage system means a sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure. 
    Public utilities means those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Regional flood means a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Storage capacity of a floodplain means the volume of space above an area of floodplain land that can be occupied by floodwaters of a given stage at a given time, regardless of whether the water is moving. 
    Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, which includes, but is not limited to, such objects as roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts. 
    Subdivision has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12). 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1) ?Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2) ?Any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the state historical society or listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows, and other nonstructural components. 
    Unnecessary hardship means any unique and extreme inability to conform to the provisions of this article due to special conditions affecting a particular property which were not self-created and are not solely related to economic gain or loss. Unnecessary hardship is present only where, in the absence of a variance, no feasible use can be made of the property. 
    Utilities means any public or private water supply, waste collection or disposal system including, but not limited to, private and public wells and their attendant facilities, septic systems and public sewage collection systems. 
    Variance means an authorization by the board of appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in this article. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this article. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Watershed means the entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water. 
    Water surface profile means a graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas. 
    Well means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 3, 4, 7-12-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-1155. - Areas to be regulated. 
    Areas regulated by this article include all lands, within the corporate limits of the city, that would be inundated by the "regional flood" defined in section 42-1154. 
Sec. 42-1156. - District boundaries. 
(a) ?Official maps. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as floodplains or A zones on the maps listed below and the revisions in the City of Mosinee Floodplain Appendix. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the flood insurance study (FIS) or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFE's) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Mosinee. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers: 55073C0629F, 55073C0633F, 55073C0636F, 55073C0637F, 55073C0639F, 55073C0641F, 55073C0642F and 55073C0645F, all dated July 22, 2010; with corresponding profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) 55073CV000B dated September 28, 2018, Volume number 55073CV000B. 
    Approved by: The DNR and FEMA 
(b) ?Districts. The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this article are divided into three districts: the floodway district (FW), flood fringe district (FF), and general floodplain district (GFP), defined as follows: 
(1) ?The floodway district (FW) consists of the channel of a stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel that are required to carry and discharge the floodwaters or flood flows of any river or stream associated with the regional flood. 
(2) ?The flood fringe district (FF) consists of that portion of the floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway area. 
(3) ?The general floodplain district (GFP) consists of land which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and encompasses both the floodway and flood fringe districts. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 5, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 42-1157. - Locating floodplain boundaries. 
(a) ?Where an apparent discrepancy exists between the location of the outermost boundary of the flood fringe district or general floodplain district shown on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions, the location of the district boundary line shall be initially determined by the zoning administrator using the criteria set forth in subsections (b) or (c) of this section. Where the zoning administrator finds that there is a significant difference between the district boundary shown on the map and the actual field conditions, the map shall be amended using the procedures established in division 2 of this article. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant on the location of the district boundary line shall be settled according to section 42-1183. 
(b) ?Where flood profiles exist, the location of the district boundary line shall be determined by the zoning administrator using both the scale appearing on the map and the elevations shown on the water surface profile of the regional flood. Where a discrepancy exists between the boundary line location shown on the map and the location indicated by the regional flood elevations and actual field conditions, the regional flood elevations shall govern. A map amendment is required where there is a significant discrepancy between the boundary line shown on the map and the location indicated by the regional flood elevations. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a land use permit on the basis of a district boundary derived from the elevations shown on the water surface profile of the regional flood, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for initiating any map amendments required under this section within a reasonable period of time. 
(c) ?Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the district boundary line shall be determined by the zoning administrator using the scale appearing on the map, visual onsite inspection and any available information provided by the department. Where there is a significant difference between the district boundary line shown on the map and actual field conditions, the map shall be amended. Where a map amendment has been approved by both the common council and the department, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to grant or deny a land use permit. 
Sec. 42-1158. - Removal of lands from floodplain. 
    Compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be grounds for removing lands from the floodplain district, unless they are removed by filling to a height of at least two feet above the regional flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain district, and the map is amended pursuant to division 2 of this article. To remove the land from flood insurance requirements, FEMA must first revise the flood insurance rate map. 
Sec. 42-1159. - Compliance with article. 
    The use or development of any land or water, a change in the use of any land or water, and the use, change of use, construction, reconstruction, remodeling or expansion of any structure within the areas to be regulated by this article shall be in compliance with the terms of this article, and other applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
Sec. 42-1160. - Abrogation and greater restrictions; interpretation of chapter. 
(a) ?Greater restrictions. This article supersedes provisions of any zoning ordinance relating to floodplains. However, any underlying zoning shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive. 
(b) ?Abrogation. It is not otherwise intended by this article to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions; however, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(c) ?Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by statute. Where a provision of this article is required by a standard in Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 116, and where the meaning of the article provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 116 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article. 
Sec. 42-1161. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection intended to be provided by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside of the delineated floodplain or permitted land uses within the floodplain will be totally free from flooding and associated flood damages, nor shall this article create a liability on the part of or a cause of action against, the city or any officer or employe thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this article. 
Sec. 42-1162. - General development standards. 
    The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 6, 7-12-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-01, § 6, adopted July 12, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 42-1163. - Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. 
(a) ?Except as allowed in subsection (c) below, no floodplain development shall: 
(1) ?Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional flood height; or 
(2) ?Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost, which equals or exceeds 0.01 foot. 
(b) ?The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or increase regional flood heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of subsection (c) are met. 
(c) ?Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be permitted if amendments are made to this article, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with section 42-1187. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 7, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1164. - Watercourse alterations. 
    No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the department and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
    As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the zoning administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or scientific data in accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to revise the FIRM, risk premium rates and floodplain management regulations as required. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 8, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1165. - Wis. Stats. Chs. 30 and 31, Development. 
    Development which requires a permit from the department, under Wis. Stats. chs. 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, BFE's established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to section 42-1187. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 9, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1166. - Public or private campgrounds. 
    Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions: 
(1) ?The campground is approved by the department of health services. 
(2) ?A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator. 
(3) ?The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground is such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants. 
(4) ?There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation. 
(5) ?This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated—by the officials identified in subsection (4)—to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state department of health services and all other applicable regulations. 
(6) ?Only camping units are allowed. 
(7) ?The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours. 
(8) ?All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section. 
(9) ?The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this section. 
(10) ?All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either subdivision II or subdivision III of division 3 of this article for the floodplain district in which the structure is located. 
(11) ?The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued. 
(12) ?All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 10, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1167. - Municipalities and state agencies regulated. 
    Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this article and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13) applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 11, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1168. - Annexed areas. 
    The Marathon County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 116 and the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 12, 7-12-2010) 
Secs. 42-1169—42-1180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Note— This division provides for the appointment of appropriate boards and staff, and the development of necessary policies and procedures, to administer this article. Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Wis. Stats. §§ 59.97, 59.971 or 62.23(7), these officials shall also administer this article. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 42-1181. - Zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this article and shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1) ?Advise applicants of the article provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications. 
(2) ?Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this article and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate. 
(3) ?Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred. 
(4) ?Keep records of all official actions such as: 
a. ?All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved. 
b. ?Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations for floodplain development. 
c. ?Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments. 
d. ?All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures. 
(5) ?Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional office: 
a. ?Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments. 
b. ?Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information required by the department including an annual summary of the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken. 
c. ?Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments. 
(6) ?Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this article to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the department regional office. 
(7) ?Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA regional office. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 13, 7-12-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-01, § 13, adopted July 12, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. 
Cross reference— Officers and employes, § 2-176 et seq. 
Sec. 42-1182. - Administrative procedures. 
(a) ?Land use permit . A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development or any structural repair or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include: 
(1) ?General information. 
a. ?Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor. 
b. ?Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification. 
(2) ?Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain: 
a. ?Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot. 
b. ?Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways. 
c. ?Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street center lines. 
d. ?Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems. 
e. ?Location and elevation of existing or future access roads. 
f. ?Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps. 
g. ?The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study—either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD). 
h. ?Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of subdivision II or subdivision III of division 3 of this article are met. 
i. ?Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to section 42-1163. This may include any of the information noted in section 42-1185. 
(3) ?Data requirements to analyze developments: 
a. ?The applicant shall provide all survey data and computations required to show the effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain storage, for all subdivision proposals, as "subdivision" is defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 236, and other proposed developments exceeding five acres in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000.00. The applicant shall provide: 
(1) ?An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional flood profile, velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity. 
(2) ?A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands outside the floodplain. 
(3) ?A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be minimized. The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural development, landscaping, access and road development, utilities, and other pertinent items, but need not include land costs. 
(4) ?Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this article shall expire 365 days after issuance. 
(b) ?Certificate of compliance. No vacant or developed land shall be occupied in the floodplain, and no building or structure erected, altered or moved into the floodplain shall be occupied or used after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, until the applicant obtains a certificate of compliance from the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall issue a certificate only after the applicant has submitted a certification signed by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor that the fill and lowest/basement floor elevations were placed in compliance with the development standards contained in this article. If floodproofing is required pursuant to section 42-1186, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate only after the applicant has submitted a certification signed by a registered professional engineer or architect that the structure is adequately constructed to comply with the provisions of section 42-1186. 
(c) ?Other permits. It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other necessary permits from all appropriate federal, state and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 14, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1183. - Zoning agency. 
(a) ?A zoning agency or committee shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1) ?Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; 
(2) ?Review and act upon all proposed amendments to the floodplain zoning ordinance map and text; and 
(3) ?Maintain a complete public record of all its proceedings. 
    (b) This zoning agency shall not: 
(1) ?Grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the board of adjustment/appeals; or 
(2) ?Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing body. 
(c) ?For purposes of this article, the city plan commission shall serve as the zoning agency/committee. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 15, 16, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1184. - Board of appeals. 
(a) ?Statutory authorization. The appropriate board created under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), for cities is authorized to act as board of appeals for the purposes of this article. The powers of the board of appeals shall be pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7). 
(b) ?Appeals to the board. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the zoning administrator and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying whether an interpretation of the ordinance text or map or a variance is sought and the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator or other officer shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealing from was taken. 
(c) ?Hearing appeals . 
(1) ?Notice . The board shall: 
a. ?Fix a reasonable time for the hearing. 
b. ?Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing. 
c. ?Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the department regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
(2) ?Hearing . Any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall: 
a. ?Resolve boundary disputes according to section 42-1184(d). 
b. ?Decide variance applications according to section 42-1184(e). 
c. ?Decide appeals of permit denials according to section 42-1184(g). 
(3) ?Decision . The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall: 
a. ?Be made within a reasonable time. 
b. ?Be sent to the department regional office within ten days of the decision. 
c. ?Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the board. 
d. ?State the specific facts which are the basis for the board's decision. 
e. ?Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application. 
f. ?Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings. 
(d) ?Boundary or mapping disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the zoning board of appeals in hearing disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map: 
(1) ?Where a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, pursuant to section 42-1156, the regional flood elevations or profiles for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary. If no regional flood elevations or profiles are available to the board, other available evidence may be examined. 
(2) ?In all cases, the person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the board of appeals. Where it is determined that the district boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should either inform the plan commission to proceed to petition the common council or inform the person contesting the location of the boundary to petition the common council, for a map amendment pursuant to section 42-1188. 
(e) ?Variance. 
(1) ?The board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this article if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that: 
a. ?Literal enforcement of the ordinance provisions will cause unnecessary hardship. 
b. ?The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended. 
c. ?The variance is not contrary to the public interest. 
d. ?The variance is consistent with the purpose of this article in section 42-1153. 
(2) ?In addition to the criteria in subsection (e)(1), to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met: 
a. ?The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation. 
b. ?Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE. 
c. ?Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. 
(3) ?A variance shall not: 
a. ?Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district. 
b. ?Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss. 
c. ?Be granted for a hardship which is self-created. 
d. ?Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area. 
e. ?Allow actions without the amendments to this ordinance or map(s) required in section 42-1187 of this article. 
f. ?Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure. 
(f) ?Notice. When a variance is granted, the applicant shall be notified in writing, by the chairman or secretary of the board of appeals, that increased flood insurance premiums may result. A copy of this notification shall be maintained with the variance appeal record. 
(g) ?Review of appeals of permit denials. 
(1) ?The zoning agency or board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include: 
a. ?Permit application data listed in section 42-1182(a). 
b. ?Floodway/flood fringe determination data in section 42-1284. 
c. ?Data listed in section 42-1185(b)(2) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator. 
d. ?Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the board with the appeal. 
(2) ?For appeals of all denied permits the board shall: 
a. ?Follow the procedures of this section. 
b. ?Consider zoning agency recommendations. 
c. ?Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal. 
(3) ?For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the board shall: 
a. ?Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners. 
b. ?Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot provided no other reasons for denial exist. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 17—19, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1185. - Procedures for determining floodway and flood fringe limits. 
(a) ?Applicability. When any development is proposed within the general floodplain district, a determination shall be made to establish the boundaries of the floodway, to allow the zoning administrator to determine whether floodway or flood fringe uses apply, and, where required, to determine the regional flood elevation. 
(b) ?Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1) ?Require the applicant to submit, at the time of the application, two copies of an aerial photograph, or a plan which accurately locates the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, channel of stream, existing floodplain developments, together with all pertinent information such as the nature of the proposal, legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures. 
(2) ?Require the applicant to furnish any of the following additional information as is deemed necessary by the state department of natural resources for evaluation of the effects of the proposal upon flood flows, to determine the boundaries of the floodway and, where applicable, the regional flood elevation. 
a. ?A typical valley cross section showing the channel of the stream, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the cross sectional area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all historic high-water information. 
b. ?Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply and sanitary facilities; and soil types and other pertinent information. 
c. ?Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream. 
d. ?Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(3) ?Transmit one copy of the information described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section to the state department of natural resources, along with a written request to have that agency provide technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of section 42-1162(d) apply, the applicant shall provide all required information and computations. 
Sec. 42-1186. - Floodproofing. 
(a) ?Where floodproofing measures are required, they shall be designed to withstand the flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces, and other factors associated with the regional flood, to ensure protection to the flood protection elevation. In addition, all floodproofing measures shall provide anchorage of structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement, and shall ensure that the structural walls and floors are watertight (i.e., completely dry without human intervention during flooding) to the flood protection elevation. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are adequately designed to protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation for the particular area. 
(b) ?Floodproofing measures could include: 
(1) ?Reinforcement of walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris. 
(2) ?Addition of mass or weight to structures to prevent flotation. 
(3) ?Placement of essential utilities above the flood protection elevation. 
(4) ?Surface drainage systems, including pumping facilities, to relieve external foundation wall and basement floor pressures. 
(5) ?Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters. 
(6) ?Cutoff valves on sewer lines or the elimination of gravity flow basement drains. 
Sec. 42-1187. - Amendments—Generally. 
    The common council may from time to time, alter, supplement or change the boundaries of the floodplain zoning districts and the regulations contained in this article in the manner provided by law. Official amendments are required for any changes in the official floodway lines, water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps or text of this article. Actions which require an amendment include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Any change in the official floodway lines or in the boundary of the general floodplain area; 
(2) ?Correction of significant discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain zoning maps; 
(3) ?Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain; 
(4) ?Any fill or encroachment into the floodplain that will cause a change, equal to or greater than 0.1 foot (3 cm), in the height of the regional flood; and 
(5) ?Any upgrading of floodplain zoning ordinances required by Wis. Adm. Code NR § 116.05(4), or otherwise required by law. 
(6) ?All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood fringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 20, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1188. - Same—Procedures. 
(a) ?Amendments to this article may be made upon petition of any interested party in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. Such petitions shall include any necessary data required by sections 42-1162(d) and 42-1185(b). 
(b) ?Copies of any amendment proposed to the common council shall be referred to the zoning agency, described in section 42-1183, for a public hearing and recommendation to the common council. Copies of the proposed amendment and notice of the public hearing shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the state department of natural resources. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(c) ?No amendment to the maps or text of this article shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the state department of natural resources. 
(d) ?All persons petitioning for a map amendment which involves an increase in the height of the regional flood of 0.1 foot (3 cm) or more shall obtain flooding easements, or other appropriate legal arrangements, from all affected local units of government and property owners before the city may approve an amendment which would result in such an increase to the regional flood elevation. 
(e) ?When considering amendments to the official floodplain zoning map, in areas where no water surface profiles exist, the zoning agency shall consider data submitted by the department, the zoning administrator's visual onsite inspections and other available information. 
Sec. 42-1189. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any violations of the provisions of this article by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building contractors) or his or their agent, shall be unlawful and shall be forwarded to the city attorney, who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the city a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 and not more than $50.00, together with taxable costs of such action. Each day during which such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this article is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the city, the state or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30. 
Sec. 42-1190. - Public information. 
(a) ?Structure marking . The applicant shall place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood. 
(b) ?Technical data. All maps, engineering and regulations shall be available and widely distributed. 
(c) ?Real estate transfers . All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 21, 7-12-2010) 
Secs. 42-1191—42-1210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 42-1211—42-1230. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Floodway District (FW) 

Sec. 42-1231. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this subdivision shall apply to all areas within the floodway district, as shown on the official floodplain zoning maps, and to the floodway portion of the general floodplain district, as determined pursuant to section 42-1185. 
Sec. 42-1232. - Description of FW district. 
    The floodway district shall include mapped floodway areas so designated on the official floodplain zoning map showing the regional flood limits, which are based on the flood hazard boundary maps or flood insurance study maps prepared by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. All such maps shall be approved by the state department of natural resources and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
Sec. 42-1233. - Permitted uses. 
(a) ?The following open space uses are permitted within the floodway district, and in the floodway portion of the general floodplain district, provided that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance, and provided further that they meet all of the standards contained in section 42-1234, and a land use permit has been issued by the zoning administrator under section 42-1182(a). 
(1) ?Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 
(2) ?Nonstructural, industrial, commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips. 
(3) ?Private and public recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails. 
(4) ?Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or essential for historical areas, providing they are not in conflict with the provisions in section 42-1234. 
(5) ?Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials. 
(6) ?Docks, piers or wharves, including docks, piers or wharves used as part of a marina, and other water-related uses, such as dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines and pipelines. 
(7) ?Public utilities, streets and bridges. 
(b) ?All uses not listed as permitted uses in subsection (a) of this section are prohibited within the floodway district and in the floodway portion of the general floodplain district. 
Sec. 42-1234. - Standards for developments in floodway areas. 
(a) ?General requirements. Any development in floodway areas shall: 
(1) ?Meet all of the provisions of section 42-1162; 
(2) ?Not obstruct flood flows; and 
(3) ?Have a low flood damage potential. 
(b) ?Structures. Only structures which are accessory to permitted open space uses, or are essential for historical areas, may be allowed by permit, providing the structures meet all of the following criteria: 
(1) ?Are not designed for human habitation; 
(2) ?Are to be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters. Whenever possible, structures will be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flow of floodwaters, and will be placed with their longitudinal axes approximately on the same line as those of adjoining structures; 
(3) ?Are firmly anchored to prevent them from floating away and restricting bridge openings or other restricted sections of the stream or river; and 
(4) ?Have all service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment at or above the flood protection elevation for the particular area. 
(5) ?It must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood. 
(c) ?Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges are permitted, provided that: 
(1) ?Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; 
(2) ?Construction shall not cause any increase of 0.1 foot or greater in the height of the regional flood, except that reasonable increases up to 1.0 foot may be approved if the amendment procedures and all conditions of section 42-1188 are met; and 
(3) ?The city amends its water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and floodplain zoning ordinances, as needed, to reflect any changes resulting from such construction. 
(d) ?Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be permitted, provided that: 
(1) ?The provisions of section 42-1162(a) are met; 
(2) ?Fill or deposition of materials does not encroach on the channel area between the ordinary high-water mark on each bank of the stream unless a permit has been granted by the state department of natural resources pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 30, and a permit pursuant to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act., Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this section are met; and 
(3) ?The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling and/or bulkheading sufficient to prevent erosion and leachate; and 
(4) ?Such fills are not associated with private or public solid waste disposal. 
(e) ?Storage of hazardous materials. Storage of any materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life is prohibited. 
(f) ?Inharmonious uses. Uses which are not in harmony with, or which may be detrimental to, the uses permitted in the adjoining districts are prohibited. 
(g) ?Sewage disposal systems . Any private or public sewage systems are prohibited, with the exception of portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code ch. COMM 83. 
(h) ?Wells. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water are prohibited, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(i) ?Solid waste disposal sites. Solid waste disposal sites, whether public or private, are prohibited. 
(j) ?Wastewater treatment ponds or facilities. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities are prohibited, except those permitted under Wis. Adm. Code § NR 110.15(3)(b). 
(k) ?Sanitary sewer or water supply lines. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines are prohibited, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 22—26, 7-12-2010) 
Secs. 42-1235—42-1255. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Flood Fringe District (FF) 

Sec. 42-1256. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all areas within the flood fringe district, as shown on the official floodplain zoning maps, and to those portions of the general floodplain district that are determined to be in the flood fringe area pursuant to section 42-1185. 
Sec. 42-1257. - Description of FF district. 
    The regional flood fringe district shall include the A zones so designated on the official floodplain zoning map showing the regional flood limits, which are based on the flood hazard boundary maps prepared by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. All such maps shall be approved by the state department of natural resources and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
Sec. 42-1258. - Permitted uses. 
    Any structures, land use or development, including accessory structures and uses, are allowed within the flood fringe district and flood fringe portions of the general floodplain district, provided that the standards contained in section 42-1259 are met, that the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or any other local, state or federal regulation and that all permits or certificates required have been issued by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 42-1259. - Standards for development in flood fringe areas. 
(a) ?Standards . All the provisions of section 42-1163 shall apply hereto. 
(b) ?Residential uses . Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved into the flood fringe area, shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
(1) ?The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The department may authorize other floodproofing measures if the elevations of existing streets or sewer lines makes compliance with the fill standards impractical. 
(2) ?The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation. 
(3) ?Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subsection (b)(4). 
(4) ?In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with subsection (b)(3) impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where access roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, if: 
a. ?The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or 
b. ?The municipality has a natural disaster plan approved by Wisconsin Emergency Management and the Department. 
(c) ?Accessory structures of uses. 
(1) ?Except as provided in subsection (c)(2), an accessory structure which is not connected to a principal structure may be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation. 
(2) ?An accessory structure which is not connected to the principal structure and which is less than 600 square feet in size and valued at less than $10,000.00 may be constructed with its lowest floor no more than two feet below the regional flood elevation if it is subject to flood velocities of no more than two feet per second and it meets all of the provisions of section 42-1234 and subsection (f) below. 
(d) ?Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the flood fringe area shall meet the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. Subject to the requirements of subsection (f) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(e) ?Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the flood fringe area shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other flood proofing measures in section 42-1186. Subject to the requirements of subsection (f) of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property. 
(f) ?Storage of materials . Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with section 42-1186. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding. 
(g) ?Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and 
(1) ?When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in compliance with section 42-1186 to the flood protection elevation; 
(2) ?Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation. 
(h) ?Sewage systems . All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 42-1186, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code ch. COMM 83. 
(i) ?Wells . All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to Section 42-1186, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Adm. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(j) ?Solid waste disposal sites . Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in flood fringe areas. 
(k) ?Deposition of materials . Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this article. 
(l) ?Manufactured homes . 
(1) ?Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities. 
(2) ?In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall: 
a. ?Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and 
b. ?Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood. 
(3) ?Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the flood fringe in this section. 
(m) ?Mobile recreational vehicles . All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in subsections (l)(2) and (3). A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 27, 7-12-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-01, § 27, adopted July 12, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. 
Secs. 42-1260—42-1280. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - General Floodplain District (GFP) 

Sec. 42-1281. - Applicability. 
    The provisions for this GFP district shall apply to all floodplains in the city for which regional flood data are not available, or where regional flood data is available but floodways have not been delineated. As adequate regional flood data becomes available and floodways are delineated for portions of this district, such portions shall be placed in the flood fringe or floodway district, as appropriate. 
Sec. 42-1282. - Permitted uses. 
    Those uses permitted in sections 42-1233 and 42-1258 are allowed within the general floodplain district, provided that the procedures of section 42-1283 are met, and all permits or certificates required have been issued by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 42-1283. - Standards for development in the general floodplain district. 
    The general floodplain district encompasses both floodway and flood fringe areas. Therefore, a determination shall be made pursuant to section 42-1185, to determine whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or flood fringe area. If it is determined that a proposed use is located within a floodway, the provisions of sections 42-1233 and 42-1234 shall apply. If it is determined that the proposed use is located within the flood fringe, the provisions of sections 42-1258 and 42-1259 shall apply. 
Sec. 42-1284. - Determining floodway and flood fringe limits. 
    Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1) ?Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and flood proofing measures. 
(2) ?Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries: 
a. ?A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all historic high water information. 
b. ?Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information. 
c. ?Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream. 
d. ?Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
(3) ?Transmit one copy of the information described in subsections (2)a. and (2)b. to the Department Regional office along with a written request for technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of section 41-1182(a)(3) apply, the applicant shall provide all required information and computations to delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood elevations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 28, 7-12-2010) 
Secs. 42-1285—42-1300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 

Sec. 42-1301. - General standards. 
    Insofar as the standards in this division are not inconsistent with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 59.97(10) and 62.23(7)(h), they shall apply to all nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses. These regulations apply to the modification of, or addition to, any structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any amendment thereto. The existing lawful use of a structure or building or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use shall be permitted unless they are made in conformity with the provisions of this division. For the purposes of this division the words "modification" and "addition" shall include, but not be limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions; such ordinary maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components; 
(2) ?If a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall be made to conform to the applicable requirements of this article; 
(3) ?As requests are received for modifications or additions to nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures in the floodway, a record shall be kept which lists the nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, and the cost of those additions or modifications which have been permitted; and 
(4) ?No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this article. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with section 42-1259(b). The costs of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50 percent provisions of this paragraph. 
(5) ?a. ?Except as provided in this section, if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current article requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's present equalized assessed value. 
b. ?For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building may be permitted in order to restore it after the nonflood disaster, provided that the nonconforming building will meet all of the minimum requirements under applicable FEMA regulations (44 CFR Part 60), or the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(6) ?A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with section 42-1234, flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with section 42-1186 are used. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 29—31, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1302. - Floodway areas. 
(a) ?No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance and meets all of the following criteria: 
(1) ?The modification or addition to the existing structure will not increase the amount of obstruction to flood flows as provided in section 42-1162; 
(2) ?Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to section 42-1186 by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; and 
(3) ?If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply: 
a. ?The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade. 
b. ?The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials. 
c. ?Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation. 
d. ?The use must be limited to parking or limited storage. 
(b) ?No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code ch. COMM 83. 
(c) ?No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 32—34, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 42-1303. - Flood fringe areas. 
(a) ?No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the standards for that particular use in section 42-1259, except where subsection (b) is applicable. 
(b) ?Where compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the board of appeals, using the procedures established in section 42-1184, may grant a variance from those provisions of subsection (a) for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if: 
(1) ?No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures. 
(2) ?Human lives are not endangered. 
(3) ?Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed. 
(4) ?Flood depths will not exceed two feet. 
(5) ?Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second. 
(6) ?The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in section 42-1259(f). 
(c) ?If neither the provisions of subsections (a) or (b) above can be met, one addition to an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in the flood fringe, if the addition: 
(1) ?Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or variance. 
(2) ?Does not exceed 60 square feet in area. 
(3) ?In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the building, does not equal or exceed 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the building. 
(d) ?All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code ch. COMM 83. 
(e) ?All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of the ordinance from which this section was derived and Wis. Adm. Code chs. NR 811 and NR 812. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 35, 7-12-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-01, § 35, adopted July 12, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. 
Secs. 42-1304—42-1335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUILDING CODE AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[22] 
Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, maintenance, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures, except that certain amendments were added as part of this codification saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(10); dwelling building code and other building code ordinances, except that certain amendments were added as part of this codification, saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(11). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-1336—42-1350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 42-1351. - Purpose. 
    This article provides certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses of materials in buildings and/or structures erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, converted to other uses or demolished after the effective date of the ordinance or amendment thereof from which this article is derived, and regulates the equipment, maintenance, use and occupancy of all such buildings and/or structures. Its purpose is to protect and foster the health, safety and well-being of persons occupying or using such buildings and the general public. 
Sec. 42-1352. - General permit required. 
    No building, plumbing or electrical work, building moving or razing shall be performed in the city unless a permit therefor is obtained as required in the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 42-1353. - Payment of fees. 
    All fees shall be paid to the administrator as agent for the building inspector, and no permit shall be issued until fees as prescribed by this article have been paid. 
Sec. 42-1354. - Permit lapses. 
    A building, electrical or plumbing permit shall lapse and be void unless operations under the permit are commenced within six months from the date of issuance thereof. Permits shall also lapse if work is discontinued for a period of six months or more, and a new permit will have to be obtained before work can be started again. 
Sec. 42-1355. - Revocation. 
    If the building inspector shall find at any time that the above-mentioned ordinances, laws, orders, plans and specifications are not being complied with, and that the holder of the permit refuses to conform after written warning or instruction has been issued to him, he shall revoke the building, electrical or plumbing permit by written notice posted at the site of the work. When any such permit is revoked, it shall be unlawful to do any further work thereunder until the permit is reissued, excepting such work as the building inspector may order to be done as a condition precedent to the issuance of the permit, or as he may require for the preservation of human life and safety or property. 
Sec. 42-1356. - Report of violations. 
    It shall be the duty of all police officers as well as other city officials to report at once to the building inspector any building, electrical or plumbing work or sign erection which is being carried on without a permit as required by this article. 
Sec. 42-1357. - Records. 
    The building inspector shall keep a record of all permits, fees and inspections and shall make an annual report therein to the common council. 
Sec. 42-1358. - Survey. 
    The building inspector may require the builder to survey the lot being built on if corner markers are not in and lot lines cannot be accurately established without a survey. Certified surveys are required in the case of a land split. 
Sec. 42-1359. - Building permits and inspection. 
(a) ?Permit required. No building of any part thereof shall after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived be erected within the city or ground broken for the same, except as provided in this section, until a permit therefor shall first have been obtained from the building inspector by the owner, or his authorized agent. The term "building" as used in this section shall include any building or structure, and any enlargement, alteration, heating or ventilating installation, sign, building moving, building razing or anything affecting the fire hazards or safety of any building or structure. 
(b) ?Application. Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the building inspector and shall state the name and address of the owner of the land and also the owner of the building if different, the legal description of the land upon which the building is to be located, the name and address of the designer, the use to which such building is to be put and such other information as the building inspector may require. 
(c) ?Dedicated street required. No building permit for a residential structure shall be issued unless the property on which the building is proposed to be built abuts a street that has been dedicated for street purposes. 
(d) ?Utilities required. 
(1) ?Residential buildings. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any residential building until sewer, water, grading and graveling are installed in the streets necessary to service the property for which the permit is required, and a receipt for payment of electrical hookup is presented to the building inspector. 
(2) ?Nonresidential building. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building other than residential until contracts have been let for the installation of sewer, water, grading and graveling in the streets necessary to service the property for which the permit is requested. 
(e) ?Plans. With such application there shall be submitted two complete sets of plans and specifications, including a plot plan showing the location of the proposed building with respect to adjoining roads, highways, streets, alleys, lot lines and buildings. Plans for buildings involving the state building code shall bear the stamp of approval of the state department of industry, labor and human relations. One plan shall be submitted which shall remain on file in the office of the building inspector. All plans and specifications shall be signed by the designer. Plans for all new one-family and two-family dwellings shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Adm. Code § 20.09(4). 
(f) ?Waiver of plans. If the building inspector finds that the character of the work is sufficiently described in the application, he may waive the filing of plans for alterations, repairs or moving, provided the cost of such work does not exceed $2,000.00. 
(g) ?Issuance of permit. If the city building inspector finds that the proposed building or repair or addition complies with all city zoning ordinances and setback requirements, the inspector shall officially approve the application and a building permit shall be subsequently issued to the applicant. The issued building permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the building site. A copy of any issued building permit shall be kept on file with the administrator. The building permit issued by the city does not provide for any inspections by a certified inspector under the one- and two-family building dwelling code. 
(h) ?Minor repairs. The building inspector may authorize minor repairs or alterations valued at less than $500.00, which do not change the occupancy, area structural strength, fire protection, exits, light or ventilation of the building without issuing a building permit. 
(i) ?Grades. Residential grade for homes shall be a minimum of +4 percent grade from the back of sidewalk grade to the top of the garage floor. Any variance must be approved by the building committee or its designee. The grade for all residential construction shall be measured from the back of the sidewalk grade to the center of the house foundation and shall not exceed 26 inches (29 inches from the top of curb). Grades for raised ranch style homes shall be measured using the same parameters except it shall be measured at the landing of the home. Grades shall be established by the zoning administrator for all residential and commercial construction in the city. 
(j) ?Moving buildings. No permit shall be issued to move a building within or into the city until both of the following has occurred: 
(1) ?The building inspector has made an investigation of such building at the location from which it is to be moved, and is satisfied from such investigation that said building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of the building code in all respects. Should any repairs, improvements or remodeling be contemplated or required with respect to said building, the same shall be made insofar as possible before said building is taken from the premises from which it is to be moved. A complete plan for all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with reference to such building shall be submitted to the building inspector, and he shall make a finding of fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity with the requirements of the building code, and that when same are completed, the building as such will so comply with said building code. In the event that a building is moved outside the city boundaries, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed alterations to such building, may not be required; and 
(2) ?The Mosinee City Council Building Committee, after an examination of the application for the moving permit which shall include exterior elevations of the building and accurate photographs of all side and views of the same, and in the event the exterior of the building is to be altered in any way, plans and specifications of such proposed alterations, and after a view of the building as it is proposed to be, the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the building to be moved or moved and altered must not be so at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functional plant of the building's immediate neighborhood or the character of the applicable district established by the zoning ordinances of the city, or any ordinance amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, so as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of said neighborhood within said applicable district. In case the owner proposes to alter the exterior of said building after moving the same, the owner shall submit with the owner's application papers, complete plans and specifications of the proposed alterations. 
(Ord. No. 91-12, 7-18-1991; Ord. No. 2001-02, § 1, 4-9-2001) 
Sec. 42-1360. - State uniform dwelling code adopted. 
(a) ?State code adopted. The administrative code provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to one-family and two-family dwellings in Wis. Adm. Code ILHR chs. 20—25 are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by an administrative code provision incorporated in this section by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the administrative code provisions incorporated in this section are intended to be made part of this section to secure uniform statewide regulation of one-family and two-family dwellings in the city. A copy of these administrative code provisions and any future amendments shall be kept on file in the building inspector's office. 
(b) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Addition means new construction performed on a dwelling which increases the outside dimensions of the dwelling. 
    Alteration means a substantial change or modification other than an addition or minor repair to a dwelling or to systems involved within a dwelling. 
    Department means the Department of Commerce. 
    Dwelling as defined in Wis. Adm. Code Comm. § 20.07(25) which is commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or an existing structure, or that part of an existing structure, which is used or intended to be used as a one-family or two-family dwelling. 
    Minor repair means repair performed for maintenance or replacement purposes on any existing one-family or two-family dwelling which does not affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection or exterior aesthetic appearance, and which does not increase a given occupancy and use. No building permit is required for work to be performed which is deemed minor repair. 
    One- or two-family dwelling means a building structure which contains one or more separate households intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by an individual or by two or more individuals maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, firm or corporation. 
    Uniform dwelling code means those administrative code provisions, and any future amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, contained in following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code: 
Wis. Adm. Code ch. ILHR 20, Administration and Enforcement. 
Wis. Adm. Code ch. ILHR 21, Construction Standards. 
Wis. Adm. Code ch. ILHR 22, Energy Conservation Standards. 
Wis. Adm. Code ch. ILHR 23, Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Standards. 
Wis. Adm. Code ch. ILHR 24, Electrical Standards. 
Wis. Adm. Code ch. ILHR 25, Plumbing and Potable Water Standards. 
Sec. 42-1361. - Enforcement. 
(a) ?Certified building inspector. There is created the office of building inspector. The building inspector shall be certified for inspection purposes by the department in each of the categories specified under Wis. Adm. Code ILHR § 26.06, and by the department of health and social services in the category of plumbing. 
(b) ?Appointment. The building inspector shall be appointed at the first regular meeting of the council in May of odd-numbered years by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. He shall have a two-year term of office. The building inspector shall be certified under the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code in construction, electrical, plumbing, energy, heating, ventilation and air conditioning and have certification under the Wisconsin Commercial Building Code. 
(c) ?Duties. The building inspector shall have the following duties: 
(1) ?Review plans and applications for building permits. 
(2) ?Issue permits for new construction, remodeling and demolition of buildings. 
(3) ?Inspect foundations, frames, roofs, etc., to ensure that they meet the requirements of the building code. 
(4) ?Inspect existing units of dwelling and commercial buildings for zoning, occupancy, housing, plumbing, electrical, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and energy code compliance. 
(5) ?Recommend and advise the public and contractors on code compliance. 
(6) ?Issue orders to correct discrepancies and code violations. 
(7) ?Consult with builders, owners and members of the public pertaining to the city codes and ordinances. 
(8) ?Report on the status of code enforcement activity to the council. 
(9) ?Perform other duties as may be directed by the common council. 
(d) ?Inspection powers. The building inspector or an authorized certified agent may at all reasonable hours enter upon any public or private premises for inspection purposes and may require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating work. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to the building inspector or his agent while in performance of his duties. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-8) 
Sec. 42-1362. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article or of Wis. Adm. Code chs. ILHR §§ 20—25, inclusive, is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected. 
Sec. 42-1363. - Construction standards; codes adopted. 
(a) ?Portions of state building code adopted. Wis. Adm. Code chs. 50—64, inclusive, (state building code) are adopted and made a part of this section with respect to those classes of buildings to which this section specifically applies. Any future amendments, revisions and modifications of chs. 50 to 64 incorporated in this section are intended to be made a part of this section. A copy of said chs. 50 to 64 and amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector. 
(b) ?FHA standards adopted. The following chapters of the Federal Housing Administration "Minimum Property Standards, One- and Two-Family Dwellings," Form 4900.1, Revised 1973, as revised by MPR revisions thereto, are adopted by reference as part of this section with respect to all dwellings or parts thereof constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived in the city: Chapter 4 (Building Design); Chapter 5 (Materials); Chapter 6 (Construction) except Division 615-5 (Plumbing) and Division 616 (Electrical); and the Appendix as applicable to the above chapters. 
(c) ?Conflicts. If, in the opinion of the building inspector and the common council, the provisions of the state building code adopted by subsection (a) of this section shall conflict with the provisions of the Federal Housing Administration standards adopted in subsection (b) of this section in their application to any proposed building or structure, the inspector and/or the city shall apply the most stringent provisions in determining whether or not the proposed building meets the requirements of this section. 
Sec. 42-1364. - New methods and materials. 
(a) ?All materials, methods of construction and devices designed for use in buildings or structures covered by this article and not specifically mentioned in or permitted by this article shall not be so used until approved in writing by the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations for use in buildings or structures covered by the state building code, except sanitary appliances, which shall be approved in accordance with the state plumbing code issued by the state board of health. 
(b) ?Such materials, methods of construction and devices, when approved, must be installed or used in strict compliance with the manufacturer's specifications and any rules or conditions of use established by the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations. The data, tests and other evidence necessary to prove the merits of such material, method of construction or device shall be determined by the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations. 
Sec. 42-1365. - Unsafe buildings. 
    Whenever the building inspector and/or common council find any building or part thereof within the city to be in their judgment so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human occupancy or use, and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the building or part, they shall order the owner to raze and remove such building or part thereof, or if it can be made safe by repairs to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to raze and remove at the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.05(5). 
Sec. 42-1366. - Electrical code. 
(a) ?State code applies. All electrical work, including the placing of wires and other equipment, shall conform to the Wisconsin Adm. Electrical Code ILHR vol. 2, ch. 16 and amendments and revisions adopted to date, which is made by reference a part of this section, except that the remaining provisions of this section shall apply. 
(b) ?Permit. No electric wiring or other equipment shall be installed or altered without first securing a permit therefor from the building inspector, except that repairs or replacements of broken or defective sockets, switches or base receptacles may be made without a permit. The application for such permit shall be on a form furnished by the building inspector and shall state clearly the work planned, alterations to be made, and equipment and materials to be used, and all later deviations from such plan must be submitted to and approved by the building inspector. 
(c) ?Inspection of work. After roughing in the wiring of any building and before any such work is covered up, or upon completion of any outside wiring construction work, it shall be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the building inspector, who shall at once inspect or cause to be inspected the same. If he finds that the work conforms to the state electrical code, he shall issue a certificate of compliance, which shall contain the date and an outline of the result of such inspection, a duplicate of which shall be filed by location in the office of the building inspector. It shall be unlawful to use any such electrical equipment until such certificate has been issued. 
(d) ?License required. All electrical work to be done in the city shall be done only by an electrician licensed by the city except that a property owner may make repairs or installations on his own property, provided that a permit is issued and the work is done in compliance with this article. The fee for such city electrical license shall be set by the council from time to time, payable to the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 90-4, 4-23-1990) 
Sec. 42-1367. - Plumbing code. 
(a) ?State code applies. The construction, reconstruction, installation and alteration of all plumbing, drainage and plumbing ventilation shall conform to the Wis. Adm. Code Comm. chs. 81—87 inclusive (state plumbing code), which is adopted by reference as a part of this section. 
(b) ?Permit required. No plumbing or drainage of any kind shall be installed or altered, except that leakage or stoppage repairs may be made without first securing a permit therefor from the building inspector. The application for such permit shall be on a form furnished by the building inspector and shall state clearly the work planned, alterations to be made and equipment and materials to be used. All later deviations from such plan must be submitted to and approved by the building inspector. 
(c) ?Licensed plumber required. All plumbing work shall be done only by a plumber licensed by the state, except that a property owner may make repairs or installations in a single-family building owned and occupied by him as his home provided that a permit is issued and the work is done in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d) ?Inspection of work. Upon completion of the plumbing work on any premises, the person doing such work shall notify the building inspector before such work is covered up, and the building inspector shall at once inspect or cause to be inspected the work. If he finds that the work conforms to the state plumbing code, he shall issue a certificate of compliance, which shall contain the date and an outline of the result of such inspection, a duplicate of which shall be filed by location in the office of the building inspector. No person shall use or permit to be used any plumbing or drainage until it has been inspected and approved by the building inspector. 
Sec. 42-1368. - Flammable liquids and flammable gases. 
(a) ?Flammable liquids code. The Wis. Adm. Code Comm. ch. 10, (flammable liquids code), is adopted by reference as a part of this section, and it shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce the provisions thereof. 
(b) ?Storage of flammable liquids. No flammable liquids, except as used for heating purposes, shall be kept in the residential district in a container larger than ten gallons. 
(c) ?National Fuel Gas Code applies. 
(1) ?The American National Standard Fuel Gas Code ANSI Z223.1 (1980), also referred to as National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet NFPA No. 54 (1980) together with any changes thereto which from time to time may be published, is adopted by reference as part of this section. 
(2) ?Installation, operation and maintenance of all gas piping and gas utilization equipment and accessories for use with fuel gases such as natural gas, manufactured gas, liquefied petroleum gas in the vapor phase, liquefied petroleum gas-air mixtures or mixtures of these gases shall be installed and maintained in accordance with this National Fuel Gas Code for both nonindustrial and industrial premises. 
Sec. 42-1369. - Disclaimer on inspections. 
    The purpose of the inspections under this article is to improve the quality of housing in the city. The inspections and the reports and findings issued after the inspections are not intended as, nor are they to be construed, as a guarantee. In order to so advise owners and other interested persons, a disclaimer shall be included in each inspection report as follows: "The findings of inspection contained in this section are intended to report conditions of noncompliance with code standards that are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not involve a detailed examination of the mechanical systems or the closed structural and nonstructural elements of the building and premises. No warranty of the operation, use or durability of equipment and materials not specifically cited in this section is expressed or implied." 
Sec. 42-1370. - Garages. 
    Private garages shall be built in accordance with the general construction standards established in the Uniform Dwelling Code. Whenever a garage is constructed as part of any building, the ceiling and the walls or wall separating the garage from other portions of the building shall be of not less than 45-minute fire-resistive construction as specified in Wis. Adm. Code Comm. ch. 51. 
Sec. 42-1371. - Fees for building and zoning permits. 
(a) ?Base fees. 
(1) ?Grade (subject to yearly rate change as necessary for engineering services), as set by the council from time to time. 
(2) ?Electrical (applies only if service is interrupted - inspection required), as set by the council from time to time. 
_____ 
(3) ?Residential, as set by the council from time to time. 
a. ?New construction: 
Sq. Ft. Price/ft. Total Cost Permit Fee** Less than 1,000 $40.00 $40,000.00 as set by the council from time to time 1,000—1,500 45.00 45,000.00—67,500.00 as set by the council from time to time 1,501+ 50.00 75,000.00 as set by the council from time to time  
**City permit fee only (does not include applicable zoning, grade fee or Uniform Dwelling Code fee) 
_____ 
b. ?Additions (additional square footage): 
Under $2,500.00 value, as set by the council from time to time. 
Value $2,500.00 or more (inspection required), as set by the council from time to time. 
c. ?Garages, as set by the council from time to time. 
d. ?Interior remodeling: 
Under $2,500.00 value, as set by the council from time to time. 
Value $2,500.00 or more (inspection required), as set by the council from time to time. 
e. ?Siding and roofing, as set by the council from time to time. 
f. ?Chimneys, as set by the council from time to time. 
g. ?Solar installations (roof or ground), as set by the council from time to time. 
h. ?Decks, patios, porches, as set by the council from time to time. 
i. ?Yard fences, as set by the council from time to time. 
j. ?Improved driveways, as set by the council from time to time. 
k. ?Swimming pools (above or in ground), as set by the council from time to time. 
l. ?Accessory buildings and garden sheds, as set by the council from time to time. 
(4) ?Building demolition, as set by the council from time to time. 
(5) ?Commercial and industrial: 
a. ?New construction or addition: 
First 100,000 square feet, as set by the council from time to time. 
b. ?Structural remodeling, as set by the council from time to time. 
(6) ?Moving buildings over public ways: 
a. ?Residential garages and accessory buildings, as set by the council from time to time. 
b. ?Principal building, as set by the council from time to time. 
(b) ?Uniform Dwelling Code. In addition to the base fees, the Uniform Dwelling Code seal charge set by the council from time to time shall be added for each new house permit. This charge is subject to change by the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations. 
(c) ?Plan examination. In addition to the base fees, a plan examination fee set by the council from time to time shall be charged for each permit requiring a plan. Only one plan examination fee shall be charged for each permit. The building inspector may reduce or waive the plan examination fee, subject to common council approval. This fee is basically for new residential construction. 
(d) ?Inspections. In addition to the base fees, an inspection fee set by the council from time to time shall be charged for each inspection required by the appropriate permit. The number of inspections required shall be stated on the permit and shall vary with different types of construction. 
(e) ?Reinspection. 
(1) ?When a reinspection is required because the initial inspection disclosed that the installation is incomplete at the time the installer indicated it would be complete, or does not comply with applicable statutes, administrative codes or ordinances, a reinspection fee shall be required. Each additional reinspection required at the site shall require the fee. 
(2) ?The reinspection fee shall be due within ten working days of written notification by the building inspector. Failure to pay the fee within the period allowed, shall constitute a violation of this section. 
Sec. 42-1372. - Installation and operation of room heaters, stoves and freestanding fireplaces. 
(a) ?Application. This section shall apply to radiant heating units installed in the city. No person shall install a radiant heating unit which fails to comply with the requirement of this section. 
(b) ?Definitions. The term "radiant heating unit" is a room heater, stove or freestanding fireplace not intended for duct connections used to heat rooms that use the combustion of a solid fuel such as wood or coal as a source of heat. 
(c) ?Permit. No person shall install or cause to be installed a radiant heating unit without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector. The building inspector shall give each permit applicant the following information: 
(1) ?The wood burned should be dry wood, preferably dry hardwood. 
(2) ?The chimney flue should be checked periodically to be sure the flue is open. 
(3) ?The chimney flue should be cleaned at least once a year. 
(d) ?Permit fee. A fee set by the council from time to time shall be paid by the applicant for each unit installed. 
(e) ?Plan and data approval. Plans and data for each radiant heating unit installation shall be submitted to the building inspector for approval before a permit may be issued. The following data is required to be submitted with each application: 
(1) ?The manufacturer's installation and maintenance/operations instructions. 
(2) ?Purposed chimney flue and/or new chimney flue sizes. 
(3) ?The number and sizes of existing vent connectors to the chimney flue. 
(f) ?Inspection. No person shall operate or permit the operation of a radiant heating unit without first calling for an inspection and receiving final approval from the building inspector. 
(g) ?Installation clearances. The clearance from combustibles for heating units shall be per manufacturer specifications. 
(h) ?Mounting of unit. 
(1) ?On incombustible floors. On incombustible floors the unit shall be mounted on a firm level base of concrete, brick or other incombustible material. 
(2) ?On combustible floors. On combustible floors the unit shall be mounted on a four-inch thick concrete block base with circular or rectangular holes or equivalent incombustible material so arranged that the holes will parallel the smaller dimension and be covered with sheet metal of not less than no. 24 U.S. gauge. The above specified floor protection shall extend not less than 18 inches around the perimeter of the unit. 
(i) ?Size and type of chimney. An approved chimney shall be used for solid fuel-burning equipment. All residential buildings shall be required to have a class "A" chimney, except as provided in Wis. Adm. Code ILHR §§ 23.04 and 23.11. The chimney shall be sized so that the cross sectional area of the chimney is not smaller than the cross sectional area of the flue collar of the equipment to be connected to it. Other equipment shall not be connected to the flue serving the solid fuel-burning equipment. Masonry chimneys constructed according to the requirements of chapter 813 of the Federal Housing Administration Minimum Property Standards, FHA. No. 30, and factory-built chimneys bearing a listing by a nationally recognized testing laboratory such as Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. will be considered as approved. 
(j) ?The chimney connector. The chimney connector shall conform to chapter 813 of the Federal Housing Administration Minimum Standards. 
(k) ?Damper. The chimney connector shall have a cast iron damper to control the draft. 
(l) ?Combustion air. If the inspector, after examination of the unit, deems it necessary to add combustion air, the size of the opening shall not be less than the cross sectional area of the blue collar size of the unit. 
(m) ?Blower. A blower where used should have adequate protection such as a screen to prevent material from being inserted into the assembly. 
(n) ?Electrical connections. The electrical connections, controls, and wiring where used should conform to city electric codes. 
(o) ?Thermostat control. The thermostat controls, where used, shall activate the blower motor at a temperature of 100 degrees Fahrenheit to 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Sec. 42-1373. - Basements. 
    First floor subflooring shall be completed within 60 days after the basement is excavated. 
Sec. 42-1374. - Discharge of clear waters. 
(a) ?Discharge into sanitary sewer. No person shall cause, allow or permit any roof drain, surface drain, subsoil drain, drain from any mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe, conduit, sump pump or any other object or thing used for the purposes of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging clear water from any part of any private premises owned or occupied by such person to discharge into a sanitary sewer. 
(b) ?Nuisance. The discharge into a sanitary sewer from any roof drain, surface drain, subsoil drain, drain from any mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe, conduit, sump pump or any other object or thing used for the purposes of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging clear water from any part of any private premises is declared to be a public nuisance and a hazard to the health, safety and well-being of the residents of the city and to the protection of property. 
(c) ?Groundwater. Where deemed necessary by the building inspector, every house shall have a sump pump installed for the purpose of discharging clear waters from foundation drains and ground infiltration and where the building is not serviced by a storm sewer shall either discharge into an underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch, gutter, dry well or shall discharge onto the ground surface in such other manner as will not constitute a nuisance as defined in this section. 
(d) ?Stormwater. All roof drains, surface drains, drains from any mechanical device, gutters, pipe, conduits or any other objects or things used for the purpose of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging stormwaters shall be discharged either to a storm sewer, a dry well, an underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch or onto the ground surface in such other manner as will not constitute a nuisance. 
(e) ?Storm sewer lateral. Where city storm sewers are provided and it is deemed necessary by the property owner and/or the city to discharge clear waters from a parcel of land, a storm sewer lateral shall be installed and connected to the storm sewer main at the expense of the owner. 
(f) ?Conducting tests. If the building inspector or his designated agent suspects an illegal clear water discharge, as defined by this article or by any other applicable provision of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as it may from time to time be amended, he may, upon reasonable notice and at reasonable times, enter the private premises where such illegal clear water discharge is suspected and conduct appropriate tests to determine whether such suspected illegal clear water discharge actually exists. 
(g) ?Compliance with section; penalty. Any person determined to be in violation of any provision of this section shall be given a written notice stating the nature of such violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the foregoing time limits shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties of section 1-13. 
Sec. 42-1375. - Duplex service connections. 
    Each unit of a duplex shall have separate water and sewer services. 
Sec. 42-1376. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a) ?Any building or structure erected, enlarged, altered or repaired, or any use established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, in violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use. The building inspector shall promptly report all such violations to the city attorney, who shall bring an action to enjoin the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair or moving of such building or structure or the establishment of such use, or to cause such building, structure or use to be removed and may also be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-13. In any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the building inspector constitute a defense. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the owner or owners of any real estate within the jurisdiction of this article. 
(b) ?If an inspection reveals a noncompliance with the article or the Uniform Dwelling Code, the building inspector shall notify the applicant and the owner, in writing, of the violation to be corrected. All cited violations shall be corrected within 30 days after written notification unless an extension of time is granted pursuant to Wis. Adm. Code ILHR § 20.10(1)(c). If, after written notification, the violation is not corrected within 30 days, a stop work order may be served on the owner or his representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the construction site. Such stop work order shall not be removed except by written notice of the building inspector after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the cited violation has been corrected. Each day each violation continues after the 30-day written notice period has run shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this article shall preclude the city from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this article or the Uniform Dwelling Code. If any construction or work governed by the provisions of this article or the Uniform Dwelling Code is commenced prior to issuance of a permit, a double the permit fee shall be charged and shall be payable by both the property owner and the building contractor, if appropriate. 
(c) ?Any person feeling aggrieved by an order or a determination of the building inspector may appeal from such order or determination to the board of appeals. Those procedures customarily used to effectuate an appeal to the board of appeals shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 10-28-1996) 
Sec. 42-1377. - Basic Housing Property Maintenance Code; adoption. 
    The Basic Housing Property Maintenance Code, as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is adopted in its entirety by reference in this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, 5-29-1990) 
Sec. 42-1378. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Debris and refuse means, but is not limited to, garbage outside of required containers, broken concrete, bricks, blocks or other mineral matter; bottles, porcelain and other glass or crockery; boxes; lumber (new or used), posts, logs, sticks or other wood, tree branches, brush, yard trimmings, grass clippings and other residues; paper, rags, cardboard, excelsior, rubber, plastic, wire, tin and metal items; discarded household goods or appliances, junk lawn mowers, motor vehicle parts, machine parts, boards, gypsum board, cut brush and branches; and tar paper, residues from burning or any similar materials that constitute health, fire or safety hazards or a serious blighting influence upon the neighborhood or the city in general. 
    Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on the adjoining property under control of owners, occupants or operators of such premises. 
    Natural areas means the wooded areas which are too shady to permit a grass lawn to grow; prairie lands that are more than one acre in square footage. 
    Natural garden means a wildflower, prairie, woodland or other decorative garden border or area that is under one acre in square footage which is well maintained, is not a public nuisance or a serious blighting influence and contains no noxious weeds. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit. 
    Public nuisance means, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?The physical condition or occupancy of any premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law; or 
(2) ?Any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences or structures; or 
(3) ?Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or is manifestly unsafe or unsecured so as to endanger life, limb or property; or 
(4) ?Any premises that are unsanitary, or that is littered with rubbish, garbage, debris or refuse or that has an uncontrolled growth of weeds. 
    Recyclables means materials listed under this division which include, but are not limited to, glass or plastic bottles, metal containers, cardboard boxes, newspaper, magazines, appliances, brush, tree trimmings, grass clippings or leaves. 
    Trailer means a wheeled vehicle which is hitched or attached to a motor vehicle. It does not mean a boat trailer or a camper trailer that is being stored but not used for habitation. 
    Undefined term means any undefined term shall be construed as the normal, everyday meaning of the word. See a dictionary for clarification. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 10-8-1, 9-8-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-1379. - Exterior building requirements. 
    No person shall allow or permit any building, whether a dwelling, nondwelling or accessory on their property to deteriorate or remain in a condition that is not in accord with the following provisions of this section: 
(1) ?Street numbers. Each structure to which a street number has been assigned shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(2) ?Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(3) ?Exterior walls and foundations. The exterior walls of every structure shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. The foundation walls of every structure shall be maintained plumb, free from open cracks, weathertight, rodentproof, insectproof, and reasonably watertight and shall be kept in a reasonably good state of maintenance and repair. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points. 
(4) ?Roofs and drainage. The roofs and flashing of every structure shall be sound, tight and maintained so as to not leak, and all water shall be so drained and conveyed therefrom so as to not cause damage to the exterior walls, eaves, soffits or foundations. Roofs shall be free of broken, rotted, split, curled or missing roof material in such amounts as to present a deteriorated appearance that is considered a blighting influence on the visual aesthetic character of the neighborhood. Cloth, fabric, canvas, tarps, tarpapers shall be prohibited as final covers for roofs and may only be temporarily used on an emergency basis for a period not to exceed 60 days. The gutters and down spouts on every structure, when provided, shall be adequately secured, kept free of obstruction and in a reasonable state of repair and to function as designed. 
(5) ?Porches, railings, stairways, deck, patios and decorative features. Every outside stair, porch, deck, patio and every appurtenance attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected as required by the building code and shall be kept in sound condition and in good repair. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facing and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(6) ?Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(7) ?Overhang extensions. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition. 
(8) ?Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and similar appurtenances shall be maintained in a structurally safe and sound condition and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(9) ?Doors, windows and basement hatchways. Every exterior door, door frame, door hinge, door latch and basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. Exterior doors, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within the frame. Latches on all exterior doors to dwelling units shall tightly secure the door. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of animals, rain and surface drainage water. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute which are without open cracks or holes. Every window sash shall be in good condition and fit reasonably tight within its frame. 
(10) ?Paint and other preservatives. If paint or other preservatives have been applied to an exterior surface, it shall be repainted, resurfaced or otherwise treated in a workmanlike manner when the paint or other preservative is missing, flaking and peeling off or its condition is a seriously blighting influence on the surrounding property. Siding not commonly intended or customarily used in a natural or exposed state shall be painted or sealed to prevent deterioration. 
(11) ?Brick, stone and other masonry. If all or any portion of the exterior surface of any building is composed of brick, stone, or other masonry which has become substantially cracked, worn, discolored, or its condition has become seriously blighted so as to influence the surrounding property, it shall be resurfaced, replaced, repaired, or otherwise treated in a workmanlike manner. 
(12) ?Accessory structures. All accessory structures including, but not limited to, storage sheds, dog houses, flagpoles, kennels, rabbit hitches, playhouses, treehouses, barbecue pits and planters shall be maintained in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(13) ?Vandalism and/or dilapidation. If it is found upon inspection of any vacated building within the city that the building is in danger of vandalism and/or dilapidation by the weather or elements, the city shall order the owner thereof to make the building secure against vandalism and/or dilapidation in a workmanlike manner. Damaged or vacant buildings need to be restored to comply with this division within three months of the original damage or vacation. Boarded up windows will not be allowed except in the case of fire, natural disaster or an emergency. In the case of an emergency, the boarded up windows will only be allowed for a three-month period. 
(14) ?Graffiti. Persons owning or otherwise controlling property cannot allow graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any permanent structure located on their property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(15) ?Insect screens. In every door, window and other outside opening where screening is provided, the screens shall be tightfitting and of not less than 16 mesh per inch and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08, § 1, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-08, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2017, repealed § 42-1379 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 97-10, § 10-8-2, 9-8-1997. 
Sec. 42-1380. - Exterior property requirements. 
(a) ?Exterior property areas. All exterior property areas shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of combustible or noncombustible material, debris and refuse. The provisions of this section shall not apply to materials stored in conjunction with any mercantile, manufacturing, or normal residential use, provided such materials are neatly stored, provide no rodent harborage, and meet applicable fire and zoning restrictions. 
(b) ?Fences. All fences shall be properly maintained and kept in good repair or shall be removed. If paint or other preservatives have been applied to the exterior surface, it shall be repainted, resurfaced or otherwise treated in a workmanlike manner when its condition is a seriously blighting influence on the surrounding property or neighborhood. 
(c) ?Walking and driving surfaces. Sidewalks, walks, drives and other concrete, asphalt, bricked, graveled, stoned or similarly treated areas shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Conditions resulting in dust, dirt, loose stones or other aggregate being repeatedly deposited upon the immediate adjacent public or private property shall be corrected. 
(d) ?Lawn areas. Lawn areas, where provided, shall not be allowed to deteriorate to such condition as to be a seriously blighting influence on the surrounding property or neighborhood, or the city in general. The growth of grass or weeds in excess of six inches in height or the maintenance of the property with a lack of vegetation which renders the yard areas unsightly and results in the diminution of the appearance of the property as compared with adjacent properties shall be considered a violation of the maintenance provision of this section. Where lawn areas are not provided or have been removed, such areas shall be landscaped with garden beds or other ground cover so as not to be a public nuisance or a serious blighting influence. Whenever grass or lawn weeds on vacant properties or unoccupied premises are six inches or more in height, the city is empowered to cause such grass or lawn weeds to be cut, and the costs therefor shall be placed on the tax rolls as a special charge against the property. 
(e) ?Natural areas and natural gardens. Natural areas and natural gardens shall be kept free of debris, refuse and noxious weeds. 
(f) ?Erosion and soil runoff. Whenever erosion of the soil causes the same to spill over onto the sidewalk, street or alley, the condition shall be corrected by the construction of a suitable retaining wall, grading, sodding and/or the planting of grass or other suitable ground cover. 
(g) ?Unpaved public areas. Those unpaved public areas abutting private property between the curb and lot line shall be maintained by the abutting property owner in such a manner as to provide a lawn which shall not be allowed to deteriorate to such condition as to be a serious blighting influence on the surrounding property or neighborhood. Any person who feels aggrieved by this subsection shall have a right of appeal following the procedure of section 42-1383(e). The board of public works is authorized to grant a variance of this subsection if in the board's discretion the physical conditions of the property make compliance with this subsection unreasonable and inappropriate. When the unpaved portion between the lot line and curb has been disturbed due to a public improvement, such lawn area shall be restored by such property owner within 12 months following completion of the final grading by the contractor of such improvement. On those streets in which curbs do not exist, the areas which shall be maintained as provided for in this subsection shall be the unpaved public area between the lot line and the shoulder of the roadway. 
(h) ?Retaining walls. Retaining walls abutting public property, when present, shall be structurally sound and not be constructed or maintained in such a manner as to cause repeated flow of mud, gravel or debris upon any public sidewalk, street or alley. 
(i) ?Firewood. Firewood is permitted to be stored in the exterior property areas when cut to fireplace or stove size lengths and neatly and tightly stacked. 
(j) ?Compost piles. Compost piles or yard waste holding bins shall be permitted, provided that they are maintained in a manner that does not produce an odor, nuisance, nor provide a rodent harborage, nor shall they be allowed to deteriorate to such condition as to be a seriously blighting influence on the surrounding property or neighborhood or the city in general. Compost piles must be located ten feet or more away from any habitable structure. Compost piles may not be located in the front yard. 
(k) ?Solid waste and recyclables. Solid waste and recyclables shall be disposed of in compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 10-8-3, 9-8-1997) 
Sec. 42-1381. - Pest infestation and extermination; structures. 
    All premises shall be kept free from insect, rodent and other pest infestation. Wherever insects, rodents or other pests are found, they shall be promptly exterminated or removed by an approved process that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination or removal, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 10-8-4, 9-8-1997) 
Sec. 42-1382. - Front yard produce gardening. 
(a) ?No person owning property used for residential purposes shall plant any garden for the purpose of raising produce in his front setback as set forth in article II of this chapter. 
(b) ?Any person aggrieved by this section shall have a right to appeal to the building board having jurisdiction within the aldermanic district in which the property lies. 
(c) ?The ward building boards are authorized to grant variances to this section if such board finds that the usage for which applied will not adversely affect property values in the area. 
(d) ?Flowering, fruit, ornamental and shade trees are excluded from this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 10-8-5, 9-8-1997) 
Sec. 42-1383. - Order to correct conditions and citation. 
(a) ?Order to correct conditions. Whenever the city, its agents or employes shall, upon inspection of any premises within the city, find the conditions of the premises are in violation of this division, an order shall be issued to the owner and/or occupant of the premises to correct such conditions. 
(b) ?Contents. The order shall specify a time within which the owner and/or occupant shall comply therewith. The order shall also provide that if the owner and/or occupant is aggrieved by the order he may appeal to the board of public works and request a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(c) ?Service. The order shall be served on the owner and/or occupant, by delivering a copy of such order to such occupant personally or by delivering the order to and leaving it with any adult, competent person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place near the entrance to the premises, or by certified mail with return receipt requested. 
(d) ?Appeal request. If the owner and/or occupant feels aggrieved by the order as provided in this section, he may appeal to the board of public works within 15 days after service of the order upon him and request a hearing. 
(e) ?Appeal hearing. The board of public works shall conduct a hearing in connection therewith within 15 days after a request for an appeal is submitted and shall notify the appellant, building maintenance inspector, the director of inspection services or his designee and any other person interested in the matter to be present. After the hearing, the board of public works shall submit its findings and recommendations within five days thereafter and serve copies on all persons who appeared at the hearing. 
(f) ?Cause work to be done. Upon failure to comply with an order, where there is proof of service of said order, which requires that any building, premises, structure or property be cleaned or repaired, or condition abated or improved in accordance with this division, the board of public works may cause such cleaning, repair, improvement, abatement or removal of the offending substance or structure. Such cleaning, repair, improvement or removal shall be deemed a special benefit to such premises, and the cost for the same shall be charged against the owners of the property. If the cost of the work is not paid within 60 days, it shall be levied as a special charge against the premises as authorized by Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16). 
(g) ?Citation. Any person violating any provision of this division shall be subject to section 1-13. A citation may be issued pursuant to section 1-13 and Wis. Stats. ch. 800. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 10-8-1, 9-8-1997) 
Sec. 42-1384. - Roofing materials—Residential. 
(a) ?Existing wood shingles or shake roofs cannot be overlaid and must be removed prior to re-roofing. 
(b) ?All roofing material, components and installation shall meet all current building code requirements as adopted by the city, as may be amended. 
(c) ?Metal roofs are permitted only if the proposed metal roofing material has the appearance of a composition shingle roof or tile roof. The following roofing materials are exempt from this section: 
(1) ?Roofing materials for accessory buildings located within the R-5 zoning district. 
(2) ?Metal roofing material that does not have the appearance of a composition shingle roof or tile roof may be only used as an accent roofing above windows or porches provided the total metal roofing area does not exceed ten percent of the first floor area square footage. 
(d) ?Roofing material for detached accessory buildings that exceed 120 square feet in area shall have the same roofing material as the principal residence. 
(e) ?Roofing materials that do not meet the criteria set forth in subsections (c) or (d) must be submitted to the common council for approval prior to their use and installation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 4-10-2017) 
Secs. 42-1385—42-1405. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FAIR HOUSING[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
State Law reference— Equal rights in housing generally, Wis. Stats. § 106.04. 

Sec. 42-1406. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health and general welfare to ensure equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent, safe and sanitary housing facilities of their choice regardless of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age, disability, marital status, lawful source of income, sexual orientation or familial status and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any person. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998) 
Sec. 42-1407. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Discrimination or discriminatory housing practice means to separate, segregate, exclude or treat any person or class of persons unequally because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age, disability, marital status, lawful source of income, sexual orientation or familial status, or any act that is unlawful under this article. 
    Familial status includes families in which one or more children under 18 years of age reside with a parent, a person who has legal custody of the child or children, the designee of the parent or legal guardian with written permission, and pregnant women and persons securing legal custody of a child under 18 years of age. 
    Financial institution means any persons engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing losses. 
    Disability means a condition which substantially limits or impairs one or more major life activities of an individual and is: 
(1) ?Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin and endocrine; or 
(2) ?Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. 
    Housing accommodation or dwelling means any building, manufactured home or trailer, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed, or intended for occupancy, as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, manufactured home or trailer, structure, or portion thereof or any real property, as defined in this article, used or intended to be used for any of the purposes set forth in this definition. 
    Major life activities means functions, such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 
    Open market means the market which is informed of the availability for sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, whether informed through a real estate broker or by advertising by publication, signs or by any portion thereof, indicating that the property is available for sale, purchase, rental or lease. 
    Owner means a lessee, sublease, covenants, assignee, managing agent or other person having the right of ownership or possession, or the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation. 
    Person means individuals, children, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations. 
    Real estate broker or real estate salesman means any individual qualified by law who, for a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or collecting the same, lists, sells, purchases, rents or leases any housing accommodations, including options thereupon, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate such activities, or who advertises or holds himself out as engaged in such activities or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing accommodation, or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose, or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
    Real property includes buildings, structures, land, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives and condominiums. 
    Sexual orientation means having a preference for heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality, having a history of such a preference or being identified with such a preference. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-1408. - Unlawful practices. 
    In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this section which affect any housing accommodation on the open market, or in connection with any public sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, it is unlawful within the city for a person, owner, financial institution, real estate broker or real estate salesman, or any representative of the above, to discriminate: 
(1) ?By refusing to sell, purchase, rent or lease or deny to or withhold any housing accommodation from a person; 
(2) ?Against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation or in the furnishing of facilities of services in connection therewith; 
(3) ?By refusing to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, rent or lease any housing accommodation from or to a person; 
(4) ?By refusing to negotiate for the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation from or to a person; 
(5) ?By refusing to renew a lease causing the eviction of a tenant from rental housing or engaging in the harassment of a tenant; 
(6) ?By representing to a person that any housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale, purchase, rental or lease when, in fact, it is so available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing accommodation; 
(7) ?By making, publishing, printing, circulating, posting, or mailing, or causing to be made, published, printed, circulated, posted or mailed, any notice, statement or advertisements, or announcing a policy, or signing or using a form of application for the sales purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing accommodation or making a record of inquiry in connection with the prospective sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing accommodation which indicates any discrimination or any intent to make a discrimination; 
(8) ?By offering, soliciting, accepting or using a listing of any housing accommodation for sale, purchase, rental or lease with the understanding that a person may be subjected to discrimination in connection with such sale, purchase, rental or lease, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(9) ?By inducing, directly or indirectly, the sale, purchase, rental or lease, or the listing for any of the above, of any housing accommodation by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular races, colors, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age, disability, marital status, lawful source of income, sexual orientation or familial status in the area to be affected by such sale, purchase, rental or lease will or may result in either: 
a. ?The lowering of property values in the area; 
b. ?An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area; or 
c. ?A decline in the quality of schools serving the area; 
(10) ?By making any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale, purchase, rental or lease, or the anticipated listing for any of the above, or the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation in any area in the city for the purpose of including or attempting to induce any such listing or any of the above transactions; 
(11) ?By engaging in, or hiring to be done, or conspiring with others to commit acts or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear, with the purpose of either discouraging or inducing, or attempting to induce, the sale, purchase, rental or lease, or the listing for any of the above, of any housing accommodation; 
(12) ?By retaliating or discriminating in any manner against a person because he has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this article or because he has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, hearing or conference under this article; 
(13) ?By aiding, abetting, inciting, compelling or coercing any person to engage in any of the practices prohibited by this article, or by obstructing or preventing any person from complying with the provisions of this article, or any order issued under this article; 
(14) ?By canvassing, to commit any unlawful practices prohibited by this article; 
(15) ?By otherwise denying to, or withholding any housing accommodation from a person because of his race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age, disability, marital status, lawful source of income, sexual orientation or familial status; 
(16) ?For any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part, in the making of commercial real estate loans, by denying a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or by discriminating against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms on conditions of such loans or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age, disability, marital status, or lawful source of income, sexual orientation or familial status of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purpose of such loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; 
(17) ?By denying any qualified person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or by discriminating against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation; 
(18) ?For a person in the business of insuring against hazards, by refusing to enter into, or by exacting different terms, conditions or privileges with respect to a contract of insurance against hazards to a dwelling; 
(19) ?Animals assisting the disabled. If an individual's vision, hearing or mobility is impaired, it is discrimination on the basis of disability for any person to refuse to rent or sell housing to the individual, cause the eviction of the individual from rental housing or a condominium, require extra compensation from an individual as a condition of continued residence in rental housing or a condominium, or engage in the harassment of the individual because he or she keeps an animal specially trained to lead or assist individuals with impaired vision, hearing or mobility if all of the following apply: 
a. ?Upon request, the individual shows to the lessor, seller or representative of the condominium association credentials issued by a school recognized by the department as accredited to train animals for individuals with impaired vision, hearing or mobility; and 
b. ?The individual accepts liability for sanitation with respect to, and damage to the premises caused by, the animal. 
This subsection does not apply in the case of rental of an owner-occupied dwelling if the owner or a member of his or her immediate family occupying the dwelling possesses and, upon request, presents to the individual a certificate signed by a physician which states that the owner or family member is allergic to the type of animal the individual possesses. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998) 
Sec. 42-1409. - Exemptions. 
(a) ?This article shall not apply to: 
(1) ?A religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operating, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, which limits the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or which gives preference to such persons unless membership in such a religion is restricted on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age, disability, marital status, lawful source of income, sexual orientation or familial status; or 
(2) ?A private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, and which limits the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or gives preference to its members. 
(b) ?Nothing in the section shall prohibit discrimination on the basis of age in relation to housing designed to meet the needs of elderly individuals. 
(c) ?Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from exacting different or more stringent terms or conditions for financing housing based on the age of the individual applicant for financing if the terms or conditions are reasonably related to the individual applicant. 
(d) ?Nothing in this section shall prohibit the development of housing designed specifically for persons with a disability and discrimination on the basis of disability in relation to such housing. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998) 
Sec. 42-1410. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a) ?Any complaint alleging any discriminatory practice prohibited by this article shall be in writing and may be initiated by either the complainant or his agent. All complaints shall contain the name and the address of the complainant, the name and address of the person against whom complaint is made, a statement setting forth the particulars of the alleged discriminatory practice and the date or dates the alleged discriminatory practice took place. 
(b) ?Complaints shall be filed with the city administrator and may be filed either in person or by mail; filing must be made no later than 120 days after the complainant knew or should reasonably have known that the alleged act or acts in violation of this article occurred. Upon receipt of the complaint, the administrator shall immediately notify the chairman of the building and grounds committee and shall cause a copy of the complaint to be served upon the person against whom the complaint is made. Complaints may be amended or withdrawn at any time subject to the approval of the building and grounds committee. 
(c) ?Upon notification of receipt of a complaint, the chairman of the building and grounds committee shall call a meeting of that committee to consider the same. The committee may designate the police department and the city attorney's office to investigate a complaint if the committee determines there is probable cause a violation of this article may have occurred or is occurring. Should a determination be made that there is no probable cause a violation of this article has occurred or is occurring, the complainant shall be afforded an opportunity to appeal this decision to the committee. Should the committee at this time determine there is no probable cause to believe that there has been a violation of the article, the complaint may appeal to the circuit court. 
(d) ?Once a determination has been made that there is probable cause a violation of the article has been or is being committed, the building and grounds committee may endeavor by means of conference, conciliation and persuasion to eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice. To this end, it may request the appearance of all parties to the complaint to attend meetings in an effort to resolve the complaint. 
(e) ?Should the committee in its judgment determine that judicial enforcement of this article is necessary it shall in writing request the city attorney to commence proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this article. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998) 
Sec. 42-1411. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who willfully violates this article shall, for each such violation, forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Payment of any such forfeiture shall be stayed during the period in which any appeal may be taken and during the pendency of any appeal. 
(Ord. of 1-20-1998) 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; lost, abandoned and surplus property, § 2-541 et seq.; alarm systems, § 14-161 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 18; court, ch. 22; emergency services, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employes, § 2-176 et seq. 
State Law reference— Police departments generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.13. 

Sec. 46-31. - Organization. 
(a) ?Composition. The police department shall consist of a chief of police, and such other officers, assistants, and patrol officers as from time to time may be appointed, pursuant to the provisions of statute, the ordinances and resolutions of the common council, and the rules and regulations of the board of police and fire commissioners. 
(b) ?Special officers. The chief of police, subject to council approval, may appoint from time to time such clerical or technical employes as may be necessary, such employes to serve either with or without compensation, as the common council shall direct. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-1) 
Sec. 46-32. - Records and reports. 
(a) ?Monthly reports. The chief of police shall submit a written monthly report to the common council, of all activities and transactions of the department during the preceding month. 
(b) ?Police records. There shall be kept by the police department, a suitable record in which shall be entered the name of every person arrested in the city, the name of the person making the arrest, the date and cause of the arrest, the court from which the warrant was issued, the disposition made of the case, the amount of fine and costs paid and to whom paid, bond posted and all complaints in full. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 46-33. - General powers of police officers. 
    Every member of the police department shall: 
(1) ?Familiarize himself with the ordinances of the city and the statutes and attend to the enforcement of such ordinances by all lawful means. 
(2) ?Help prevent crimes, misdemeanors and violations of city ordinances and protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the city and its inhabitants. 
(3) ?Report all street and sidewalk obstructions, unlighted streetlamps, unlawful street signs or signals and defective or dangerous streets and sidewalks to the appropriate person or organization responsible for their repair or service. 
(4) ?Assist the fire department in maintaining order at the scene of a fire or any other fire response within the city. 
(5) ?See that the necessary permits and licenses issued by the state or city are in the possession of or properly displayed by any person engaged in an activity or business within the city for which such permit or license is required and that the terms of such permits or licenses are complied with. 
(6) ?Perform such other lawful duties as ordered by the chief of police or his authorized representative. 
(7) ?Perform such additional duties as assigned by the police chief and common council. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-3; Ord. No. 90-8, § 1, 5-29-1990) 
Sec. 46-34. - Rules and policies. 
    The chief of police shall establish and promulgate rules of conduct, directives and policies and procedures and prescribe such duties for individual members as he may deem necessary for the effective and efficient command and operation of the department; provided, however, that no such rules of conduct, directive or policy procedure duties or assignment shall be in conflict with the statutes or ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-5) 
Sec. 46-35. - Maintenance of personnel records and performance evaluations. 
    The chief of police shall cause to be maintained adequate personnel records of employment, assignment, promotions, attendance, performance and training for all members of the police department. He shall also comply with all provisions of the law enforcement standards board in regard to background investigations. He shall keep himself adequately informed of the activities of the police department and be assured that the duties of his subordinates are properly discharged. He shall formulate procedures for recognizing outstanding performance by police department members, for investigating complaints of misconduct by any police department member and for taking appropriate disciplinary action subject to the provisions of the applicable statutes and rules of the police department. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-6) 
Sec. 46-36. - Police chief's responsibility for training. 
    The chief of police is responsible for the training of all members of the police department. He shall cause adequate and progressive programs of training to be organized and conducted to prepare police department members in the knowledge, procedures and techniques of their duties and responsibilities. He will ensure that, within budgetary limitations, members of the police department attend training courses, seminars and conferences necessary to maintain and improve their job skills and professional knowledge. He shall encourage police department members to further their education in law enforcement through study, special courses, college attendance, extension programs and independent readings. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-7) 
Sec. 46-37. - Civilians to assist. 
    All persons in the city, when called upon by any police officer or peace officer, shall promptly aid and assist him in the execution of his duties and whoever shall neglect or refuse to give such aid or assistance shall be subject to the general penalty as provided in section 1-17. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1-8) 
Chapter 50 - MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 38; land use regulations, ch. 42; zoning regulation of manufactured homes, § 42-901 et seq.; planning, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; waterways, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.058, 66.0585. 

Sec. 50-31. - Monthly fee; limitations on parking. 
(a) ?There is hereby imposed on each owner of a nonexempt, occupied manufactured home in the city a monthly parking fee as determined in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.058(3) which is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this article as if fully set forth in this section. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensee to collect the proper amount from each manufactured homeowner. Licensees shall pay to the administrator such parking permit fees on or before the tenth day of the month following the month for which such fees are due in accordance with the terms of this article and such regulations as the administrator may reasonably promulgate. 
(1) ?Licensees of manufactured home parks and owners of land on which are parked any occupied, nonexempt manufactured homes shall furnish information to the administrator and assessor on such homes added to their park or land within five days after arrival of such home on forms furnished by the administrator in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.058(3)(c). 
(2) ?Occupants or owners of nonexempt manufactured homes parked outside of a manufactured home park shall remit such fees directly to the administrator as provided in this subsection (a). It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensee of a manufactured home park to collect such fees from each occupied nonexempt manufactured home therein and to remit such fees to the administrator as provided in this subsection (a). 
(b) ?Owners of nonexempt, occupied manufactured homes, upon receipt of notice from the administrator of their liability for the monthly parking permit fee, shall remit the administrator a cash deposit in an amount set by the council from time to time to guarantee payment of such fees when due. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensees of a manufactured home park to collect such cash deposits from each occupied, nonexempt manufactured home therein and remit such deposits to the administrator. Upon receipt of a notice from the owner or licensee that the nonexempt, occupied manufactured home has been or is about to be removed from the city, the administrator shall apply such cash deposit to reduce any monthly parking permit fees for which the owner is liable and refund the balance, if any, to the owner. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to park any manufactured home in the city at any site other than a licensed manufactured home park. 
(Code 1986, § 7-6-1) 
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Court, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture. 
    The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order of the state are adopted by reference in this section to define offenses against the peace and good order of the city, provided that the penalty for commission of such offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under the general penalty provisions. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated in this section by reference are intended to be made part of this chapter. 
Wis. Stats. § 29.288 Throwing refuse in waters Wis. Stats. § 134.66(2)(a) Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco products Wis. Stats. § 167.10 Fireworks regulated Wis. Stats. § 175.25 Storage of junked automobiles Wis. Stats. § 254.76 Causing fires by tobacco smoking Wis. Stats. § 254.92 Purchase or possession of tobacco products by person under 18 prohibited Wis. Stats. Ch. 938 Children's Code Wis. Stats. § 939.05 Parties to crime Wis. Stats. § 939.22 Words and phrases defined Wis. Stats. § 940.19(1) Battery Wis. Stats. § 940.291 Failure of a police officer to render aid Wis. Stats. § 941.10 Negligent handling of burning materials Wis. Stats. § 941.12(2), (3) Interfering with firefighting Wis. Stats. § 941.13 False alarms Wis. Stats. § 941.20(1) Endangering safety by use of dangerous weapon Wis. Stats. § 941.23 Carrying concealed weapon Wis. Stats. § 941.235 Carrying a firearm in a public building Wis. Stats. § 941.237 Carrying handgun where alcohol sold/consumed Wis. Stats. § 941.24 Possession of switchblade knife Wis. Stats. § 941.2965 Restrictions on use of facsimile firearms Wis. Stats. § 941.297 Sale, distribution of imitation firearms Wis. Stats. § 941.35 Emergency telephone calls Wis. Stats. § 941.36 Fraudulent tapping of electric wires or gas or water meters or pipes Wis. Stats. § 943.01(1) Criminal damage to property Wis. Stats. § 943.017(1) Graffiti Wis. Stats. § 943.06 Molotov cocktails Wis. Stats. § 943.11 Entry into locked vehicle Wis. Stats. § 943.125 Entry into locked coin box Wis. Stats. § 943.13 Criminal trespass to land Wis. Stats. § 943.14 Criminal trespass to dwellings Wis. Stats. § 943.15 Entry onto construction site Wis. Stats. § 943.20 Theft (not exceeding $1,000.00) Wis. Stats. § 943.21 Fraud on innkeeper ($1,000.00 or less) Wis. Stats. § 943.215 Absconding without paying rent Wis. Stats. § 943.22 Cheating tokens Wis. Stats. § 943.225 Refusal to pay for bus ride Wis. Stats. § 943.23(4m) Operating vehicle without owners' consent Wis. Stats. § 943.24 Worthless checks (not over $1,000.00) Wis. Stats. § 943.34 Receiving stolen property (not over $1,000.00) Wis. Stats. § 943.37 Alteration of property identification marks Wis. Stats. § 943.38(3) Forgery Wis. Stats. § 943.41(2), 
(3)(a)—(d), (4)(b) Credit card crimes Wis. Stats. § 943.45 Theft of telecommunications service Wis. Stats. § 943.455(2)(a)—(f) Theft of cellular telephone service Wis. Stats. § 943.46(2)(a)—(f) Theft of cable television service Wis. Stats. § 943.47(2) Theft of satellite cable programming Wis. Stats. § 943.50 Retail theft (not over $1,000.00) Wis. Stats. § 943.55 Removal of shopping cart Wis. Stats. § 943.61 Theft of library materials not exceeding $1,000.00 Wis. Stats. § 944.17 Sexual gratification Wis. Stats. § 944.20 Lewd and lascivious behavior Wis. Stats. § 944.23 Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings Wis. Stats. § 944.30 Prostitution Wis. Stats. § 944.31 Patronizing prostitutes Wis. Stats. § 944.33(1) Pandering Wis. Stats. § 944.36 Solicitation of drinks Wis. Stats. § 945.01 Definitions Wis. Stats. § 945.02 Gambling Wis. Stats. § 945.04 Permitting premises to be used for commercial gambling Wis. Stats. § 946.40 Refusing to aid officer Wis. Stats. § 946.41(1) Resisting or obstructing officer Wis. Stats. § 946.42(2) Escape Wis. Stats. § 946.425(1m)(a) Failure to report to jail Wis. Stats. § 946.46 Encouraging violation of probation or parole Wis. Stats. § 946.49(1)(a) Bail jumping Wis. Stats. § 946.67 Compounding crime Wis. Stats. § 946.69 Falsely assuming to act as public officer or employe Wis. Stats. § 946.70(1) Impersonating peace officer Wis. Stats. § 946.72(2) Tampering with public records and notices Wis. Stats. § 947.01 Disorderly conduct Wis. Stats. § 947.012 Unlawful use of telephone Wis. Stats. § 947.013 Harassment Wis. Stats. § 947.02 Vagrancy Wis. Stats. § 947.06 Unlawful assemblies Wis. Stats. Ch. 948 Juvenile Code Wis. Stats. § 948.63 Receiving property from a child  
(Code 1986, § 9-1-1; Ord. No. 2001-09, §§ 1, 2, 11-12-01) 
Sec. 54-2. - Possession of controlled substances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a controlled substance contrary to the Uniformed Controlled Substances Act, Wis. Stats. ch. 961. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-10) 
Sec. 54-3. - Defecating or urinating in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate, outside of designed sanitary facilities, upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground, cemetery or other public area within the city, or upon any private property in open view of the public, or in the halls, stairways or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or to indecently expose his person. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-9(c)) 
Sec. 54-4. - Unauthorized presence on school property. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, to be present in, loiter or enter into any public school building, school parking lot or on any public school grounds without the permission of the school principal, custodian or other person in charge thereof between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on official school days. 
(b) ?This section shall not apply to: 
(1) ?Students regularly enrolled in public schools who have not been properly ordered by the school principal, custodian or other person in charge thereof, to leave the school building or school grounds; 
(2) ?Persons coming into the school building or school grounds for the purpose of attending scheduled school or civic functions, or making use of the recreational facilities located upon or within school premises, but as to such attendance or use, this exception shall apply only to the portion of the premises on which such facilities are located and during the hours such facilities are specifically open to the general public or an invited portion thereof; and 
(3) ?Parents or legal guardians of a regularly enrolled student; however, such parent or legal guardian may be required to register at the school office. 
(c) ?The exceptions set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to any person who, while in school buildings or on school grounds, commits or attempts to commit any act prohibited by statute or ordinance. 
(d) ?All entrances to the school buildings shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry Into School Building by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited." All school grounds shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry Upon School Grounds by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited." 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-11) 
Sec. 54-5. - Failure to obey lawful order. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the direction or order of a police officer while such police officer is acting in an official capacity in carrying out his duties. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-12) 
Secs. 54-6—54-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY AND PEACE 

Sec. 54-36. - Regulation of firearms and explosives. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Firearm means any instrumentality from or with which a shot, bullet or pellet may be discharged or expelled, regardless of whether the propelling force is provided by air, spring or other similar mechanical device or gunpowder. 
(b) ?Discharge and possession of firearms. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, except a sheriff, police officer or other law enforcement officer in the performance of an official duty, shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun of any description, within the city or have any firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun in his possession or under his control unless it is unloaded and enclosed or encased within a carrying case or other suitable container pursuant to state law. 
(c) ?Shooting into city limits. Except as otherwise provided, no person shall in the territory adjacent to the city discharge any firearm in such manner that the discharge shall enter or fall within the city. 
(d) ?Shooting ranges. This section shall not prevent the maintenance and use of duly supervised rifle or pistol ranges or shooting galleries approved by the chief of police and common council, after an advisory recommendation from the chief of police, where proper safety precautions are taken. 
(e) ?Explosive devices. No person shall discharge or detonate any dynamite, nitroglycerin or other explosive within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the chief of police. 
(f) ?Hunting . With the exception of the following, hunting is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city. 
(1) ?Subsection (f) of this section shall not apply to bow hunting within the City of Mosinee corporate limits. Bow hunting within the City of Mosinee corporate limits shall satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a. ?Every person who bow hunts within the City of Mosinee shall: 
1. ?Possess a current valid archery deer hunting license or small game license issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources; 
2. ?Secure the permission of the owner of the land where the hunt is to occur; 
3. ?Hunt in a location no less than 100 yards from any "building" without the express consent of any and all owners of said "buildings" within that distance. Building shall mean a permanent structure used for human occupancy and includes a manufactured home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.91(2); 
4. ?Hunt from an elevated position which directs the arrow toward the ground immediately upon release; 
5. ?Hunt only with a bow and arrow or a crossbow and arrow; and 
6. ?Hunters must comply with all state and local laws, rules and regulations and the directions set forth in the Deer Management Plan of the Department of Natural Resources. 
b. ?Bow hunting on city-owned property is permitted with the following restrictions: 
1. ?Any cutting of trees, brush, lanes, or trails is prohibited; 
2. ?The conducting of deer drives (on foot or motorized) is prohibited; 
3. ?Permanent free standing or tree stands are prohibited; 
4. ?Permanent ladders, or nailed on or screw-in steps affixed to any tree are prohibited; 
5. ?Portable tree stands and ladders must be removed daily; 
6. ?Hunting in any city park or on school grounds is strictly prohibited; and 
7. ?Hunters who harvest deer or large animals are to clean up all entrails. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-1; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Sec. 54-37. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Churkin means a round throwing knife consisting of several sharp points protruding from a rounded disc. 
    Numchuk or nunchaku means an instrument consisting of two or more sticks, clubs or rods connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain. 
    Sucbai means a short length of wood or metal or similar material which when gripped in the hand protrudes on either side of the fist. Such prohibited instrument may or may not have spikes or short pointed protrusions from either end. 
(b) ?Seizure and destruction. Any such device shall be seized by a law enforcement officer and destroyed or turned over to the state crime laboratory for destruction. 
(c) ?Prohibited generally. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall within the city wear or in any manner carry under his clothes or conceal upon or about his person, any deadly or dangerous weapon; provided this subsection shall not apply to a peace officer or such persons as may be authorized to carry such weapons. 
(d) ?Concealed weapons in public establishments. No person shall carry or be possessed of a dangerous weapon in any public building or business establishment open to the public except a bona fide weapons repair, display or sales establishment, unless such dangerous weapon is so stored and concealed (other than on the person) so as not to be readily accessible to any person or patron. This subsection shall not apply to peace officers or others duly authorized by law acting within the scope of their duties. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the sale, purchase, repair or trade of firearms by a retail business establishment doing so in the course of its regular business in accord with state and federal law, nor to hinder a prospective customer from attempting to buy, sell or trade firearms to or from a retailer. 
(e) ?Specific weapons prohibited. No person, except a sheriff, constable, police officer or other law enforcement officer acting within the scope of their duties, shall carry or wear concealed about his person any pistol, revolver, firearm, slingshot, crossknuckle of lead, brass or other metal, Bowie knife, switchblade, dirk or dagger or any other dangerous or deadly weapon within the city. 
(f) ?Possession, sale and manufacture. No person shall sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or carry a numchuk (also called a nunchaku) or a churkin or sucbai or similar weapon, within the city. Any possession of a numchuk that is being used within a course of instruction in the tradition and proper use of the numchuk under the supervision of an adult, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, provided that such numchuk is possessed only in the building where the martial arts instruction program is located within. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-2; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 54-38. - Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones and other missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or throw by any means any dangerous missile, object, arrow, stone, snowball or other missile within the city; provided, however, with the exception of the provision listed in section 54-36(f)(1) or upon written application to the chief of police and common council, a person may be granted permission by the common council to construct and maintain supervised archery ranges if in the opinion of the common council the construction or maintenance of such ranges will not endanger the public health and safety. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-3; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 10-12-2015) 
Sec. 54-39. - Harassing or obscene telephone calls. 
    Whoever does any of the following acts shall be subject to the general penalty as provided in section 1-13: 
(1) ?Makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious or indecent; 
(2) ?Makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with the intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number; 
(3) ?Makes or causes the telephone of another repeatedly or continuously to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number; 
(4) ?Knowingly permits any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section; and 
(5) ?In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes repeated calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called number. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 54-40. - Obstructing streets and sidewalks. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Block means to interfere with unobstructed travel by any means including, but not limited to, standing on the part of the walk that is fit for travel, or placing any object or vehicle whatsoever on such walk. 
    Sidewalk means any sidewalk owned or maintained by the city. The term shall not include sidewalks or walkways on private property in shopping centers, apartment complexes, office building sites or any other private property. 
(b) ?Obstructing streets. No person shall stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, bridge or public ground within the city in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place. 
(c) ?Blocking sidewalk. No person shall block any sidewalk by obstructing the sidewalk so that it is impossible for a pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street. 
(d) ?Free speech. This section shall not be interpreted as prohibiting any person from stopping on any sidewalk to talk or to make a speech, provided that such person shall not stand in such a location that it is impossible for any pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street. If two or more persons are engaged in talking while stopped on a sidewalk, they shall not stand in such locations as to completely prevent any pedestrian from passing them on the sidewalk. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-6) 
Sec. 54-41. - Loitering. 
    No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall prior to any arrest for an offense under this section afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the police or peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true, and, if believed by the police or peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-7) 
Sec. 54-42. - Disorderly conduct. 
    No person, within the city, shall: 
(1) ?In any public or private place engage in violent, noisy, riotous, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to cause or provoke an immediate disturbance of public order or tends to annoy or disturb any other person. 
(2) ?Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy altercation other than a bona fide athletic contest. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-9(a)) 
Secs. 54-43—54-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 54-76. - Destruction of property. 
(a) ?Prohibited generally. No person shall willfully injure or intentionally deface, destroy or unlawfully remove, take or meddle with any property of any kind or nature within the city and belonging to the city or its departments, the Mosinee School District, or to any private person, without the consent of the owner or proper authority. 
(b) ?Parental liability. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 895.035, the parents of an unemancipated minor shall be liable for the damage of property caused by the willful, malicious or wanton act of such child; such liability shall not exceed $2,500.00. 
(c) ?Unlawful removal of property. It shall be unlawful for any person to take and carry away the property of another without the owner's consent with the intention to do so. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-1; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 9-9-1996) 
Sec. 54-77. - Damage to public property. 
(a) ?Prohibited acts. No person shall climb any tree, or pluck any flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon, remove, or in any manner injure or deface, write upon, defile or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, fountain, ornament, statue, building, fence, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign, bridge, structure or other property within any park or parkway, or in any way injuring, damaging or defacing any public building, sidewalk or other public property in the city. 
(b) ?Breaking of streetlamps or windows. No person shall break glass in any streetlamps or windows of any building owned or occupied by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-10) 
Sec. 54-78. - Retail theft. 
(a) ?Described. Whoever intentionally alters indicia of price or value of merchandise or takes and carries away, transfers, conceals or retains possession of merchandise held for resale by a merchant without consent and with intent to deprive the merchant permanently of possession, or the full purchase price may be penalized as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b) ?Intentional concealment. The intentional concealment of unpurchased merchandise which continues from one floor to another or beyond the last station for receiving payments in a merchant's store is evidence of intent to deprive the merchant permanently of possession of such merchandise without paying the purchase price thereof. The discovery of unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person or among the belongings of another is evidence of intentional concealment on the part of the person so concealing such goods. 
(c) ?Detainment of suspects. A merchant or merchant's adult employe who has probable cause for believing that a person has violated this section in his presence may detain such person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time to deliver him to a peace officer, or to his parent or guardian if a minor. The detained person must be promptly informed of the purpose for the detention and may make phone calls, but shall not be interrogated or searched against their will before the arrival of a police officer who may conduct a lawful interrogation of the accused person. Compliance with this subsection entitles the merchant or his employe affecting the detention to the same defense in any action as is available to a peace officer making an arrest in the line of duty. 
(d) ?Penalty. If the value of the merchandise does not exceed $100.00, any person violating this section shall forfeit not more than $200.00. If the value of the merchandise exceeds $100.00, this section shall not apply and the matter shall be referred to the district attorney for criminal prosecution. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-5) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 943.50. 
Sec. 54-79. - Theft of library material. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Archives means a place in which public or institutional records are systematically preserved. 
    Library means any public library, library of an educational or historical organization or society, or museum, and specifically the public libraries of the city or the county located within the city. 
    Library material means any book, plate, picture photograph, engraving, painting, drawing, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, broadside, manuscript, document, letter, public record, microform, sound recording, audiovisual materials in any format, magnetic or other tapes, electronic data processing records, or other tapes, artifacts or other documentary, written or printed materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, belonging to, on loan to or otherwise in the custody of a library which value does not exceed $1,000.00. 
(b) ?Possession without consent. Whoever intentionally takes and carries away, transfers, conceals or retains possession of any library material without the consent of a library official, agent or employe and with intent to deprive the library of possession of the material may be subject to a forfeiture as provided by section 1-13. The failure to return library material after its proper return date, after written notice from the library and city attorney, shall be deemed to be theft. Notice shall be considered given when written notice is mailed to the last known address of the person with the overdue material; the notice date shall be the date of mailing. 
(c) ?Concealment. The concealment of library material beyond the last station for borrowing library material in a library is evidence of intent to deprive the library of possession of the material. The discovery of library material which has not been borrowed in accordance with the library's procedures or taken with consent of a library official, agent or employe and which is concealed upon the person or among the belongings of the person or concealed by a person upon the person or among the belongings of another is evidence of intentional concealment on the part of the person so concealing the material. 
(d) ?Detention based on probable cause. An official or adult employe or agent of a library who has probable cause for believing that a person has violated this section in his presence may detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time to deliver the person to a peace officer, or to the person's parent or guardian in the case of a minor. The detained person shall be promptly informed of the purpose of the detention and be permitted to make telephone calls, but shall not be interrogated or searched against his will before the arrival of a peace officer who may conduct a lawful interrogation of the accused person. Compliance with this section entitles the official, agent or employe effecting the detention to the same defense in any action as is available to a peace officer making an arrest in the line of duty. 
(e) ?Damaging material. No person shall mar, deface or in any other way damage or mutilate any library material. 
(f) ?Return demanded. No person shall fail, on demand, to return any library material when such demand has been made in accordance with the rules and regulations duly made and adopted by the library. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 943.61. 
Sec. 54-80. - Damaging or tampering with coin machines. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coin machine means any device or receptacle designed to receive money or anything of value. The term includes a depository box, parking meter, vending machine, pay telephone, money-changing machine, coin-operated phonograph and amusement machine if they are designed to receive money or other thing of value. 
(b) ?Prohibited acts. No person shall, without lawful authority, open, remove or damage any coin machine, coin telephone or other vending machine dispensing goods or services, or a part thereof, or possess a key or device specifically designed to open or break any coin machine, coin telephone or other vending machine dispensing goods or services, or possess a drawing, print or mold of a key or device specifically designed to open or break any coin machine, coin telephone or other vending machine dispensing goods or services within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-9) 
Sec. 54-81. - Disturbing cemetery property. 
    No person except the owner of the cemetery lot or a cemetery employe shall cut, remove, injure or carry away flowers, trees, plants or vines from any cemetery lot or property; nor shall any person deface, injure or mark upon any cemetery markers, headstones, monuments, fences or structures; nor shall any person other than the owner injure, carry away or destroy any vases, flower pots, urns or other objects which have been placed on any cemetery lot. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-11) 
Sec. 54-82. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    In addition to the general penalty of this Code or any other penalty imposed for violation of any section of this article, any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parents of any unemancipated minor child who violates section 54-76 may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property in accordance with the statute. Nothing in this Code of Ordinances shall prevent the police department from referring violations of the provisions of this article to the district attorney's office in the interest of justice. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-12) 
Secs. 54-83—54-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUDITY AND NUDE ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; adult-oriented establishments, § 14-31 et seq.; amusements, § 14-231 et seq. 

Sec. 54-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employe means waiters, waitresses, entertainers, dancers and any other person who, at the time of performance by him or her of any act prohibited under this article, is in any manner, either expressly or at sufferance, acting for and in behalf of the person or persons in charge of such licensed premises, whether or not compensated therefor. 
    Licensed means the existence of a business or business premises holding or legally required to hold a seller's permit under the sales and use statutes, Wis. Stats. § 77.51 et seq. 
    Nude or nudity means the exhibition, in or on any licensed premises, of the human body with the private parts or any pubic hair thereof exposed and in addition, as to the female human body, with any part of the breast, including the areola, either uncovered, or covered in any manner without completely opaque material so as to give the appearance of nudity to a person of ordinary discernment and sensibility. 
    Nude entertainment means that performance in, or on licensed premises by a nude person, of any dance commonly known as topless or bottomless dancing, or by words of similar import, any gyration of the human body, commonly known as bumps or grinds, or words of similar import; any real or depicted obscene act, either by the actor alone or with another or others; or the mingling, while nude, of any employe of such licensed premises with patrons or members of the public then present in or on such licensed premises; or any posing of the nude human body therein and thereon. 
    Obscene act means sexual conduct as defined by the Wisconsin Supreme Court in State ex rel. Chobot v. Circuit Court, 61 Wis. 2d 354. 
    Person in charge of such licensed premises means the owner, whether or not on the licensed premises at the time any act prohibited under this article is performed, and the operator thereof while on such licensed premises at such time. 
    Sexual conduct means acts of sexual intercourse between humans, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, acts of masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus and acts of excretory function, lewd exhibition of the genitals especially in a stimulated condition and sexual relations between humans and animals. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-2(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-117. - Prohibited acts. 
    No employe of any licensed premises, or any other person, shall perform, and no owner or operator thereof, shall permit such employe or any other person to perform, any nude exhibition, nude entertainment or obscene act, at any place in or upon such licensed premises. Every separate such performance is a separate and distinct violation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 9-4-2(b)) 
Secs. 54-118—54-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Sale of alcohol beverages to underage or intoxicated persons, § 6-5; alcohol beverages and underage persons, § 6-41 et seq. 
State Law reference— Crimes against children generally, Wis. Stats. § 948.01 et seq. 

Sec. 54-151. - Curfew. 
(a) ?Hours. It shall be unlawful for any person under 16 years of age to be on foot, bicycle or in any type of vehicle on any public street, avenue, highway, road, alley, park, school grounds, swimming beach, cemetery, playground, public building or any other public place in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied by their parent or guardian, or person having lawful custody and control of the child, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. The fact such child, unaccompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal custody, is found upon any such public place during the aforementioned hours shall be prima facie evidence that the child is there unlawfully and that no reasonable excuse exists therefor. 
(b) ?Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a child who is performing an errand as directed by his parent, guardian or person having lawful custody; who is on his own premises or in the areas immediately adjacent thereto; whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places or in any motor vehicle during such hours; or who is returning home from a supervised school, church or civic function. These exceptions shall not, however, permit a child to unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys or public places or be in a parked motor vehicle on the public streets. 
(c) ?Responsibility of parents or guardians. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the lawful care, custody and control of any person under 16 years of age to allow or permit such person to violate the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. The fact that prior to the present offense a parent, guardian or custodian was informed by any law enforcement officer of a separate violation of this section occurring within 30 days of the present offense shall be prima facie evidence that such parent, guardian or custodian allowed or permitted the present violation. Any parent, guardian, or custodian who shall have made a missing person notification to the police department shall not be considered to have allowed or permitted any person under 16 years of age to violate this section. 
(d) ?Responsibilities of owners of businesses. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business to permit any minor under 16 years of age to loaf or idle in such place during the hours prohibited by this section. Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business during the hours prohibited by this section shall find persons under 16 years of age loafing or idling in such place of business, he shall immediately order such person to leave, and, if such person refuses to leave such place of business, the operator shall immediately notify the police department and inform them of the violation. 
(e) ?Detention by police. Every law enforcement officer is authorized to take custody of any minor violating the provisions of this section, until such time as the parent, guardian or person having legal custody of the minor shall be immediately notified, and the person so notified shall as soon as reasonably possible thereafter report to the police department for the purpose of taking the custody of the minor and shall sign a release for him. If no response is received, the police shall take whatever action is deemed necessary, in the best interest of the minor per Wis. Stats. § 938.17. 
(f) ?Warning. The first time a minor, parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a minor that is detained by a law enforcement officer of the city, as provided in subsection (e) of this section, such minor, parent, guardian or person having such legal custody, shall be advised, personally, if known, or by registered mail, as to the provisions of this section, and further advised that any violation of this section occurring thereafter by this minor or any other minor under his care or custody shall result in a penalty being imposed as provided in subsection (g) of this section. 
(g) ?Penalty for violation of section. Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child described in subsections (a)—(e) of this section who has been warned in the manner provided in subsection (f) of this section and who thereafter violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-13. After a second violation within a six-month period, if the defendant, in a prosecution under this section, proves that he is unable to comply with this section because of the disobedience of the child, the action shall be dismissed and the child shall be referred to the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction under Wis. Stats. ch. 48. Any minor person under 16 years of age who shall violate this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $1.00, nor more than $25.00, together with the cost of prosecution. 
(Code 1986, § 9-6-1; Ord. No 99-4, § 1, 9-27-99) 
Sec. 54-152. - Possession of controlled substances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years to possess a controlled substance contrary to the Uniformed Controlled Substances Act, Wis. Stats. ch. 961. 
(Code 1986, § 9-6-2; Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 9-9-1996) 
Sec. 54-153. - Petty theft by juveniles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 with intent to steal or take property from the person or presence of the owner without the owner's consent and with the intent to deprive the owner of the use thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 9-6-3) 
Sec. 54-154. - Receiving stolen goods. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of 18 to intentionally receive or conceal property he knows to be stolen. 
(Code 1986, § 9-6-4) 
Sec. 54-155. - City jurisdiction over juveniles aged 12 or older. 
(a) ?Adoption of state statute. Wis. Stats. § 48.17(2), ch. 938 is hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(b) ?Provisions of city ordinance applicable to juveniles aged 12 or over. Subject to the provisions and limitations of Wis. Stats. ch. 938 and § 48.17(2), complaints alleging a violation of any provision of these ordinances against juveniles aged 12 or over may be brought on behalf of the city and may be prosecuted utilizing the same procedures in such cases as are applicable to adults charged with the same offense. 
(c) ?No incarceration as penalty. The court shall not impose incarceration as a penalty for any person convicted of an offense prosecuted under this article. 
(d) ?Additional prohibited acts. In addition to any other provision, juveniles age 12 or over shall not own, possess, ingest, buy, sell, trade, use as a beverage, give away, or otherwise control any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in violation of Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(e) ?Penalty for violations of subsection (d). Any juveniles age 12 or over who shall violate the provisions of subsection (d) of this section shall be subject to the same penalties as are provided in section 1-13 exclusive of the provisions therein relative to commitment in the county jail. 
(Code 1986, § 9-6-5; Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 9-9-1996) 
Sec. 54-156. - Truancy. 
(a) ?Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except when the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
(1) ?Dropout means as given in Wis. Stats. § 118.153(1)(b). 
(2) ?Truant means a student who is absent for part of or all of one or more days from school during which the school attendance officer, principal, or teacher has not been notified of the legal cause of such absence by the parent or guardian of the absent pupil, and also means intermittent attendance carried on for the purpose of defeating the intent of the compulsory school attendance laws of Wis. Stats. Ch. 118.15. 
(3) ?Habitual truant means a pupil who is absent from his/her school without an acceptable excuse under Wis. Stats. Ch. 118.15 for either of the following: 
a. ?Part or all of five or more days out of ten consecutive days on which school is held during a school semester. 
b. ?Part or all of ten or more days on which school is held during a school semester. 
(b) ?Truancy prohibited . Any school-age child is prohibited from being a truant or habitual truant. 
(c) ?Truant disposition . The court is authorized to order the following disposition upon a finding of truancy: 
(1) ?An order for the person to attend school. 
(2) ?For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than $50.00 plus statutorily authorized costs, assessments, surcharges and fees. 
(3) ?For a second or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, a forfeiture of no more than $100.00 plus statutorily authorized costs, assessments, surcharges and fees, subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500.00 for all violations committed during a school semester. 
(4) ?All or part of the forfeiture plus costs, assessments, surcharges and fees may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. 
(d) ?Habitual truancy disposition. The municipal court judge may order any of the following dispositions: 
(1) ?Suspension of the person's operating privilege, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), for not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days. The court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license and forward it to the State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension. 
(2) ?An order for the person to participate in counseling or a supervised work program or other community service under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g). 
(3) ?An order for the person to remain at home except during the hours in which the person is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time to get to and from the school program or place of worship. The order may permit a person to leave his home if the person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(4) ?An order for the person to attend an educational program under Wis. Stats. § 938.34(7d). 
(5) ?An order for the State of Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development to revoke, under Wis. Stats. § 103.72, a permit issued under Wis. Stats. § 103.70 authorizing the employment of the person. 
(6) ?In the case of a person who is a dropout, the court may suspend the person's operating privilege, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(40), of a person at least 16 years of age and a dropout, until the person reaches the age of 18. The court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license and forward it to the State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension. 
(7) ?A forfeiture of not more than $500.00 plus costs, assessments, surcharges and fees, subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.37. All or part of the forfeiture may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. 
(8) ?Any other reasonable conditions consistent with Wis. Stats. § 118.163, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on specified premises and restrictions on associating with other children or adults. 
(e) ?School attendance . No person shall, having under his/her control a child who is between the ages of six and 18 years, allow that child to be in noncompliance with Wis. Stats. § 118.15. 
(f) ?Contributing to truancy . 
(1) ?No person may, by an act or omission, knowingly encourage or contribute to the truancy of a child as defined in Wis. Stats. § 118.16(1)(c). 
(2) ?Any person found guilty of violating subsection (f)(1) of this section shall be fined as per the penalty in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 10-11-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 54-157. - Harboring, aiding, abetting and/or assisting minor runaways. 
(a) ?No person shall knowingly allow, permit or board any minor child at his residence, business or other property in his control, where the person knows or should have known the minor child to be a runaway from his parent, guardian or legal custodian. 
(b) ?No person shall knowingly assist, aid or abet a runaway child to escape apprehension or flee from his parents or authorities including, but not limited to: 
(1) ?Provide transportation to such runaway child. 
(2) ?Provide money, clothing or any other useful instrument to the runaway child to aid the runaway child in escape. 
(3) ?Obstruct by providing false or untrue information regarding the location or plan of the runaway child. 
(4) ?Refuse to provide information to law enforcement officers when questioned about the runaway child, which information was known to them at the time and would assist in the apprehension of such runaway child. 
(5) ?Assist, aid or abet the runaway child in any other way for the purpose of hindering law enforcement officers or the child's parents, guardian or legal custodian from learning the whereabouts of the child. 
(6) ?This section does not apply to the recipient of a placement by the juvenile court intake staff or the court, providing that the law enforcement agency who originated the runaway child report is informed of such placement. This section does not apply to any person providing temporary shelter to a runaway for the purpose of protecting the runaway from imminent abuse, provided the person does not withhold information about the whereabouts of the runaway if questioned by law enforcement authorities and reports the whereabouts of a known runaway to law enforcement officers as soon as feasible. 
(Ord. No. 93-8, § 2, 8-9-1993) 
Secs. 54-158—54-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC NUISANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, Wis. Stats. § 823.01 et seq. 

Sec. 54-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public nuisance means a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to: 
(1) ?Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
(2) ?In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; 
(3) ?Greatly offend the public morals or decency; and 
(4) ?Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use of public property. 
(Code 1986, § 9-7-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-192. - Prohibited generally. 
    No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 9-7-1) 
Sec. 54-193. - Loud and unnecessary noise. 
(a) ?Prohibited generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud and unnecessary noise. 
(b) ?Prohibited acts. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1) ?Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city for longer than three seconds in any period of one minute or less, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any signaling device and the sounding of any plainly audible device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2) ?Radios, phonographs and similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set; musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a loud and unnecessary manner. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3) ?Loudspeakers and amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting attention of the public to any building or structure. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4) ?Animals; birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued unnecessary noise. 
(5) ?Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(6) ?Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor boat except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. No person shall use motor vehicle brakes within the city which are in any way activated or operated by the compression of an engine of any such motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. 
(7) ?Construction or repair of buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or any other similar equipment attended by loud or unusual noise, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays; provided, however, that the city building inspector shall have the authority, upon determining that the loss of inconvenience which would result to any party in interest would be extraordinary and of such nature as to warrant special consideration, to grant a permit for a period necessary within which time such work and operation may take place within the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(8) ?Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, hospital or court street. 
(c) ?Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1) ?Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2) ?Excavations or repairs of streets or other public construction by or on behalf of the city, county and state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3) ?The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(d) ?Stationary noise limits. 
(1) ?Maximum permissible sound levels. 
a. ?Noise from a stationary source shall not exceed the following standards for maximum sound pressure levels measured at the property line. 
Zone Noise 
Rating/ 
Daytime Noise 
Rating/ 
Nighttime Residential 60 db 50 db Commercial 70 db 70 db All other zones 75 db 75 db  
b. ?Ambient noise is the all-encompassing noise associated with a given source, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far, but excluding the noise source being measured. Ambient noise is a factor and the subject noise shall exceed the ambient noise by five db in any octave band to be designated excessive. 
c. ?Pure tones and impulsive noises are factors. Five noise rating numbers shall be taken from the table in subsection (d)(1)a of this section, if the subject noise consists primarily of a pure tone or if it is impulsive in character. 
(2) ?Construction noise. Construction equipment in any zone may be operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., provided that such equipment does not exceed a maximum sound pressure level of 80 dB(a) measured at the property line of the location at which such equipment is in use. 
(3) ?Noise in residential districts. In residential zones, the person in violation of this section shall be ordered to reduce the sound pressure to acceptable levels immediately by the monitoring officer. 
(4) ?Operation of certain equipment. Lawnmowers, chainsaws, powered garden equipment, electric insect killing/repelling devices, and other nonconstruction maintenance equipment shall be operated only during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., unless within the specified noise levels measured at the property line of the location at which such equipment is in use. 
(5) ?Exemptions . Operation of emergency equipment shall be exempt from this article. Operation of snowplows on commercial use properties shall be exempt from this article. Snowblowers not operated on a commercial basis on residential use properties shall be exempt from this article when used to gain access to a city street. Emergency equipment shall include ambulance, police, fire, snow removal, civil defense sirens, etc., necessary for the health, safety and protection of the citizens of the city. 
(6) ?Methods of measuring noise. 
a. ?Equipment. Noise measurement shall be made with a sound level meter. 
b. ?Location of noise meter. Noise measurement shall be made at the nearest lot line of the premises from which a noise complaint is received. The noise meter shall be placed at a height of at least three feet above the ground and at least three feet away from walls, barriers, obstructions, and all other sound reflective surfaces. 
(7) ?Appeals. The common council may grant an exemption to individuals proving evidence of substantial hardship. Evidence that reasonable technological attempts have been made to correct the problem shall be considered grounds for granting an exemption to this article for existing industries. 
(e) ?Permits for amplifying devices. 
(1) ?Required. The use of loudspeakers or amplifying devices on the streets of the city is prohibited unless the party desiring to use such loudspeaker or amplifying device first obtains a permit from the chief of police. 
(2) ?Grounds or reasons for denial or allowance. The chief of the police department shall have the authority to revoke such permit when he believes such loudspeaker or amplifying device is becoming a nuisance because of the volume, the method in which it is being used, or the location in which it is being operated. 
(3) ?Time restrictions. The chief of the police department shall not grant a permit to use a loudspeaker or amplifying device before the hours of 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Nor shall a permit be granted to anyone who, in the opinion of the chief of police, uses such loudspeaker or amplifying device in such a manner or for such a purpose as to constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-8; Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 2-13-2012) 
Cross reference— Noise standards for industrial developments, § 42-737. 
Sec. 54-194. - Disorderly conduct with motor vehicle. 
    No person shall, within the city, on public or private property, by or through the use of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, mini-bike, or ATV, under circumstances which tend to cause or provoke a disturbance or annoy one or more persons, engage in violent, abusive, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct, including, but not limited to, unnecessary or deliberate or intentional: spinning of wheels; squealing of tires; revving of engine; blowing of horn(s); causing the engine to backfire; or causing the vehicle, while commencing to move or in motion, to raise one or more of its wheels off the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1, 9-11-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 2017, repealed § 54-194 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1986, § 9-2-9(b). 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; disturbance of the peace with a motor vehicle, § 78-9. 
Sec. 54-195. - Open cisterns, wells, basements or other dangerous excavations. 
    No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by him any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or other dangerous openings. All such places shall be filled, securely covered or fenced in such manner as to prevent injury to any person and any cover shall be of a design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed by small children. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-3) 
Sec. 54-196. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside without first removing such door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from such icebox, refrigerator or container, unless such container is displayed for sale on the premises of the owner or his agent and is securely locked or fastened. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-4) 
Sec. 54-197. - Storage of junk. 
    No person shall store junked or discarded property including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement blocks, or other unsightly debris which substantially depreciates property values in the neighborhood except or upon permit issued by the common council. The chief of police or building inspector may require by written order any premises violating this section to be put in compliance within the time specified in such order, and if the order is not complied with, may have the premises put in compliance and the cost thereof assessed as a special tax against the property. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-6) 
Cross reference— Junked vehicles and appliances, § 54-236 et seq. 
Sec. 54-198. - Public nuisances affecting health. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of section 54-191: 
(1) ?Adulterated food. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(2) ?Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or foods which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(3) ?Breeding places for vermin. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed. 
(4) ?Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(5) ?Garbage cans. Garbage cans which are not flytight. 
(6) ?Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances. 
(7) ?Noxious odors. Any use of property, substances or things within the city or within four miles thereof or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the city. 
(8) ?Street pollution. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the city. 
(9) ?Accumulations of refuse. Accumulations of old cans, lumber, elm firewood and other refuse. 
(10) ?Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the limits or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property. 
(Code 1986, § 9-7-3) 
Sec. 54-199. - Public nuisances offending morals and decency. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of section 54-191: 
(1) ?Disorderly houses. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling. 
(2) ?Gambling devices. All gambling devices and slot machines. 
(3) ?Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by the ordinances of the city. 
(4) ?Continuous violation of city ordinances. Any place or premises within the city where city ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. 
(5) ?Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the state or ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 9-7-4) 
Sec. 54-200. - Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of section 54-191: 
(1) ?Signs, billboards and other structures. All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
(2) ?Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within the city. 
(3) ?Obstruction of intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(4) ?Tree limbs. All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than ten feet above the surface thereof and all limbs which project over a public street less than 14 feet above the surface. 
(5) ?Dangerous trees. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are the cause of substantial annoyance to the general public. 
(6) ?Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
(7) ?Wires over streets. All wires over streets, alleys, or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface. 
(8) ?Obstructions of streets: excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the city or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished, or do not conform to the permit. 
(9) ?Abandoned refrigerators. All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside. 
(10) ?Flammable liquids. Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the city or laws of the state relating to the storage of flammable liquids. 
(11) ?Unremoved snow. All snow and ice not removed or sprinkled with ashes, sawdust, sand or other chemical removers, as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 9-7-5) 
Sec. 54-201. - Abatement—Generally. 
(a) ?Enforcement. The chief of police, the chief of the fire department, the public works director, the building inspector and health officer shall enforce those provisions of this article that come within the jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has satisfied themselves that a nuisance does in fact exist. 
(b) ?Summary abatement. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within the city and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, or welfare, the mayor may direct the proper officer to cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(c) ?Abatement after notice. 
(1) ?If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, or welfare, he shall serve notice on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the nuisance within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within such ten days, the proper officer shall cause the nuisance to be removed as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2) ?If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report of his findings with the mayor who shall cause an action to enjoin such nuisance to be commenced in the name of the city in circuit court in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 823. 
(d) ?Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the city or its officials in accordance with law. 
(Code 1986, § 9-7-6) 
Sec. 54-202. - Same—Costs. 
    In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the costs of abating a public nuisance by the city shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such costs shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. 
(Code 1986, §§ 9-7-6(3)(c), 9-7-7) 
Secs. 54-203—54-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - JUNKED VEHICLES AND APPLIANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Storage of junk as a public nuisance, § 54-197; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; abandoned, wrecked and discarded vehicles, § 78-416 et seq. 

Sec. 54-236. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disassembled, inoperable, junked or wrecked motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors and trailers means motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, farm machinery or trailers in such state of physical or mechanical ruin as to be incapable of propulsion, being operated upon the public streets or highways or which is otherwise not in safe or legal condition for operation on public streets or highways due to missing or inoperative parts, flat or removed tires, expired or missing license plates, or other defects. 
    Inoperable appliance means any stove, washer, refrigerator or other appliance which is no longer operable in the sense for which it was manufactured. 
    Motor vehicle means as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(35). 
    Unlicensed motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers means motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers which do not bear lawful current license plates. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-8(b)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-237. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction, shall be subject to section 1-13. Each motor vehicle or appliance involved shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-8(e)) 
Sec. 54-238. - Storage of automobiles. 
    No disassembled, inoperable, unlicensed, junked or wrecked motor vehicles, snowmobiles, truck bodies, tractors, trailers, farm machinery or appliances shall be stored or allowed to remain in the open upon private property within the city for a period exceeding five days, unless it is in connection with a properly licensed automotive or appliance sales, repair or storage business enterprise located in a properly zoned area. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-8(a)) 
Sec. 54-239. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored within an enclosed building or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, in a storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner, or seasonal use vehicles such as snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters and nonmotorized campers, provided such vehicles are stored in compliance with this Code. Such business enterprises shall include auto junkyards, auto repair and body shops, but shall not include automobile service stations or tire, battery and accessory sales stores, except those service stations which operate a duly licensed wrecker service. Also excepted are motor vehicles registered pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 341.265 and 341.266. In other situations the common council may issue permits permitting an extension of not to exceed an additional 30 days time to comply with this article where exceptional facts and circumstances warrant such extension. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-8(c)) 
Sec. 54-240. - Enforcement of article. 
(a) ?Whenever the chief of police shall find any vehicles or appliances, as described in this article, placed or stored in the open upon private property within the city, he shall notify the owner of such property on which such vehicle or appliance is stored of the violation of this article. If such vehicle or appliance is not removed within five days, the police department shall cause to be issued a citation to the property owner or tenant of the property upon which such vehicle or appliance is stored. 
(b) ?If such vehicle or appliance is not removed within ten days after issuance of a citation, the chief of police shall cause the vehicle or appliance to be removed and impounded and it shall thereafter be disposed of as prescribed in sections 78-421—78-424 by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. Any costs incurred in the removal and sale of such vehicle or appliance shall be recovered from the owner. However, if the owner of the vehicle or appliance cannot readily be found, the cost of such removal shall be charged to the property from which it is removed, which charges shall be entered as a special charge on the tax roll. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-8(d)) 
Chapter 58 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance naming public ground and parks saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(22); streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 86; waterways, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Use of metal detectors on public property. 
    Absent authorization by the common council, the use of metal detectors and digging for buried objects on city property, except beaches where no vegetation is present, is prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-3) 
Sec. 58-2. - Use of city recreational facilities. 
(a) ?Written application for use. Written application shall be made with the administrator of the city for the use of the recreational facilities at least 14 days prior to the intended use. All reservations will be on a first-come, first-served basis. The application shall include: 
(1) ?The date of application. 
(2) ?The name and address of the applicant; or if the applicant is an organization, the legal name of the organization and the name and address of the organization's president and secretary. 
(b) ?Responsibility for cleaning. The applicant will be responsible for cleaning the facilities within 24 hours of their use, restoring the premises to its previous condition, and for damages to the premises or equipment thereon. 
(c) ?User limitations. 
(1) ?The use of the recreation building will be limited to city residents, or resident organizations, as defined by the city recreational guidelines. 
(2) ?Use of the ball park will be limited to resident organized city ball clubs. 
(3) ?No individual will be allowed rental of city recreational facilities for the purpose of profit. 
(4) ?All city park and recreational facilities may be available for rental on a yearround basis, when there are no conflicts with the city recreational schedule. 
(d) ?Fees. The following fees will be charged for the use of recreational facilities: 
(1) ?Recreation Building and Dessert Park: 
Profit-making activities set by the council from time to time. 
(Deposit set by the council from time to time required) 
Nonprofit activities and organizations administering Mosinee recreational programs set by the council from time to time. 
(2) ?Ball park (use of field, concession and lights): 
Profit-making activities set by the council from time to time. 
Nonprofit-making activities set by the council from time to time. 
(3) ?City public and private school-sponsored youth activities shall be free, but rental or ice skating facilities shall be excluded from this section. 
(e) ?Tournament awards. Ball tournament awards based on the sale or consumption of beverages shall be prohibited. 
(f) ?Alcoholic beverages sales. If alcoholic beverages are sold at the recreation building, two or more dance supervisors must be present to park cars and patrol, unless the city authorizes otherwise. Such dance inspectors shall be obtained from a list of persons approved by the chief of police, and shall be hired by the applicant. No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted outside the licensed area. 
(g) ?Youth activities. A minimum of one adult male and one adult female sponsors or chaperones must be present at the recreation facilities for all coeducational youth activities that are within the jurisdiction of this section. 
(h) ?Emergency vehicle entrances to be maintained. At the recreation building, each applicant shall be responsible for parking all bicycles and motor vehicles in the parking lot, allowing space for the entrance of an ambulance or fire trucks to the building. 
(i) ?Recreation building hours. All activities must end and the recreation building be vacated by 12:00 midnight. Beverages shall not be served after 11:45 p.m. 
(j) ?Waiver of liability. Applicants will hold the city harmless from any damages to the applicant or to others resulting, or to result from any accident incurred while using any recreational facility. The applicant will refrain from instituting, pressing or in any way aiding any claim, action or cause of action for damages, costs, loss of service, expenses of compensation, on account of, or in any way growing out of any accident occurring at any recreational facility. The city reserves the right to require liability insurance. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-6) 
Secs. 58-3—58-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION AND DIRECTOR[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— City park boards generally, Wis. Stats. § 27.08. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 58-36—58-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-391 et seq. 

Sec. 58-56. - Membership. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall consist of a councilmember appointed annually by the mayor and six who are citizens of the city appointed by the mayor for three-year terms. All appointments by the mayor shall be subject to confirmation by the common council. The recreation director shall be an ex officio member of the parks and recreation commission. Terms of office for citizen members shall commence on May 1. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-4(a)) 
Sec. 58-57. - Officers. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall annually elect one member as chairman and one member as vice-chairman. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-4(b)) 
Sec. 58-58. - Meeting procedure. 
    Four members shall constitute a quorum. The chairman or acting chairman shall not vote except in cases of tie, but shall be considered in determining a quorum. The parks and recreation commission shall adopt rules of procedure for governing the conduct of its meetings. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-4(c)) 
Sec. 58-59. - Powers and duties. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall have all the powers conferred by law upon park and recreational and cemetery boards and shall be chargeable with all the duties so required such as recommend, supervise work, and administer funds of all parks, cemeteries, playgrounds and recreational activities as part of properties within the city. The parks and recreation commission is specifically empowered and directed to: 
(1) ?Govern, manage, control, improve and care for all public parks located within, or partly within and partly without, the corporate limits of the city and secure the quiet, orderly and suitable use and enjoyment thereof by the people; also to adopt rules and regulations to promote these purposes. 
(2) ?Acquire in the name of the city for park purposes by gift, purchase, devise, bequest or condemnation, either absolutely or in trust, money, real or personal property, or any incorporeal right or privilege, provided gifts to the city of money or other property, real or personal either absolutely or in trust, for park purposes shall be accepted only after they have been recommended by the board to the common council and approved by the common council by resolution. 
(3) ?Buy or lease lands in the name of the city for park purposes within or without the city and with the approval of the common council, to sell or exchange property no longer required for its purposes. 
(4) ?Execute every trust imposed upon the use of property or property rights by the deed, testament or other conveyance transferring the title of such property to the city for park purposes. 
(5) ?Have the powers necessary and convenient for the effective and efficient management, control, supervision and operation of the city park system and recreation program, as carried out by the director, subject to budgetary approval by the common council. 
(6) ?Establish rules and regulations including user fees as deemed necessary and desirable for the proper use, care and operation of parks, park facilities, recreation programs and other activities under their control; provided, however, that such rules and regulations do not conflict with the laws of the state or ordinances. 
(7) ?Such other and further duties as may be necessary for the proper carrying out of the purposes of the parks and recreation board. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-4(d)) 
Sec. 58-60. - Recordkeeping. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the administrator. 
Sec. 58-61. - Finance. 
(a) ?Budget. The parks and recreation commission shall assist the recreation director in preparing an annual budget for submission to the common council, which budget shall reflect the parks and recreation commission's recommendations as to maintenance or acquisition of city parks, open spaces, park and related facilities, recreation programs and equipment, summer or seasonal employes, etc. Such annual budget shall contain estimates as to revenues to be derived from recreation programs or activities as well as estimated expenditures for operating the parks and recreation department. 
(b) ?Deposits. All revenues and income from the operation of park and recreation programs shall be deposited with the administrator as general revenue of the city. 
(c) ?Monetary contributions. All monies donated to the city specifically for park or recreation use shall be deposited in city accounts as a nonlapsing fund or reserve for such specific use. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-4(f)) 
Secs. 58-62—58-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECREATION DIRECTOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employes, § 2-176 et seq. 

Sec. 58-81. - Appointment. 
    The recreation director shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. The recreation director is responsible for the general administration, planning, direction and operation of the city recreation program. The recreation director functions under the direction of the common council and the parks and recreation board. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-12(a)) 
Sec. 58-82. - Duties. 
    The recreation director shall: 
(1) ?Plan, direct and schedule a program of summer and winter recreational activities for various segments, groups, ages and interest levels of the community; 
(2) ?Interview and select personnel for recreation jobs; 
(3) ?Coordinate use of facilities for classes and recreational activities; 
(4) ?Prepare and control operating budgets for all recreation programs; 
(5) ?Direct the operation of the playgrounds, ballparks and other facilities; 
(6) ?Participate in the preparation of facilities and playing fields for recreational use; 
(7) ?Explain the city's recreation program through press releases and contact with community agencies and groups, both public and private; 
(8) ?Attend meetings of professional organizations to keep abreast of trends in the recreation field; 
(9) ?Perform such other duties as may be directed by the common council and parks and recreation board. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-12(b)) 
Secs. 58-83—58-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-116. - Purpose of article. 
    In order to protect the parks, parkways, recreational facilities and conservancy areas within the city from injury, damage or desecration, this article is enacted. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-1(a)) 
Sec. 58-117. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park means all grounds, structures and watercourses which are or may be located within any area dedicated to the public use as a park, parkway, recreation facility or conservancy district in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-1(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-118. - Park hours. 
    All city parks will be open from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily with the exception of: 
(1) ?The recreation center and River Park which shall be closed at midnight during times of scheduled events. 
(2) ?People actively engaged in fishing shall be allowed in River Park and Chuck's Landing before and after regular park closing hours. 
(Ord. No. 91-7, § 1, 5-29-1991; Ord. No. 99-5, § 1, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 58-119. - Specific regulations. 
(a) ?Littering. No person shall litter, dump or deposit any rubbish, refuse, earth or other material in any park. 
(b) ?Sound devices. No person shall operate or play any amplifying system unless specific authority is first obtained from the common council. 
(c) ?Pets . No person shall permit any dog, cat or other pet to run at large in any park. Dogs are prohibited from being in a park at all times during a festival or any organized event that is being held within the park. 
(d) ?Billposting. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any placard, bill, notice, sign or advertising matter upon any structure, tree or other natural object in any park, except park regulations and other signs authorized by the common council. 
(e) ?Throwing stones and missiles. No person shall throw stones or other missiles in or into any park. 
(f) ?Removal of park equipment. No person shall remove benches, seats, tables or other park equipment from any park without the permission of the common council. 
(g) ?Trapping. No person shall trap in any park unless specific written authority is first obtained from the common council. 
(h) ?Making of fires. No person shall start, tend or maintain a fire except in personal grills or designated fireplaces. Personal grills shall be used only in designated picnic areas. The use of personal grills is permitted, provided that lawns and vegetation are not endangered. Unburned fuel and ashes shall be disposed of in such a manner as to prevent fire or damage to any park property. 
(i) ?Protection of park property. No person shall kill, injure or disturb or attempt to injure or disturb waterfowl, birds or animals, wild or domestic, within any park. No person shall climb any tree or remove flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon, remove or in any manner injure, deface, write upon or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, soil, sand, fountain, ornament, building, structure, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign or other property within any park or any of the facilities of the municipal swimming pool. 
(j) ?Motorized vehicles. No person shall operate an unlicensed or licensed motorized vehicle outside of areas specifically designated as parking areas or areas where the operation of such vehicles is specifically permitted. 
(k) ?Snowmobiles. No person shall operate a snowmobile in a city park except in designated areas. 
(l) ?Speed limit. No person shall operate any vehicle in a city park in excess of 15 mph unless otherwise posted. 
(m) ?Glass beverage bottles in parks. No person shall possess any glass beverage bottle within the limits of the parks of the city. 
(n) ?Reckless driving in parks. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a reckless manner in any of the public parks of the city. 
(o) ?Parking in parks. No person shall park any motor vehicle in any park in the city except in a designated parking area. 
(p) ?Horse and carriages. No person shall ride a horse or drive a horse-driven vehicle in any park, except on roads or designated bridle paths, except when approval of the parks and recreation commission is first obtained. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or drive a horse-drawn vehicle in a careless, negligent or reckless manner which may endanger the safety and well-being of others. 
(q) ?Camping. Camping in all city parks is prohibited. 
(r) ?Park hours. All city parks will be open from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily with the exception of the recreation center which shall be closed at midnight. People actively engaged in fishing shall be allowed in River Park and Chuck's Landing before and after regular park closing hours. 
(s) ?Protection of brick paved sidewalks in River Park. No motorized vehicles, bicycles, scooters, roller blades, in-line skates and skateboards shall be used on the brick paved sidewalks located within River Park. 
(t) ?Smoking prohibited in Edgewood Park and city softball field park. No person may smoke within Edgewood Park and the city softball field park during school-sponsored events. 
(u) ?Alcohol beverage possession prohibited in the recreation center parking lot during school-sponsored events. No person may possess or consume alcohol beverages within the recreation center parking lot area during the time period beginning one hour prior to a school-sponsored athletic event at one of the adjacent athletic facilities and lasting until one hour after the conclusion of the school-sponsored event. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-1(b); Ord. No. 98-4, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-25-2002; Ord. No. 2007-05, § 1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 12-10-2012; Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Sec. 58-120. - Radio-controlled model airplanes. 
    No person shall fly a radio-controlled model airplane in any park in the city except in areas specifically designated and posted for such purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-2) 
Secs. 58-121—58-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL POOLS 

Sec. 58-151. - Regulations. 
    The following rules and regulations are hereby prescribed for the use and regulation of the municipal swimming pool of the city: 
(1) ?All bathers and swimmers and any persons entering the pool enclosure shall be required to wear bathing suits. 
(2) ?Contaminating the pool, runways, isles or ground within the pool enclosure is prohibited. 
(3) ?Bringing of or throwing into the pool or pool enclosure of any article or anything which may in any way endanger the safety of the bathers or cause unsightliness is prohibited. 
(4) ?Eating within the pool enclosure shall be prohibited. 
(5) ?No person suffering from a cough, fever or inflamed eyes shall be allowed the use of the pool. 
(6) ?No person with sores or suffering from a skin disease or any other infectious disease, or wearing a bandage shall be allowed the use of the pool. 
(7) ?All children under five years of age using the pool or enclosure shall be accompanied by their parents, guardian or an adult. 
(8) ?Provision for the hours at which the pool and enclosure shall be open to the public shall be prescribed and determined by the committee on public welfare. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-5(a)) 
Sec. 58-152. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a) ?Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be prohibited from using the pool or entering the enclosure for a period to be determined by the director. Any person guilty of a second violation of the provisions of this article shall be fined by a sum of not more than $5.00 or by being prohibited from using the pool or enclosure for a period of not more than 30 days, nor less than 16 days, or by both. 
(b) ?The caretaker of the pool and enclosure and grounds and buildings shall have the power to refuse admittance to the pool or enclosure of any person guilty of any violation of the provisions of this article as set forth in subsection (a) of this section; and such caretaker shall have the same power as the city police in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-5(b)) 
Chapter 62 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; land use regulations, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; waterways, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Planning generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.23 and ch. 236. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-391 et seq. 

Sec. 62-31. - Composition. 
    The city planning commission shall consist of the following members: 
(1) ?The mayor, or his designate, who shall be the presiding officer. 
(2) ?One councilmember. 
(3) ?One representative from the park and recreation commission. 
(4) ?Four citizens of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-3(a)) 
Sec. 62-32. - Appointment. 
(a) ?The councilmember of the commission shall be annually elected by a majority vote of the common council, and during each April thereafter. 
(b) ?Citizen members. The four regular citizen members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor at the council's April organization meeting, subject to confirmation by the common council, for three-year terms each, the term of at least one member to expire each year. Each term shall commence May 1. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-3(b)) 
Sec. 62-33. - Organization. 
    The mayor shall serve as presiding officer. The planning commission shall organize by the election of a vice-chairman, secretary and such other officers as may in their judgment be necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-3(c)) 
Sec. 62-34. - Recordkeeping. 
    The planning commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the administrator. Four members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of all of the members of the planning commission. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-3(d)) 
Sec. 62-35. - Duties. 
(a) ?The master plan. The planning commission may make, adopt and, as necessary, amend, extend or add to the master plan, subject to common council confirmation, for the physical development of the city including areas outside of its boundaries which, in the planning commission's judgment, bear relation to the development of the city. The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats and descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the planning commission's recommendations for such physical development, and may include, among other things, without limitation, because of emuneration, the general location, character and extent of streets, highways, freeways, street grades, roadways, walks, parking areas, public places and areas, parks, parkways, playgrounds, sites for public buildings and structures, and the general location and extent of sewers, water conduits and other public utilities whether privately or publicly owned, the acceptance, widening, narrowing, extension, relocation, removal, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing public ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings, properties, utilities, routes or terminals, the general location, character and extent of community centers and neighborhood units, and a comprehensive zoning plan. The planning commission may adopt the master plan as a whole by a single resolution, or, as the work of making the whole master plan progresses, may from time to time by resolution adopt a part or parts thereof, any such part to correspond generally with one or more of the functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan. The adoption of the plan or any part, amendment or addition, shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of all the members of the planning commission, subject to confirmation by the common council. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter, and other matters intended by the planning commission to form the whole or any part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the adopted plan or part thereof by the identifying signature of the secretary of the planning commission, and a copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the common council. The purpose and effect of the adoption and certifying of the master plan or part thereof shall be solely to aid the planning commission and the common council in the performance of their duties. 
(b) ?Mandatory referrals. The common council or officer of the city, having final authority thereon, shall refer to the planning commission, for its consideration and report before final action is taken by the council, public body or officer, the following matters: the location of any statue or other memorial; the location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment, change of use, sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land for any street, alley or other public ways, park, playground, airport, area for parking vehicles, or other memorial or public grounds; the location, extension, abandonment or authorization for any public utility whether publicly or privately owned; all plats of lands in the city or within the territory over which the city is given platting jurisdiction by Wis. Stats. ch. 236; the location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing or sale of lands for public or semipublic housing, slum clearance, relief of congestion or vacation camps for children; and the amendment or repeal of any land use ordinance. Unless such report from the planning commission is made within 30 days, or such longer period as may be stipulated by the common council, the council or other public body or officer, may take final action without it. 
(c) ?Miscellaneous powers. The planning commission may make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the city to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the common council, programs for public improvements and the financing thereof. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. The planning commission, its members and employes, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and markers thereon. In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning in cooperation with the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-3(e)) 
Chapter 66 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 38; manufactured homes, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Solid waste, hazardous waste and refuse generally, Wis. Stats. § 144.43 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-31. - Compliance with article provisions. 
    It shall be unlawful to store, collect, transport, transfer, recover, incinerate or dispose of any solid waste within the boundaries of this city contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(e)) 
Sec. 66-32. - Collection of refuse. 
(a) ?Placement. Residential solid waste shall be accessible to collection crews. Residential solid waste in approved containers shall be placed immediately behind the curb of the public street for collection. Yard and bulky wastes from residential units shall likewise be placed in neat, orderly fashion behind the curb. During winter months, solid waste shall not be placed on top of the snow bank, nor shall it be placed in the roadway. The owner shall either shovel out an area behind the curb in which to place his wastes or he shall place it in his driveway. Collection crews will not collect residential solid waste unless it is placed at the curb of a public street. Residential units shall bring their solid waste to the public right-of-way for collection. Should collection crews be unable to discharge contents of garbage cans into collection vehicles using normal handling procedures, the cans, including contents, will be left at curbside. The owner shall make provisions to ensure that the solid waste therein can be collected on the next collection day. Collection crews will not empty garbage cans by means other than dumping. 
(b) ?Restriction on time of placement. All receptacles and containers for refuse and rubbish and all bundles of rubbish shall be placed in collection locations as designated in subsection (a) of this section only after 6:00 p.m. of the evenings prior to the regular collection time the following day. All receptacles and containers for refuse and garbage disposal shall be removed from the curbside collection point within 24 hours after the regular collection time. City employes or employes of licensed collectors will not enter any structures to remove garbage or refuse, except by written agreement with the property owner. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-6) 
Sec. 66-33. - Improper transportation. 
    It shall be unlawful to transport any solid waste in any vehicle which permits the contents to blow, sift, leak or fall therefrom. If spillage does occur, the collection crew shall immediately return spilled materials to the collection vehicle and shall properly clean, or have cleaned, the area. All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall be durable, easily cleanable and leakproof, if necessary, considering the type of waste and its moisture content. Collection vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent nuisances and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(f)) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 66-34. - Private dumps. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a dump. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(i)) 
Sec. 66-35. - Burning of waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste in any manner, except as provided elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(j)) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
Sec. 66-36. - Feeding of food waste to animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the feeding of food waste to animals for commercial purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(k)) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 66-37. - Interference with authorized collector. 
    No person other than an authorized collector shall collect or interfere with any garbage after it shall have been put into a garbage receptacle and deposited in the proper place for the collector, nor shall any unauthorized person molest, hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with an authorized garbage collector in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(g)) 
Sec. 66-38. - Scavenging. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any solid waste placed for collection. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(h)) 
Sec. 66-39. - Noncollectible materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any of the following wastes: 
(1) ?Hazardous waste; 
(2) ?Toxic wastes; 
(3) ?Chemicals; 
(4) ?Explosives or ammunition; 
(5) ?Drain or waste oil or flammable liquids; 
(6) ?Large quantities of paint; and 
(7) ?Tires. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(l)) 
Sec. 66-40. - Prohibited activities and noncollectible materials. 
(a) ?Dead animals. It shall be unlawful to place any dead animal, or parts thereof, in a container for collection; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to animal parts from food preparation for human consumption. 
(b) ?Undrained food wastes. It shall be unlawful to place any garbage or other food wastes in a container for collection unless it is first drained and wrapped. 
(c) ?Ashes. It shall be unlawful to place ashes for collection. 
(d) ?Animal or human wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place animal wastes and/or human wastes for collection. These wastes should be disposed of in plastic bags or in the sanitary sewer system. Such items as kitty litter may be placed for collection if animal wastes are removed prior to disposal. 
(e) ?Hospital wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any pathogenic hospital wastes. Such items as needles and syringes may be disposed of as long as they are contained to eliminate injury to collection crews. 
(f) ?Building waste. All waste resulting from remodeling, construction or removal of a building, roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner, builder or contractor. No license is required if done by the owner, contractor or builder. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(a)—(c), (m)—(o)) 
Sec. 66-41. - Improper placement. 
    It shall be unlawful to place, or allow to be placed, any solid waste upon the roads, streets, public or private property within this city contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-7(d)) 
Sec. 66-42. - Garbage accumulation; when a nuisance. 
    The accumulation or deposit of garbage, trash or putrescible animal or vegetable matter in or upon any lot or land or any public or private place within the city which causes the air or environment to become noxious or offensive or to be in such a condition as to promote the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects, or to provide a habitat or breeding place for rodents or other animals, or which otherwise becomes injurious to the public health is prohibited and declared to constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-8) 
Sec. 66-43. - Refuse from outside the city. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or cause to be deposited, for collection, any waste or refuse not generated within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-9) 
Sec. 66-44. - Enforcement and penalties for violation of article. 
(a) ?The city and its authorized solid waste and recycling collectors expressly reserve the right to inspect and to refuse to collect solid waste and recyclables if the placement of same is not in compliance with this article. 
(b) ?Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of $25.00 for the first offense and $100.00 for the second and subsequent offenses within two years. 
(c) ?The penalties provided in this section shall not be construed as prohibiting other methods of enforcing this article by the city in accordance with the ordinances of the city and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 90-17, § 1, 12-10-1990; Ord. No. 92-1, § 1, 2-24-1992; Ord. No. 94-7, § 1(g), 10-24-1994) 
Secs. 66-45—66-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTAINERS 

Sec. 66-66. - General standards. 
    Suitable containers of a type approved by the city shall be provided by the property owner or tenant in which to store all solid waste except for bulky or certain yard wastes as provided for in this division. Containers, in order to be approved, shall provide for efficient, safe and sanitary handling of solid wastes. They shall be maintained in a nuisance-free and odor-free condition and shall be sufficient to prevent the scattering of contents by weather conditions or animals. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-5(a)) 
Sec. 66-67. - Specifications. 
    Approved residential solid waste containers shall consist of metal or plastic containers with tightfitting covers and suitable handles, commonly referred to as "garbage cans," or plastic garbage bags which are closed by means of a tie. Approved containers shall be maximum 35-gallon size. Containers, including contents, shall not exceed in weight that which one person can safely lift (50 pounds). Metal garbage cans shall be of sufficient thickness to resist denting during normal handling by collection crews. Plastic garbage cans shall consist of plastic material not damaged by freezing and not susceptible to melting. They shall be capable of being handled during hot and cold weather without damage during normal handling by collection crews. Plastic bags shall be of sufficient strength to allow lifting and loading of contents without tearing. Each unit will be allowed to dispose of rubbish (not garbage) in small cardboard boxes (no more than nine cubic feet in volume), provided that the contents therein are covered and secured, as well as newspapers and magazines, as long as they are tied into bundles a maximum of ten inches high. Should bundles, cardboard boxes and/or contents, because of weather conditions become wet and soaked, they will not be collected, but must be stored by the owner in an approved container for collection on the next collection day. Cardboard boxes will be considered disposable and will not be emptied and returned to the curb. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-5(b)) 
Sec. 66-68. - Defective containers. 
    All garbage cans incapable of continuing to meet the definition of an approved container because of damage, loss of handles or other factors shall be tagged by the collection crew. The collection crew will also leave notification of the defects on the premises. Where garbage cans from several residential units are placed for collection at the same location, the garbage cans shall be identified with the address number so ownership can be determined. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-5(c)) 
Sec. 66-69. - Illegal containers. 
    Containers not approved consist of metal barrels and drums, wooden or cardboard barrels, wheelbarrows and other such containers not approved by this article. These containers will not be emptied, regardless of contents or weight. 
(Code 1986, § 6-3-5(d)) 
Secs. 66-70—66-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MANDATORY RECYCLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Reduction, recovery and recycling generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 144.794, 159.07 et seq. 

Sec. 66-101. - Applicability of article provisions. 
    This article shall apply to all residential, commercial, industrial and institutional properties in the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, § 1(b), 10-24-1994) 
Sec. 66-102. - Separation required; enumeration of materials. 
    It shall be mandatory for all persons to separate the recyclable materials designated in this section from other refuse which will be deposited in the county landfill. 
(1) ?Newsprint. The term "newsprint" as used in this article shall be deemed to include paper of the type commonly referred to as from wood pulp and used mostly for newspapers. It includes the shiny paper inserts commonly found in newspapers. Also included are books, magazines, catalogs, telephone books and other paper products. 
(2) ?Glass containers includes all clear, green and brown glass containers. 
(3) ?Aluminum cans. 
(4) ?Batteries. 
(5) ?Waste oil. 
(6) ?Corrugated cardboard. 
(7) ?Office paper means from commercial businesses only. 
(8) ?Plastic containers: 
a. ?No. 1 PETE. Plastic soda bottles. 
b. ?No. 2 HDPE. Plastic milk jugs. 
No plastic containers used for storage of oil (motor oil or cooking oil) shall be recycled. 
(9) ?Steel containers and tin cans. 
(10) ?Bimetal containers. 
(11) ?Waste tires. 
(12) ?Major appliances include white goods, such as refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, dishwashers, furnaces, boilers, dehumidifiers and hot water heaters. Microwaves may be disposed of at the landfill if the capacitor has been removed. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, § 1(a), 10-24-1994; Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 9-11-1995) 
Sec. 66-103. - Residential collection. 
(a) ?Required containers. 
(1) ?One- through four-family dwellings. The city will provide to the owner of each one- through four-family dwelling three plastic containers which shall be used for the collection of recyclables. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16), a charge for current services shall be made against the owner of each one- through four-family lot or parcel for the cost of such containers. 
(2) ?Multifamily dwellings and manufactured home courts. Arrangements for appropriate containers and the pickup of recyclables shall be made between the city's waste collection/recycling contractor and the owner and/or manager of each multifamily dwelling and manufactured home court. Such owner or manager shall be responsible for informing the residents of the recycling arrangements and the residents shall be responsible for complying with such arrangements. 
(b) ?Preparation for collection. Recyclables shall be separated and placed in the appropriate containers as provided in subsection (a) of this section. Newsprint shall be tied into bundles and placed in the container labeled "newspapers." Aluminum cans and glass containers must be rinsed free of foreign materials and the glass containers shall have their caps/lids removed. Paper labels need not be removed from the glass containers. Aluminum cans shall be placed into the container labeled "aluminum." Glass containers (all three colors) shall be placed unbroken into the container labeled "glass." Waste oil shall be placed into secure, capped containers not exceeding five gallons and shall be clearly marked "oil." Automotive type batteries need no containers unless they are leaking. Corrugated paper must be flattened and tied. Bimetal and steel cans shall be rinsed clean and placed in the "aluminum" container. Magazines shall be tied into bundles and placed with the newspapers. Office paper shall be placed in a clear plastic bag (commercial only). Plastics shall be tied together or placed in a clear plastic bag. 
(c) ?Time of collection. Recyclable materials in their approved containers shall be placed at the curb, alley or roadside along with other collectable refuse by 7:00 a.m. on scheduled days, but no sooner than 24 hours prior to collection. After collection, containers shall be removed from the curb or roadside within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, § 1(c), 10-24-1994) 
Sec. 66-104. - Commercial, industrial, agricultural and institutional units. 
    Arrangements for appropriate containers and the pickup of recyclables shall be made between the city's waste collection/recycling contractor and the owner, manager or person in charge of each commercial, industrial, agricultural or institutional unit. Such owner, manager or person in charge shall be responsible for informing their employes of the recycling arrangements and shall be responsible for complying with such arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, § 1(d), 10-24-1994) 
Sec. 66-105. - Scavengers. 
    No person shall remove recyclable material or containers from the property of another without the consent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, § 1, 10-24-1994) 
Sec. 66-106. - Dumping. 
    No person may dump, deposit or place refuse or recyclables in containers on the property of another without the consent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, § 1(f), 10-24-1994) 
Sec. 66-107. - Yard wastes. 
(a) ?Brush, branches, and Christmas trees will be picked up by the city crew during the third week of each month. Residents are to remove any rope, wire, plastic or other objects from the branches or brush and neatly stack the material next to the alley or curb with the cut ends facing the alley or curb. 
(b) ?City crews will pick up leaves according to a fixed schedule. City residents are to either burn their leaves according to section 34-7(b)(4) or to rake their leaves into the street fronting their property. 
(c) ?Leaves and dried grass generated in the spring of the year will not be picked up at curbside by city crews. City residents are either to burn such materials in accordance with subsection (b), leave grass clippings on their lawn for natural composting, place them in their own private compost pile, or drop them off at the city lawn waste transfer site. 
(d) ?Grass clippings, garden waste and other types of yard waste will not be picked up by city crews. Residents are to either leave grass clippings on their lawn for natural composting, place them in their own private compost pile, or drop them off at the city lawn waste transfer site. 
(Ord. No. 92-1, § 1(c), 2-24-1992) 
Secs. 66-108—66-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTERING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Littering generally, Wis. Stats. § 159.81. 

Sec. 66-141. - Prohibited generally. 
    No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the city, or upon property within the city owned by the Mosinee School District or any private person, or upon the surface of any body of water within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-2(a)) 
Sec. 66-142. - Produced by conduct of commercial enterprise. 
(a) ?Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all sales, promotions and other commercial ventures that result in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way. 
(b) ?Litter to be cleaned up. Any person carrying on an enterprise that results in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way shall clean up the litter within 12 hours of the time the litter is deposited. If any such litter is subject to being blown about, it shall be picked up immediately. If any such litter is likely to attract animals or vermin, such litter shall be picked up immediately. 
(c) ?Pickup at litterer's expense. If any person, firm, corporation or association fails to pick up any litter as required by subsection (a) of this section within the time specified, the city shall arrange to have the same picked up by city crews or by private enterprise. Applicable bidding procedures shall be used for any arrangement for the use of private enterprise to pick up such litter. The entire expense of picking up such litter, together with an additional charge of 20 percent for administrative expenses, shall be charged to the person, firm, corporation or association that did the littering. If such sum is not promptly paid, steps shall be taken, with the advice of the city attorney's office, to collect the charge. This charge shall be in addition to any forfeiture or other penalty for violation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-2(b)) 
Sec. 66-143. - Dumping of refuse and grass in gutters. 
    No person shall deposit any refuse, leaves or grass clippings in any gutter along any public street, road, alley or highway. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-2(c)) 
Sec. 66-144. - Handbills. 
(a) ?Scattering. It shall be unlawful to deliver any handbills or advertising matter to any premises in the city except by being handed to the recipient, placed on the porch, stoop or entrance way of the building or firmly affixed to a building or vehicle so as to prevent any such articles from being blown about, becoming scattered or in any way causing litter. 
(b) ?Papers in public places. It shall be unlawful to leave any handbills, advertising matter or newspapers unattended in any street, alley, public building or other public place, provided that this shall not prohibit the sale of newspapers in vending machines. 
(Code 1986, § 9-3-2(d)) 
Chapter 68 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. Nos. 2009-03, 2009-04, and 2009-05, adopted March 30, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as a new ch. 43. For purposes of alpabetization and to preserve the style of this Code, these provisions have been included as ch. 68 at the editor's discretion. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 68-1—68-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-03, §§ 1—28, adopted March 30, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as ch. 43, art. I, div. 1, §§ 43-1—43-6, div. 2, § 43-30, div. 3, §§ 43-50—43-55, and div. 4, §§ 43-70—43-78. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as ch. 68, art. II, div. 1, §§ 68-31—68-36, div. 2, § 68-41, div. 3, §§ 68-51—68-56, and div. 4, §§ 68-71—68-79. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 68-31. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Mosinee through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) Permit. The objectives of this article are: 
(1) ?To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges from any user. 
(2) ?To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3) ?To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 4, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-32. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean: 
    Authorized enforcement agency means the City of Mosinee, Wisconsin and any of its employees that are designated to enforce this article. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity means activities subject to WPDES construction or local building permits. Permits will be required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 68-41 of this article. 
    Illicit connections means either of the following: any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and washwater to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to WPDES industrial permits. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm drainage system means publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Stats. ch. 283, and Wis. Adm. Code chs. NR151 and 216, that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 5, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-33. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency or this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 6, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-34. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The city administrator, public works director, or their designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the common council to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employment of the agency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 7, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-35. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 8, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-36. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this section are minimum standards; therefore this section does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 9, 3-30-2009) 
Secs. 68-37—68-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 68-41. - Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
(a) ?Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or waters of the state any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as follows: 
(1) ?The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2) ?Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3) ?Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
(4) ?The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under a WPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b) ?Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1) ?The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2) ?This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3) ?A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 11, 3-30-2009) 
Secs. 68-42—68-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 68-51. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a) ?Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the state. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b) ?Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
(c) ?A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this article, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 13, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-52. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity WPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 14, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-53. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a) ?Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b) ?Access to facilities. 
(1) ?The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2) ?Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of a WPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3) ?The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4) ?The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5) ?Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6) ?Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a WPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7) ?If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 15, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-54. - Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The authorized enforcement agency shall establish requirements identifying best management practices (BMP's) for any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid WPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the WPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 16, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-55. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 17, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-56. - Notification of spills. 
(a) ?Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. 
(b) ?In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the director of public works for the city within three business days of the phone notice. 
(c) ?If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 18, 3-30-2009) 
Secs. 68-57—68-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 68-71. - Notice of violation. 
(a) ?Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person or entity has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1) ?The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2) ?The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3) ?That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4) ?The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5) ?Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; 
(6) ?The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b) ?If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 20, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-72. - Appeal of notice. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency to the board of appeals. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the board of appeals shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 21, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-73. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the board of appeals upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 22, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-74. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within thirty days after abatement of the violation by the city, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the board of appeals or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall be charged against such property and be collected as a special tax thereon as provided in Wis. Stats. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 23, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-75. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 24, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-76. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, other community service activities, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 25, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-77. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 26, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-78. - Criminal prosecution. 
    Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $5,000.00 per violation; each day such violation exists shall be deemed a separate violation. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorneys' fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 27, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-79. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 28, 3-30-2009) 
Secs. 68-80—68-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-04, §§ 1—33, adopted March 30, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as ch. 43, art. II, div. 1, §§ 43-150—43-153, div. 2, §§ 43-180—43-183, div. 3, §§ 43-210, 43-220, div. 4, §§ 43-310—43-317, div. 5, §§ 43-350—43-353, and div. 6, §§ 43-380—43-384. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as ch. 68, art. III, div. 1, §§ 68-151—68-154, div. 2, §§ 68-181—68-184, div. 3, §§ 68-211, 68-212, div. 4, §§ 68-311—68-318, div. 5, §§ 68-351—68-353, and div. 6, §§ 68-381—68-385. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 68-151. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to require use of best management practices to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants resulting from land-disturbing construction activities on sites that do not include the construction of a building and is otherwise regulated by the Wisconsin Department of Commerce in Wis. Adm. Code § Comm 21.125 or 50.115. Use of this article will foster consistent, statewide application of the construction site performance standards for new development and redevelopment contained in Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 151, subchapters III and IV. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 3, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-152. - Authority. 
(a) ?This article is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.234. This article supersedes all provisions of any ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23 that relates to construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. § 62.234, Wis. Stats. § 62.23 applies to this article and to any amendments to this article. 
(b) ?The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the city. 
(c) ?The common council hereby designates the city administrator, or the director of public works or their designee to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(d) ?The requirements of this article do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
(1) ?Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33. 
(2) ?Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Adm. Code § NR 151.004. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 4, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-153. - Findings of fact. 
    The City of Mosinee Common Council finds that runoff from land-disturbing construction activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the state in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 5, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-154. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth, by minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land-disturbing construction activity to waters of the state in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 6, 3-30-2009) 
Secs. 68-155—68-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION 

Sec. 68-181. - Applicability. 
(a) ?This article applies to the following land-disturbing construction activities except as provided under subsection (b) of this section: 
(1) ?Construction sites for which the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources received a notice of intent in accordance with subch. III of ch. NR 216 on or after April 12, 2016. 
(2) ?Construction sites for which a bid has been advertised or construction contract signed for which no bid was advertised, on or after April 11, 2016. 
(b) ?This article does not apply to the following: 
(1) ?A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued under chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 122, for land-disturbing construction activity. 
(2) ?Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices. 
(3) ?Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities. 
(4) ?Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility. 
(c) ?Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in subsection (a), this article applies to construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the City of Mosinee, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 8, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 68-182. - Jurisdiction. 
    This article applies to land-disturbing construction activities on lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the city, as well as all lands located within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the city, even if plat approval is not involved. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 9, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-183. - Exclusions. 
    This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01 (1), but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under Wis. Stats. § 281.33 (2). 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 10, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-184. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Administering authority means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stats. §§ 59.693, 60.627, 61.354, and 62.234 that is designated by the common council of the city to administer this article. 
    Agricultural facilities and practices has the meaning in Wis. Stats. § 281.16(1). 
    Average annual rainfall means a typical calendar year of precipitation as determined by the department for users of models such as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology. The average annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location closest to the municipality. 
    Best management practice or "BMP" means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state. 
    Business day means a day the Office of the Mosinee City Hall is routinely and customarily open for business. 
    Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land-disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit. 
    Construction site means an area upon which one or more land-disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land-disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one plan. A long-range planning document that describes separate construction projects, such as a 20-year transportation improvement plan, is not a common plan of development. 
    Division of land means the creation from one parcel of two or more parcels or building sites of two or fewer acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a five-year period. 
    Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a comprehensive plan developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during construction. 
    Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within three miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within one and one-half miles of a fourth class city or village. 
    Final stabilization means that all land-disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
    Governing body means the Common Council of the City of Mosinee. 
    Land-disturbing construction activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities. 
    MEP or maximum extent practicable means a level of implementing best management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this chapter which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic properties. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions. 
    Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice. 
    Permit means a written authorization made by the city to the applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state. 
    Pollutant has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 283.01(13). 
    Pollution has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.01(10). 
    Responsible party means any entity holding fee title to the property or performing services to meet the performance standards of this article through a contract or other agreement. 
    Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
    Sediment means settleable solid material that is transported by runoff, suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original location. 
    Separate storm sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria: 
(1) ?Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff; 
(2) ?Is not part of a combined sewer system; 
(3) ?Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more stringent treatment; and 
(4) ?Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state. 
    Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land-disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit application. 
    Stop work order means an order issued by the city which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. 
    Technical standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method. 
    Waters of the state has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.01(20). 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 11, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 2, 4-11-2016) 
Secs. 68-185—68-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 68-211. - Technical standards. 
(a) ?Design criteria, standards and specifications. All BMPs required to comply with this article shall meet the design criteria, standards and specifications based on any of the following: 
(1) ?Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code. 
(2) ?For this article, soil loss is calculated using the appropriate rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the R factor, or an equivalent design storm using a type II distribution, with consideration given to the geographic location of the site and the period of disturbance. 
(b) ?Other standards . Other technical standards not identified or developed in subsection (a), may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the City of Mosinee Common Council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 13, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 3, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 68-212. - Performance standards for construction sites under an acre. 
(a) ?Responsible party. The landowner of the construction site or other person contracted or obligated by other agreement with the landowner to implement and maintain construction site BMPs is the responsible party and shall comply with this section. 
(b) ?Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. 
(1) ?Erosion and sediment control practices. Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land-disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following: 
a. ?The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles. 
b. ?The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site stormwater inlets. 
c. ?The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state. 
d. ?The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site. 
e. ?The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities. 
f. ?The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than seven days. 
g. ?The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels. 
h. ?The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision. 
(c) ?Location . The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located prior to runoff entering waters of the state. 
(d) ?Implementation . The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be implemented as follows: 
(1) ?Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or installed before land-disturbing construction activities begin. 
(2) ?Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until final stabilization. 
(3) ?Final stabilization activity shall commence when land-disturbing activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of the site. 
(4) ?Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land-disturbing activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days. 
(5) ?BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be removed by the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 14, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 4, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 68-213. - Performance standards for construction site of one acre or more. 
(a) ?Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement an erosion and sediment control plan, developed in accordance with division 5 of this article that incorporates the requirements of this section. 
(b) ?Plan . A written plan shall be developed in accordance with division 5 of this article and implemented for each construction site. 
(c) ?Erosion and other pollutant requirements . The plan required under subsection (b) shall include the following: 
(1) ?Erosion and sediment control practices. Erosion and sediment control practices at each site where land-disturbing construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following: 
a. ?The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles. 
b. ?The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into on-site stormwater inlets. 
c. ?The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the state. 
d. ?The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site. 
e. ?The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities. 
f. ?The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than seven days. 
g. ?The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in downstream channels. 
h. ?The transport by runoff into waters of the state of chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and materials on the construction site during the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this subdivision. 
i. ?The transport by runoff into waters of the state of untreated wash water from vehicle and wheel washing. 
(2) ?Sediment performance standards. In addition to the erosion and sediment control practices under subdivision (1), the following erosion and sediment control practices shall be employed: 
a. ?BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than five tons per acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final stabilization. 
b. ?No person shall be required to employ more BMPs than are needed to meet a performance standard in order to comply with maximum extent practicable. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be combined to meet the requirements of this paragraph. Credit may be given toward meeting the sediment performance standard of this paragraph for limiting the duration or area, or both, of land-disturbing construction activity, or for other appropriate mechanisms. 
c. ?Notwithstanding subdivision (1), if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to meet the sediment performance standard, the plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of why the sediment performance standard cannot be met and how the sediment load will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3) ?Preventive measures . The plan shall incorporate all of the following: 
a. ?Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface waters whenever possible. 
b. ?Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil. 
c. ?Minimization of land-disturbing construction activity on slopes of 20 percent or more. 
d. ?Development of spill prevention and response procedures. 
(d) ?Location . The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located prior to runoff entering waters of the state. 
(e) ?Alternate requirements. The common council may establish stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the common council determines that an added level of protection is needed for sensitive resources. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, § 5, 4-11-2016) 
Secs. 68-214—68-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES AND FEES 

Sec. 68-311. - Permit required. 
    No responsible party may commence a land-disturbing construction activity subject to this article without receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 16, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-312. - Permit application and fees. 
    At least one responsible party desiring to undertake a land-disturbing construction activity subject to this article shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of this article and shall pay an application fee to the city. A schedule of the fees shall be available for review in the city clerk's office. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the city and its designated representatives to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 17, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-313. - Review and approval of permit application. 
(a) ?The director of public works or their designee shall review any permit application that is submitted with an erosion and sediment control plan, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
(1) ?Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of a complete permit application, as required under this article, the director of public works or their designee shall inform the applicant whether the application and plan are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this article. 
(2) ?If the permit application and plan are approved, the director of public works or their designee shall issue the permit. 
(3) ?If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the director of public works or their designee shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
(4) ?The director of public works or their designee may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the director of public works or their designee shall have 30 business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan is either approved or disapproved. 
(5) ?Failure by the city to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 30 business days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 18, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 6, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 68-314. - Surety bond. 
    As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the city may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved erosion control plan and any permit conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 19, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-315. - Permit. 
(a) ?All permits shall require the responsible party to: 
(1) ?Notify the city within 48 hours of commencing any land-disturbing construction activity. 
(2) ?Notify the city of completion of any BMPs within 14 days after their installation. 
(3) ?Obtain permission in writing from the director of public works or their designee prior to any modification pursuant to this article of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(4) ?Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment control plan. 
(5) ?Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(6) ?Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainage ways resulting from land-disturbing construction activities and document repairs in a site erosion control log. 
(7) ?Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inches or more which results in runoff during active construction periods, and at least once each week make needed repairs and document the findings of the inspections in a site erosion control log with the date of inspection, the name of the person conducting the inspection, and a description of the present phase of the construction at the site. 
(8) ?Allow the director of public works or their designee to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 20, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-316. - Permit conditions. 
    Permits issued under this section may include conditions established by the city in addition to the requirements set forth in this article, where needed to assure compliance with the performance standard set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 21, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-317. - Permit duration. 
    Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the length of the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The director of public works or their designee may extend the period one or more times for up to an additional 180 days. The director of public works or their designee may require additional BMPs as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 22, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-318. - Maintenance. 
    The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of this article until the site has undergone final stabilization. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 23, 3-30-2009) 
Secs. 68-319—68-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN, STATEMENT AND AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 68-351. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
(a) ?An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and submitted to the director of public works or their designee. 
(b) ?The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet the performance standards in section 68-221, section 68-222 and other requirements of this article. 
(c) ?The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following items: 
(1) ?The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm. The application shall also include start and end dates for construction. 
(2) ?Description of the site and the nature of the construction activity, including representation of the limits of land disturbance on a United States Geological Service 7.5 minute series topographic map. 
(3) ?A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
(4) ?Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the site that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities. 
(5) ?Calculations to show compliance with the required performance standards. 
(6) ?Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils. 
(7) ?Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources Conservation Service soil information where available. 
(8) ?Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United States Geological Service 7.5 minute series topographic maps. 
(d) ?The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map. The site map shall include the following items and shall be at a scale not greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour interval not to exceed five feet: 
(1) ?Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered drainage systems, roads and surface waters. Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified 100-year flood plains, flood fringes and floodways shall also be shown. 
(2) ?Boundaries of the construction site. 
(3) ?Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading activities. 
(4) ?Areas of soil disturbance. 
(5) ?Location of major structural and non-structural controls identified in the plan. 
(6) ?Location of areas where stabilization practices will be employed. 
(7) ?Areas which will be vegetated following construction. 
(8) ?Area and location of wetland acreage on the construction site and locations where stormwater is discharged to a surface water or wetland within one-quarter mile downstream of the construction site. 
(9) ?An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire construction site map. 
(e) ?Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a description of appropriate controls and measures that will be performed at the site to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the state. The plan shall clearly describe the appropriate control measures for each major activity and the timing during the construction process that the measures will be implemented. The description of erosion controls shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum requirements: 
(1) ?Description of interim and permanent stabilization practices, including a practice implementation schedule. The erosion control plan shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized. 
(2) ?Description of structural practices to divert flow away from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless otherwise specifically approved in writing by the director of public works or their designee, structural measures shall be installed on upland soils. 
(3) ?Management of overland flow at all sites, unless otherwise controlled by outfall controls. 
(4) ?Trapping of sediment in channelized flow. 
(5) ?Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to erosion. 
(6) ?Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur. 
(7) ?Minimization of tracking at all vehicle and equipment entry and exit locations of the construction site. 
(8) ?Clean up of off-site sediment deposits. 
(9) ?Proper disposal of building and waste materials at all sites. 
(10) ?Stabilization of drainage ways. 
(11) ?Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles. 
(12) ?Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as possible after final grading. 
(13) ?Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable. 
(f) ?The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that velocity dissipation devices be placed at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to provide a non-erosive flow from the structure to a water course so that the natural physical and biological characteristics and functions are maintained and protected. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 25, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 7, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 68-352. - Erosion and sediment control plan statement. 
    For each construction site identified under this article, an erosion and sediment control plan statement shall be prepared. This statement shall be submitted to the director of public works or their designee. The control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, including a site map. Further, it shall also include the best management practices that will be used to meet the requirements of the article, including the site development schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 26, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-353. - Amendments. 
(a) ?The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following occur: 
(1) ?There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not otherwise been addressed in the plan. 
(2) ?The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction site runoff. 
(3) ?The director of public works or their designee notifies the applicant of changes needed in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 27, 3-30-2009) 
Secs. 68-354—68-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 68-381. - Fee schedule. 
    The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established by the common council and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the common council shall be available for review in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 29, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-382. - Inspection. 
    If land-disturbing construction activities are being carried out without a permit required by this article, the director of public works or their designee may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0119(1), (2), and (3). 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 30, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-383. - Enforcement. 
(a) ?The director of public works or their designee may post a stop-work order if any of the following occurs: 
(1) ?Any land-disturbing construction activity regulated under this article is being undertaken without a permit. 
(2) ?The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner. 
(3) ?The conditions of the permit are not being met. 
(b) ?If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stop-work order posted under this section or fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the common council may revoke the permit. 
(c) ?If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not cease the activity after being notified by the director of public works or their designee, or if a responsible party violates a stop-work order posted under subsection (a), the common council may request the city attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction. 
(d) ?The common council may retract the stop-work order issued under subsection (a) or the permit revocation under subsection (b). 
(e) ?After posting a stop-work order under subsection (a), the director of public works or their designee may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with this article. The director of public works or their designee may go on the land and commence the work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed under this subsection by the city, plus interest at the rate authorized by the common council shall be billed to the responsible party. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the city clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 66, subch. VII. 
(f) ?Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $5,000.00 and the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g) ?Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 31, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-384. - Appeals. 
(a) ?Board of appeals. The board of appeals created pursuant to section 2-686 of this Code pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e): 
(1) ?Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the city administrator, director of public works or their designee in administering this article except for cease and desist orders obtained under section 68-383(c). 
(2) ?Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this article which are not contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the article will result in unnecessary hardship; and 
(3) ?Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances. 
(b) ?Who may appeal. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any office, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the city administrator, director of public works or their designee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 32, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-385. - Severability. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision or portion of this article unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the article shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 33, 3-30-2009) 
Secs. 68-386—68-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POST CONSTRUCTION CONTROL REGULATIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ 1—22, adopted March 30, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as ch. 43, art. III, div. 1, §§ 43-500—43-505, div. 2, §§ 43-700, 43-750, div. 3, § 43-900, div. 4, §§ 43-1010, 43-1030, 43-1050, and div. 5, §§ 43-2000, 43-2010, 43-2030, and 43-2040. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as ch. 68, art. IV, div. 1, §§ 68-501—68-506, div. 2, §§ 68-701, 68-702, div. 3, § 68-901, div. 4, §§ 68-1011—68-1013, and div. 5, §§ 68-1101—68-1104. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 68-501. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to reduce the amount of post-construction stormwater and associated pollutants reaching waters of the state. Use of this article will foster the consistent statewide application of post-construction performance standards for new development and redevelopment contained in Wis. Adm. Code, ch. NR 151, subchapters III and IV. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 3, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-502. - Authority. 
(a) ?This article is adopted by the common council under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 62.234. This article supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 62.23, that relate to stormwater management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. § 62.234, Wis. Stats. § 62.23 applies to this article and to any amendments to this article. 
(b) ?The provisions of this article are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body. 
(c) ?The common council hereby designates the zoning administrator, director of public works or their designee to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(d) ?The requirements of this article do not pre-empt more stringent stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of the following: 
(1) ?Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33. 
(2) ?Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Adm. Code § NR 151.004. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 4, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-503. - Findings of fact. 
(a) ?The common council finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can: 
(1) ?Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature. 
(2) ?Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants. 
(3) ?Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads. 
(4) ?Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading. 
(5) ?Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor drainage facilities. 
(6) ?Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and volumes. 
(7) ?Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 5, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-504. - Purpose and intent. 
(a) ?Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to establish long-term, post- construction runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to: 
(1) ?Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions. 
(2) ?Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth. 
(3) ?Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger downstream property. 
(b) ?Intent. It is the intent of the common council that this article regulates post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the state. This article may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The common council recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the stormwater performance standards set forth in this article is through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level stormwater management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional stormwater devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance standards developed under Wis. Stats. § 281.16, for regional stormwater management measures and have been approved by the common council, it is the intent of this article that the approved plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the community. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 6, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-505. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a) ?Applicability. 
(1) ?Where not otherwise limited by law, this article applies after final stabilization to a site of land-disturbing construction activity meeting any of the criteria in this paragraph, unless the site is otherwise exempt under subdivision (2). 
a. ?A post construction site that had one or more acres of land-disturbing construction activity. 
b. ?A post-development construction site that had one or more acres of land-disturbing construction activity after March 10, 2003. 
(2) ?A site that meets any of the criteria in this paragraph is exempt from the requirements of this article. 
a. ?A redevelopment post-construction site with no increase in exposed parking lots or roads. 
b. ?A post-construction site with less than ten percent connected imperviousness based on complete development of the post-construction site, provided the cumulative area of all parking lots and rooftops is less than one acre. 
c. ?Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices. 
d. ?Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities. 
e. ?Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility. 
f. ?Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and fiber optic lines. This exemption does not apply to the construction of any above ground structures associated with utility construction. 
(3) ?Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph (a), this article applies to post-construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the zoning administrator is likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety. 
(b) ?Jurisdiction. This article applies to post construction sites within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the city as well as the extraterritorial division of land subject to an ordinance enacted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.45(2) and (3). 
(c) ?Exclusions. This article is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01 (1), but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under Wis. Stats. § 281.33(2). 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 7, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 1, 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 68-506. - Definitions. 
    Administering authority means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stats. § 62.234 that is designated by the common council to administer this article. 
    Agricultural facilities and practices has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.16. 
    Average annual rainfall means a typical calendar year of precipitation, as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for users of models such as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology. The average annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location closest to the municipality. 
    Best management practice or "BMP" means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state. 
    Business day means a day the office of the zoning administrator is routinely and customarily open for business. 
    Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land-disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit. 
    Combined sewer system means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff. 
    Connected imperviousness means an impervious surface connected to the waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path or a minimally pervious flow path. 
    Design storm means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall. 
    Development means residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land uses and associated roads. 
    Division of land means the creation from one parcel of two or more parcels or building sites of two or fewer acres each in area where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a five-year period. 
    Effective infiltration area means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment. 
    Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Exceptional resource waters means waters listed in Wis. Adm. Code § NR 102.11. 
    Extraterritorial means the unincorporated area within three miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village. 
    Final stabilization means that all land-disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures. 
    Financial guarantee means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the zoning administrator by the responsible party to assure that requirements of the article are carried out in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
    Governing body means the common council of the city. 
    Impervious surface means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that typically are impervious. 
    In-fill area means an undeveloped area of land located within existing development. 
    Infiltration means the entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil. 
    Infiltration system means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only. 
    Karst feature means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets. 
    Land-disturbing construction activity means any manmade alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land-disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities. 
    Maintenance agreement means a legal document that provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    "MEP" or maximum extent practicable means a level of implementing best management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified in this article which takes into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing issues such as public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic properties and geographic features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions. 
    New development means development resulting from the conversion of previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses. 
    Off-site means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application. 
    On-site means located within the property boundary described in the permit application. 
    Ordinary high-water mark has the meaning given in Wis. Adm. Code § NR 115.03(6). 
    Outstanding resource waters means waters listed in Wis. Adm. Code § NR 102.10. 
    Percent fines means the percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through a #200 sieve. 
    Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice. 
    Permit means a written authorization made by the zoning administrator to the applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state. 
    Permit administration fee means a sum of money paid to the zoning administrator by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit. 
    Pervious surface means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious. 
    Pollutant has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 283.01(13). 
    Pollution has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.01(10). 
    Post-construction site means a construction site following the completion of land-disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization. 
    Pre-development condition means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of land-disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner. 
    Preventive action limit has the meaning given in § NR 140.05(17), Wis. Adm. Code. 
    Redevelopment means areas where development is replacing older development. 
    Responsible party means any entity holding fee title to the property or other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs. 
    Runoff means stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow. 
    Separate storm sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria: 
(1) ?Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff. 
(2) ?Is not part of a combined sewer system. 
(3) ?Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or more stringent treatment. 
(4) ?Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state. 
    Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land-disturbing construction activity occurred. 
    Stop work order means an order issued by the zoning administrator which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped. 
    Stormwater management plan means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater after the site has undergone final stabilization following completion of the construction activity. 
    Stormwater management system plan is a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale. 
    Technical standard means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method. 
    Top of the channel means an edge, or point on the landscape, landward from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12 percent continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12 percent or less continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark. 
    TR-55 means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986. 
    Type II distribution means a rainfall type curve as established in the "United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published 1973". The Type II curve is applicable to all of Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern. 
    Waters of the state has the meaning given in Wis. Stats; § 281.01(18). 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 6-13-2016) 
Secs. 68-507—68-700. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 68-701. - Technical standards. 
    The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak flow shaving and infiltration components of stormwater practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this article: 
(1) ?Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Adm. Code, ch. NR 151, subch. V. 
(2) ?Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the zoning administrator. 
(3) ?In this article, the following year(s) and location(s) has been selected as average annual rainfall(s): Green Bay, 1969 (Mar. 29—Nov. 25). 
(4) ?Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 10, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 3, 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 68-702. - Performance standards. 
(a) ?Responsible party. The landowner of the post-construction site or other person contracted or obligated by other agreement with the landowner to implement and maintain post-construction stormwater BMPs is the responsible party and shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b) ?Plan. A written stormwater management plan in accordance with section 68-1011 shall be developed and implemented for each post-construction site. 
(c) ?Requirements. The plan required under subsection (b) shall include the following: 
(1) ?Total suspended solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from the post-construction site as follows: 
a. ?BMPs shall be designed in accordance with Table 1, or to the maximum extent practicable as provided in subsection (c). The design shall be based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls. 
Table 1. TSS Reduction Standards 
Development Type TSS Reduction New Development 80 percent In-fill development 80 percent Redevelopment 40 percent of load from parking areas and roads  
b. ?Maximum extent practicable. If the design cannot meet a total suspended solids reduction performance standard of Table 1, the stormwater management plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of why the total suspended solids reduction performance standard cannot be met and why the total suspended solids load will be reduced only to the maximum extent practicable. No person shall be required to exceed the applicable total suspended solids reduction performance standard to meet the requirements of maximum extent practicable. 
c. ?Off-site drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from off-site shall be taken into account in determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly. 
(2) ?Peak discharge. 
a. ?By design, BMPs shall be employed to maintain or reduce the one-year, 24-hour and the two-year, 24-hour post-construction peak runoff discharge rates to the one-year, 24-hour and the two-year, 24-hour pre-development peak runoff discharge rates respectively, or to the maximum extent practicable. The runoff curve numbers in Table 2 shall be used to represent the actual pre-development conditions: 
Table 2. Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers 
Pre-development condition Hydrologic Soil Group A B C D Woodland 30 55 70 77 Grassland 39 61 71 78 Cropland 55 69 78 83  
b. ?This subsection of the article does not apply to any of the following: 
1. ?A post-construction site where the discharge is directly into a lake over 5,000 acres or a stream or river segment draining more than 500 square miles. 
2. ?A redevelopment post-construction site. 
3. ?An in-fill development area less than five acres. 
(3) ?Infiltration . 
a. ?BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance with the following or to the maximum extent practicable: 
1. ?Low imperviousness. For development up to 40 percent connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and low density residential development, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 90 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
2. ?Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than 40 percent and up to 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as medium and high density residential, multi-family development, industrial and institutional development, and office parks, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 75 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
3. ?High imperviousness . For development with more than 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and commercial downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 60 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than two percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area. 
b. ?Pre-development. Pre-development condition shall be the same as specified in Table 2 of the peak discharge section of this article. 
c. ?Source areas. 
1. ?Prohibitions . Runoff from the following areas may not be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to meeting the requirements of this section unless demonstrated to meet the conditions of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources groundwater standards in NR § 151.124(6): 
a. ?Areas associated with a tier 1 industrial facility identified in NR § 216.21(2)(a), including storage, loading and parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority. 
b. ?Storage and loading areas of a tier 2 industrial facility identified in NR § 215.21(2)(b). 
c. ?Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Rooftops of fueling and vehicle maintenance areas may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory authority. 
2. ?Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from these source areas is optional: 
a. ?Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial development. 
b. ?Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for industrial development not subject to the prohibitions under subdivision 1 of this article. 
c. ?In-fill development areas less than five acres. 
d. ?Roads on commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial residential roads. 
d. ?Location of practices. 
1. ?Prohibitions . Infiltration practices may not be located in the following areas: 
a. ?Areas within 1,000 feet up gradient or within 100 feet downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater. 
b. ?Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in NR § 811.16(4) or within the separation distances listed in NR § 812.08 for any private well or non-community well for runoff infiltrated from commercial, including multi-family residential, industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices for one- and two-family residential development. 
c. ?Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in NR § 720.03(2), are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur. 
2. ?Separation distances. 
a. ?Infiltration practices shall be located so that the characteristics of the soil and the separation distance between the bottom of the infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock are in accordance with Table 3: 
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics 
Source Area Separation Distance Soil Characteristics Industrial, Commercial, Institutional Parking Lots and Roads 5 feet or more Filtering Layer Residential Arterial Roads 5 feet or more Filtering Layer Roofs Draining to Subsurface Infiltration Practices 1 foot or more Native or Engineered Soil with Particles Finer than Coarse Sand Roofs Draining to Surface Infiltration Practices Not Applicable All Other Impervious Source Areas 3 feet or more Filtering Layer  
b. ?Notwithstanding subdivision 2, applicable requirements for injection wells classified under NR ch. 815 shall be followed. 
3. ?Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirements under the following conditions, but the decision to infiltrate under these conditions is optional: 
a. ?Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than 0.6 inches per hour using a scientifically credible field test method. 
b. ?Where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet below the proposed bottom of the infiltration system using the U.S. Department of Agriculture method of soils analysis is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay. 
e. ?Alternate use. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry, or irrigation or storage on green roofs where an equivalent portion of the runoff is captured permanently by rooftop vegetation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by this section. 
f. ?Groundwater standards. 
1. ?Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this section shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application in accordance with NR ch. 140. However, if site specific information indicates that compliance with a preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent practicable. 
2. ?Notwithstanding subdivision a., the discharge from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standards application. 
g. ?Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance with subdivision f. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil and grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips. 
h. ?Maximum extent practicable. Where the conditions of subdivisions c. and d. limit or restrict the use of infiltration practices, the performance standard of NR § 151.124 shall be met to the maximum extent practicable. 
(4) ?Protective areas. 
a. ?Definition . In this section, "protective area" means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this section, "protective area" does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location. 
1. ?For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, 75 feet. 
2. ?For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a United States geological survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50 feet. 
3. ?For lakes, 50 feet. 
4. ?For wetlands not subject to subdivision 5 or 6, 50 feet. 
5. ?For highly susceptible wetlands, 75 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the following types: calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood swamps and ephemeral ponds. 
6. ?For less susceptible wetlands, ten percent of the average wetland width, but no less than ten feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include: degraded wetlands dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass; cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel pits, or dredged material or fill material disposal sites that take on the attributes of a wetland. 
7. ?In subsections a.4. and a.5., determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in NR § 103.03. 
8. ?Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in accordance with current Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources procedures. This paragraph does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been placed. When there is a legally authorized wetland fill, the protective area standard need not be met in that location. 
9. ?For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres, ten feet. 
10. ?Notwithstanding subsections a.1. to a.9., the greatest protective area width shall apply where rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands are contiguous. 
b. ?Applicability . This section applies to post-construction sites located within a protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to subsection d. below. 
c. ?Requirements . The following requirements shall be met: 
1. ?Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area entirely or to the maximum extent practicable. If there is not practical alternative to locating an impervious surface in the protective area, the stormwater management plan shall contain a written, site-specific explanation. 
2. ?Where land-disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective area, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70 percent or greater shall be established and maintained where no impervious surface is present. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur. 
3. ?Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention basins that are designed to control pollutants from non-point sources may be located in the protective area. 
d. ?Exemptions . This paragraph does not apply to: 
1. ?In-fill development areas less than five acres. 
2. ?Structures that cross or access surface waters such as boat landings, bridges and culverts. 
3. ?Structures constructed in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 59.692(1v). 
4. ?Areas of post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter the surface water, including wetlands, without first being treated by a BMP to meet the local ordinance requirements for total suspended solids and peak flow reduction, except to the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability. 
(5) ?Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas shall have BMPs designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, such that the runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen. 
(6) ?Swale treatment for transportation facilities. 
a. ?Requirement . Except as provided in subsection (b) below, transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant removal are exempt from the requirements of local ordinance requirements for peak flow control, total suspended solids control, and infiltration, if the swales are designed to do all of the following or to the maximum extent practicable: 
1. ?Swales shall be vegetated. However, where appropriate, non-vegetative measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check dams. 
2. ?Swales shall comply with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources technical standard 1005 "Vegetated Infiltration Swales" dated May 2007, or a superseding document. 
b. ?Other requirements. Notwithstanding subdivision a., the zoning administrator may, consistent with water quality standards, require that other requirements, in addition to swale treatment, be met on a transportation facility with an average daily travel of vehicles greater than 2,500 and where the initial surface water of the state that the runoff directly enters is any of the following: 
1. ?An outstanding resource water. 
2. ?An exceptional resource water. 
3. ?Waters listed in section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act that are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due to nonpoint source impacts. 
4. ?Waters where targeted performance standards are developed pursuant to NR § 151.004. 
c. ?The transportation facility authority shall contact the zoning administrator to determine if additional BMPs beyond a water quality swale are needed under this subsection. 
(d) ?General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater management measures. The following considerations shall be observed in managing runoff: 
(1) ?Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section. 
(2) ?Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety. 
(e) ?Location and regional treatment option. 
(1) ?The BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or system. 
(2) ?Post-construction runoff within a non-navigable surface water that flows into a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not required to meet the performance standards of this article. Post-construction BMPs may be located in non-navigable surface waters. 
(3) ?Except as allowed under subparagraph (4), post-construction runoff from new development shall meet the post-construction performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water. 
(4) ?Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable surface water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the performance standards of this article if: 
a. ?The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this article and the BMP either received a permit issued under ch. 30, Stats., or the BMP did not require a Wis. Stats. ch. 30, permit; and 
b. ?The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future upland development. 
(5) ?Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and in-fill areas shall meet the post-construction performance standards in accordance with this paragraph. 
a. ?To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters. 
b. ?Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable federal, state and local regulations such as ch. NR 103, Wis. Adm. Code and ch. 30, Wis. Stats. 
(6) ?The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, or after a series of such BMPs is subject to this chapter. 
(7) ?The zoning administrator may approve off-site management measures provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
a. ?The zoning administrator determines that the post-construction runoff is covered by a stormwater management system plan that is approved by the City of Mosinee and that contains management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this article. 
b. ?The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions: 
1. ?The facility is in place. 
2. ?The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the performance standards of this article. 
3. ?The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance. 
(8) ?Where a regional treatment option exists such that the zoning administrator exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site stormwater management requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the zoning administrator. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the zoning administrator shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option. 
(f) ?Alternate requirements. The zoning administrator may establish stormwater management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the zoning administrator determines that an added level of protection is needed to protect sensitive resources. 
(g) ?Maintenance of effort. For redevelopment sites where the redevelopment will be replacing older development that was subject to post-construction performance standards of NR 151 in effect on or after October 1, 2004, the responsible party shall maintain the existing level of control for TSS, infiltration and peak flow reduction, or meet the redevelopment standards of NR §§ 151.122 to 151.125, whichever is more stringent. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 4, 6-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-06, § 4, adopted June 13, 2016, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 68-703—68-900. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 68-901. - Permitting requirements, procedures and fees. 
(a) ?Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a land-disturbing construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff permit from the zoning administrator prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b) ?Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the zoning administrator a permit application made on a form provided by the zoning administrator for that purpose. 
(1) ?Unless otherwise excepted by this article, a permit application must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, a maintenance agreement and a non-refundable permit administration fee. 
(2) ?The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 68-702 and section 68-1011, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 68-1012, the financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of section 68-1013, and fees shall be those established by the common council as set forth in section 68-1101. 
(c) ?Review and approval of permit application. The zoning administrator shall review any permit application that is submitted with a stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used: 
1. ?Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all items as required by subsection (b), the zoning administrator shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this article. 
2. ?If the stormwater permit application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees in lieu of stormwater management practices is made, the zoning administrator shall issue the permit. 
3. ?If the stormwater permit application, plan or maintenance agreement is disapproved, the zoning administrator shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
4. ?The zoning administrator may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the zoning administrator shall have 30 business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
(d) ?Permit requirements. All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this article shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The zoning administrator may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the responsible party. An action by the zoning administrator to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with this article. 
(1) ?Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. Copies of all applicable state, federal and local permits shall be submitted to administering authority. 
(2) ?The responsible party shall design and install all structural and non-structural stormwater management measures in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit. 
(3) ?The responsible party shall notify the zoning administrator at least seven business days before commencing any work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan, and within seven business days upon completion of the stormwater management practices. If required as a special condition under subsection (e), the responsible party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the zoning administrator so that practice installations can be inspected during construction. 
(4) ?Practice installations required as part of this article shall be surveyed by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified "as built" by a licensed professional engineer or hydrologist. Completed stormwater management practices must pass a final inspection by the zoning administrator or its designee to determine if they are in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and this article. The zoning administrator or its designee shall notify the responsible party in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit. 
(5) ?The responsible party shall notify the zoning administrator of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved stormwater management plan. The zoning administrator may require that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to incorporation into the stormwater management plan and execution by the responsible party. 
(6) ?The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater management practices in accordance with the stormwater management plan until the practices either become the responsibility of the city or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved maintenance agreement. 
(7) ?The responsible party authorizes the zoning administrator to perform any work or operations necessary to bring stormwater management measures into conformance with the approved stormwater management plan, and consents to a special assessment or charge against the property as authorized under Wis. Stats. ch. 66, subch. VII, or to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under section 68-1013. 
(8) ?If so directed by the zoning administrator, the responsible party shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(9) ?The responsible party shall permit property access to the zoning administrator or its designee for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved stormwater management plan and this permit. 
(10) ?Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the zoning administrator will require the responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or public safety. 
(11) ?The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties detailed in section 68-1102, if the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of this permit. 
(e) ?Permit conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions established by zoning administrator in addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance standards in section 68-702 or a financial guarantee as provided for in section 68-1013. 
(f) ?Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the zoning administrator notifies the responsible party that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under subsection (d)(4). 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 13, 3-30-2009; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 5, 6-13-2016) 
Secs. 68-902—68-1010. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT 

Sec. 68-1011. - Stormwater management plan. 
(a) ?Plan requirements. The stormwater management plan required under section 68-901(b) shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
(1) ?Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of stormwater management practices; and person(s) responsible for maintenance of stormwater management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party. 
(2) ?A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision plat. 
(3) ?Pre-development site conditions, including: 
a. ?One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet. The site maps shall show the following: site location and legal property description; predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type and condition; topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two feet; topography and drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations to show compliance with performance standards; lakes, streams, WiDNR and Army Corps of Engineers certified wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the 100 year floodplain; location of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project area and delineated pursuant to Wis. Adm. Code § NR 811.16. 
b. ?Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s). 
(4) ?Post-development site conditions, including: 
a. ?Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters and wetlands. 
b. ?Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater management measures in the development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and ordinances. 
c. ?One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet showing the following: post-construction pervious areas including vegetative cover type and condition; impervious surfaces, including all buildings, structures, and pavement; post-construction topographic contours of the site at a scale not to exceed two feet; post-construction drainage network including enough of the contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site; locations and dimensions of drainage easements; locations of maintenance easements specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path and direction for all stormwater conveyance sections; location and type of all stormwater management conveyance and treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area; location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainage way; watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant loading calculations and any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site. 
d. ?Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show compliance with performance standards. The computations shall be made for each discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in making the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map(s). 
e. ?Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the placement and design of stormwater management measures. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles of all permanent stormwater conveyance and treatment practices. 
(5) ?Description and installation schedule for the stormwater management practices needed to meet the performance standards in section 68-702. 
(6) ?A maintenance plan developed for the life of each stormwater management practice including the required maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule. 
(7) ?Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and maintenance of each stormwater management practice. 
(8) ?Other information requested in writing by the zoning administrator to determine compliance of the proposed stormwater management measures with the provisions of this article. 
(9) ?All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be certified by a professional engineer or hydrologist licensed in the state to be prepared in accordance with accepted engineering practice and requirements of this article. 
(b) ?Alternate requirements. The zoning administrator may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management performance standards under section 68-702(e). 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 15, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-1012. - Maintenance agreement. 
(a) ?Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement required under section 68-901(b) for stormwater management practices shall be an agreement between the city and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of stormwater practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the county register of deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the stormwater management practices. 
(b) ?Agreement provision. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information and provisions and be consistent with the maintenance plan required by section 68-1011(a)(6): 
(1) ?Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of the drainage area served by the facilities. 
(2) ?A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the stormwater management system consistent with the stormwater management plan required under section 68-901(b). 
(3) ?Identification of the party(s) responsible for long term maintenance of the stormwater management practices identified in the stormwater management plan required under section 68-901(b). 
(4) ?Requirement that the responsible party(s) shall maintain stormwater management practices in accordance with the schedule included in subsection (2). 
(5) ?Authorization for the zoning administrator or designee to access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement. 
(6) ?A requirement on the zoning administrator to maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the responsible party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the stormwater management practice into proper working condition. 
(7) ?Agreement that the party designated under subsection (3), as responsible for long term maintenance of the stormwater management practices, shall be notified by the zoning administrator of maintenance problems which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set by the zoning administrator. 
(8) ?Authorization of the zoning administrator to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible party designated under subsection (3) does not make the required corrections in the specified time period. The zoning administrator shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 66, subch. VII. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 16, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-1013. - Financial guarantee. 
(a) ?Establishment of guarantee. The zoning administrator will require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the zoning administrator. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the zoning administrator to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the stormwater management practices during the period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the zoning administrator the authorization to use the funds to complete the stormwater management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved stormwater management plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the zoning administrator that the requirements of this article have not been met. 
(b) ?Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as follows: 
(1) ?The zoning administrator shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by the zoning administrator to complete installation of practices, upon submission of "as built plans" by a licensed professional engineer. The zoning administrator may make provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development stages. 
(2) ?The zoning administrator shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section to assure maintenance of stormwater practices, less any costs incurred by the zoning administrator, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 17, 3-30-2009) 
Secs. 68-1014—68-1100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FEES, ENFORCEMENT, APPEALS, AND SEVERABILITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-05, § 18, adopted March 30, 2009, set out a new div. 5 entitled "Administration." As div. 3 of this article also pertains to administration, div. 5 has been renamed at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 68-1101. - Fee schedule. 
    The fees referred to in other sections of this article shall be established by the common council and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the common council shall be available for review at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 19, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-1102. - Enforcement. 
(a) ?Any land-disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after the effective date of this article by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the article provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b) ?The zoning administrator shall notify the responsible party by certified mail of any non-complying land-disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be taken. 
(c) ?Upon receipt of written notification from the zoning administrator under subsection (b), the responsible party shall correct work that does not comply with the stormwater management plan or other provisions of this permit. The responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the zoning administrator in the notice. 
(d) ?If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this article are likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the zoning administrator may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the city plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible party. 
(e) ?The zoning administrator is authorized to post a stop work order on all land-disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this article, or to request the city attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction. 
(f) ?The zoning administrator may revoke a permit issued under this article for non-compliance with article provisions. 
(g) ?Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the zoning administrator or by a court with jurisdiction. 
(h) ?The zoning administrator is authorized to refer any violation of this article, or of a stop work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this article, to the city attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction. 
(i) ?Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 or more than $5,000.00 per offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(j) ?Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings. 
(k) ?When the zoning administrator determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article has failed to follow practices set forth in the stormwater management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth in said stormwater management plan, the zoning administrator or a party designated by the zoning administrator, may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The zoning administrator shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to section 68-1013 of this article. Where such a security has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 20, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-1103. - Appeals. 
(a) ?Board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals, created pursuant to section 2-686 of this Code to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in administering this article. The board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from the provisions of this article that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the article will result in unnecessary hardship. 
(b) ?Who may appeal. Appeals to the zoning board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 21, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 68-1104. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the article shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 22, 3-30-2009) 
Chapter 70 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, prescribing, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city, or establishing or prescribing the grades, curblines and widths of sidewalks saved from repeal § 1-9(a)(6); any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special assessments therefor saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(7); any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(20); any ordinance regarding lighting of streets and alleys saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(21); any ordinance regarding construction of public works saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(26); special assessments, § 2-671 et seq.; land use regulations, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 58; planning, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; waterways, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Public works director. 
(a) ?Appointment. The public works director shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. The public works director shall serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(b) ?Responsibilities. The public works director is responsible for planning and directing the maintenance and repair of all city streets and related facilities, parking lots, street medians, parks and other public grounds. 
(c) ?Duties. The public works director shall have the following duties: 
(1) ?Plan, direct and inspect the repair and maintenance of streets, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, streetlights and street trees; 
(2) ?Plan, direct and inspect the maintenance of parks including grass cutting, playground equipment installation or repair and building maintenance; 
(3) ?Supervise plowing of snow and all phases of snow and ice control on city streets, alleys, sidewalks and public parking lots; 
(4) ?Supervise the operation of the municipal garage and the repair and maintenance of city-owned vehicles and equipment; and 
(5) ?Perform such other duties as may be directed by the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-10) 
Sec. 70-2. - Terrace areas. 
(a) ?Definition. The definition of the term "terrace" shall be as defined in section 86-63. 
(b) ?Noxious weeds; paving. All that part of the terrace not covered by a sidewalk shall be kept free and clear of all noxious weeds and shall not be paved, surfaced or covered with any material which shall prevent the growth of plants, and shall be maintained as a lawn, except in areas specifically approved by the common council or its designee. 
(c) ?Responsibility to maintain. Every owner of land in the city whose land abuts a terrace is required to maintain, or have maintained by his tenant, the terrace directly abutting such land, as provided in this section, and elsewhere in this Code. Every owner shall keep mailboxes located on a terrace free and clear of snow. 
(d) ?Street rights-of-way. Any tree, shrub, hedge, fence or other obstruction planted or constructed within the right-of-way of any city street shall be done at the property owner's risk and shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 86, article III of this Code. If any street is widened or sidewalk constructed, any such planting or obstruction shall be removed at the property owner's expense. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-8) 
Sec. 70-3. - Vaults. 
    All vaults under sidewalks in the city shall be constructed of brick, concrete block or poured concrete. The surface opening into the street shall be within three feet of the outer edge of the sidewalk or the curb. The slab over such vault shall be able to withstand a load of 250 pounds per square foot of slab area. The owner of any lot or parcel of land adjoining such vault shall maintain such vault and slab over in a safe condition and at his own expense. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-9) 
Sec. 70-4. - Sale or display of merchandise. 
    No person shall display, sell or offer to sell, on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place within the city, anything of value or service of any kind, except in connection with a citywide enterprise or promotion of community trade. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-11) 
Sec. 70-5. - Requests for improvements. 
    Requests or petitions by city property owners for new streets, curb and gutter, and sidewalks shall be presented to the common council on or before November 1 to be considered for installation in the following year. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-12) 
Secs. 70-6—70-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET, ALLEY AND SIDEWALK GRADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority regarding street grades generally, Wis. Stats. § 62.16. 

Sec. 70-36. - Establishment. 
(a) ?Grades to be established. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established by resolution by the common council, and the grades shall be recorded by the administrator in his office. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked on until the grade is established. In all cases where the grade of sidewalks shall not have been specifically set by ordinance the sidewalks shall be laid to the established grade of the street. 
(b) ?New sidewalk grade. Whenever a street shall be improved for the first time or the grade changed and the street improved so as to conform to the new grade, the grading of the sidewalk shall be considered a part of the improvement, shall be let by contract with the other work of improving such street, and the expense thereof shall be provided for and borne in all respects like that of improving the street, but the construction of the sidewalk shall be done by the owners of the abutting lots or parcels of land or at their expense as provided in this chapter. Before such construction is commenced by the owners of the abutting lots or parcels of land, the public works director shall, upon application by the respective owners for a sidewalk grade, cause such sidewalk grade to be established. The cost of furnishing such grade shall be borne by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 70-37. - Alteration of grade. 
    No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof in the city by any means whatsoever unless authorized or instructed to do so by the common council. All such alterations of grade shall be recorded in the office of the administrator or the officer authorizing the alteration. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-2) 
Secs. 70-38—70-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Sidewalks generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.615; curb ramping, Wis. Stats. § 66.616. 

Sec. 70-71. - Removal of rubbish and dirt from sidewalks. 
    No owner or occupant shall allow the sidewalk abutting on his premises to be littered with rubbish or dirt. If such owner or occupant shall refuse or fail to remove any such rubbish or dirt when notified to do so by the common council, the council may cause the same to be done and report the cost thereof to the administrator who shall spread the cost on the tax roll as a special tax against the premises, or such cost may be recovered in an action against the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-1) 
Sec. 70-72. - Downspouts and eaves of buildings not to drain on sidewalks. 
    No downspouts from any building shall terminate on or upon, or in such position that the contents of such spout be cast upon or flow back or over, any public sidewalk in the city. When the eaves of any building extend over or are so constructed that water may fall therefrom or run back upon any public sidewalk, such eaves shall be so protected by proper spouts or otherwise that no water shall fall or drain therefrom or run back upon or over any public sidewalk. The owners of any building and the officers of any association or corporation owning any building on which any spouts or the eaves shall be maintained contrary to this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-10) 
Sec. 70-73. - Construction and repair. 
(a) ?Owner to construct. It shall be the duty of the abutting owner to build, repair, construct and perpetually maintain sidewalks along or upon any street, alley or highway in the city and to pay the entire cost of construction thereof. Whenever the common council shall by resolution determine that a sidewalk is laid or a section rebuilt along or upon any public street, alley or highway within the city, it shall proceed according to Wis. Stats. § 66.615. Sidewalks shall be located in such places as designated by the common council. No person shall remove any sidewalk without the permission of the common council. 
(b) ?Permit required. No person shall hereafter lay, remove, replace or repair any public sidewalk within the city unless he is under contract with the city to do such work or has obtained a permit therefor from the administrator at least seven days before work is proposed to be undertaken. No fee shall be charged for such permits. 
(c) ?Specifications. All sidewalks within the city shall be repaired, rebuilt and constructed in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1) ?Subgrade. The subgrade shall be prepared by excavating to the line, grade and cross section as established by the common council. Soft and unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with sand or other satisfactory material, and the subgrade shall be thoroughly and uniformly compacted and moistened immediately before the concrete is placed. When so specified by the public works director a subbase of sand, sand and gravel or other approved porous material shall be placed under the sidewalk. On embankments the subgrade shall extend at least one foot beyond each edge of the sidewalk. 
(2) ?Material. All sidewalks shall be of air entrained concrete composed of six bags per cubic yard of one course construction, and built to the established line and grade. Gravel shall be of good quality. Concrete shall be mixed thoroughly for a minimum of one minute after all materials have been placed in the mixer. 
(3) ?Forms. Concrete shall be placed in straight forms of wood or metal of sufficient strength to resist springing, tipping or other displacement during the process of depositing and consolidating the concrete. Wood forms shall be surfaced plank of at least two inches thickness except for sharply curved sections. Metal forms shall be of approved section. The forms shall be of full depth of the required walk and shall be of such design as to permit secure fastening. Forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before the concrete is placed against them. Concrete shall be placed in the forms on a moist subgrade, deposited just above the finished grade and consolidated and spaded sufficiently to bring the mortar to the surface and to prevent honeycombing. It shall then be struck off level with the top of the forms and finished with wooden flats. To provide adequate drainage, the sidewalk shall slope toward the curb at a minimum rate of one-fourth inch per foot of width of sidewalk. All joints and edges shall be finished with a one-fourth-inch radius edging tool. Sidewalks shall be constructed within the limits of the street, and unless otherwise specifically indicated, there shall be one foot strip of street property left between the property line and the edge of the sidewalk. 
(4) ?Width and thickness. Residential walks shall be five feet in width and not less than four inches thick except within driveway approaches where the minimum thickness shall be six inches; provided, however, that walks in residential areas may be repaired or replaced to a width not less than the existing width on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Sidewalks in front of commercial or industrial establishments shall be not less than eight feet in width and five inches in thickness except within driveway approaches where the minimum thickness shall be seven inches. 
(5) ?Finishing. Before the last finish has set, the sidewalk shall be steel troweled and brushed in the transverse direction. Before the final finishing, the surface shall be checked with a ten-foot straight edge and any areas departing more than one-eighth of an inch from the testing edge shall be corrected by adding or removing concrete while the concrete in the walk is still plastic. 
(6) ?Jointing. Transverse, full depth, one-half inch thick expansion joints of premolded expansion material shall be located every 40 feet and at the property line, and where the walk intersects another walk, curbline, building or driveway approach, and at buildings, walls, poles and stop boxes. The expansion joint material shall be placed in a neat and workmanlike manner with its upper edge slightly below the finished sidewalk surface. Dummy groove joints for controlled cracking, at least three-eighths of an inch in thickness and 5/16 of an inch in depth, shall be placed at intervals of approximately four feet. All joints shall be at right angles to the direction and grade of the walk. Diagonal joints may be used only when approved by the public works director. 
(7) ?Curing and drying. As soon as any of the concrete work mentioned in this section has been finished and hardened sufficiently to prevent excessive marring of the surface, it shall be cured and protected against rapid drying. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be deemed sufficient cause for suspension of the work. Curing shall be accomplished by the impervious coating, wet fabric or paper methods. For impervious coating or membrane curing, only those materials meeting requirements of ASTM Specifications C156-44T, "Method of Test for Efficiency of Materials for Curing Concrete" shall be used. Such specifications are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth in this section. Walks shall be kept free from all traffic at normal temperatures for 48 hours and in cold weather (below 50 degrees Fahrenheit) for 96 hours. No concrete shall be poured when the temperature may be expected to fall below 35 degrees Fahrenheit in any 72-hour period or upon frozen subgrade. 
(d) ?Sidewalk repair or replacement. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.615, the common council may order property owners to repair or remove and replace any sidewalk which is unsafe, defective or insufficient. If the property owner shall fail to so repair or remove and replace such sidewalk for a period of 20 days after service of the notice provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.615(3)(c), the common council shall repair or construct such sidewalk, and the administrator shall enter the total cost thereof upon the tax roll as a special tax against such lot or parcel of land. 
(e) ?Unsafe sidewalks. The common council may at any time, by ordinance or resolution, order any sidewalk which is unsafe, defective or insufficient, to be removed and replaced with a sidewalk in accordance with the standard specifications provided for in this section. 
(f) ?Construction and repair of concrete curb and gutter. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.60, shall be followed in the case of the construction and repair of concrete curb and gutter provided that the property deemed benefited by such construction and repair shall pay 100 percent of the costs thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-2) 
Secs. 70-74—70-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 70-106. - Exception to article provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to excavation work done under the direction of the public works director by city employes or contractors performing work under contract with the city except that the safety precautions under section 70-108(c) shall be complied with. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-4(k)) 
Sec. 70-107. - Permit, insurance and bond. 
(a) ?Permit required. No person, partnership or corporation, or their agents or employes or contractors, shall make or cause to be made any opening or excavation in any public street, public alley, public way, public ground, public sidewalk or city owned easement within the city without a permit therefor from the administrator. 
(b) ?Fees. The fee for a street opening permit shall be as set by the council from time to time for excavation into pavement and as set by the council from time to time for any excavation other than pavement on any street or right-of-way. The fee shall be paid to the administrator, who shall issue a receipt therefor. 
(c) ?Insurance required. A permit shall be issued only upon condition that the applicant submit to the public works director or administrator satisfactory written evidence that applicant has in force and will maintain during the time the permit is in effect public liability insurance of not less than the amount set by the council from time to time. 
(d) ?Bond. 
(1) ?Before a permit for excavating or opening any street or public way may be issued, the applicant shall execute and deposit with the administrator an indemnity bond in the amount set by the council from time to time on condition that he will indemnify and save harmless the city and its officers from all liability for accidents and damage caused by any of the work covered by his permit, and that he will fill up and place in good and safe condition all excavations and openings made in the street, and will replace and restore the pavement over any opening he may make as near as can be to the state and condition in which he found it, and keep and maintain the same in such condition, normal wear and tear excepted, to the satisfaction of the common council for a period of two years, and that he will pay all fines imposed upon him for any violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance governing street openings or drainlaying adopted by the common council and will repair any damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation in accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. Such statement shall also guarantee that if the city shall elect to make the street repair, the person opening the street will pay all costs of making such repair and of maintaining the street for two years. 
(2) ?Recovery on such bond for any accident, injury, violation of law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall not exhaust the bond but the party shall be obligated to replenish the bond up to the applicable limits and it shall cover any and all accidents, injuries or violations during the period of excavation for which it is given. 
(3) ?Whenever the common council shall find that any such work has become defective within two years of the date of completion, it shall give written notice thereof to the contractor or to his surety stating the defect, the work to be done, the cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the common council to be reasonably necessary to complete such work. After receipt of such notice, the contractor or the surety must, within the time specified, repair the defect or indemnify the city for the cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. 
(4) ?An annual bond may be given under this section covering all excavation work done by the principal for one year beginning January 1, which shall be conditioned as specified above and in the amount determined by the common council as necessary to adequately protect the public and the city. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-3) 
Sec. 70-108. - Regulations. 
(a) ?Frozen ground. No openings in the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ways shall be permitted when the ground is frozen except where it is deemed necessary by the public works director. 
(b) ?Removal of paving. In any opening or excavation all paving or ballasting materials shall be removed with the least possible loss of or injury to surfacing materials and together with the excavated materials from the opening shall be placed so as to cause the least practicable inconvenience to the public and permit free flow of water along gutters. 
(c) ?Protection of public. 
(1) ?Every opening and excavation shall be enclosed with sufficient barriers. Sufficient warning lights shall be kept on from sunset to sunrise. Such lights shall be spaced so as to give adequate warning of the existence of the opening and of piled excavated materials. No open flame warning pots shall be used. Except by special permission from the public works director, no trench shall be excavated more than 250 feet in advance of pipe or conduit laying nor left unfilled more than 500 feet where pipe or conduit has been laid. 
(2) ?All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectively from accidents or damage to persons or property through the period of the work. Each person making such opening shall be held liable for all damages, including costs incurred by the city in defending any action brought against it for damages, as well as cost of any appeal, that may result from the neglect by such person or his employes of any necessary precaution against injury or damage to persons, vehicles or property of any kind. 
(d) ?Replacing street surface. In opening any public street, public alley, public sidewalk, public way, public easement or public ground, the paving materials, sand, gravel and earth or other material moved or penetrated and all surface monuments or hubs must be removed and replaced as nearly as possible in their original condition or position in the same relation to the remainder as before. Any excavated material which in the opinion of the public works director is not suitable for refilling shall be replaced with approved backfill material. All rubbish shall be immediately removed. In refilling the opening, the earth must be puddled or laid in layers not more than six inches in depth and each layer rammed, tamped or flushed to prevent after-settling. When the sides of the trench will not stand perpendicular, sheathing and braces must be used to prevent caving. No timber, bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench. The city may elect to have the opening for any street or sidewalk repaired by the city, in which case the cost of making such repair and of maintaining it for two years shall be charged to the person making the street opening. 
(e) ?Notice. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the public works director or administrator and all public and private individuals, firms and corporations affected by the work to be done at least 24 hours before such work is to commence. The public works director shall also be notified at least four hours prior to backfilling and/or restoring the surface. 
(f) ?Validity of permit. Unless the work shall be commenced within 30 days of the issuance of the permit, the permit shall be void, and a new permit must be obtained and an additional fee charged. The public works director may extend the time limitation for good cause. 
(g) ?Backfilling. It shall be the duty of the permittee to backfill the opening immediately upon completion of the work and to place at least five inches of traffic bind or similar material in the opening unless otherwise advised by the public works director. It shall be the duty of the permittee to maintain the opening in good condition for a period of six months after the completion of the work or until the surface has been restored. The public works director shall decide when within the six months' period the opening is ready for paving if a paving surface is required. If the surface is not restored within a period of ten days or such longer period as determined by the public works director, the city may restore the surface and bill the permittee therefor. 
(h) ?Emergency excavation. In the event of an emergency any person owning or controlling any sewer, gas main, water main, conduit or other utility in or under any public street, alley easement, way or ground and his agents and employes may take immediate proper emergency measures to remedy dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health, or safety without obtaining an excavation permit, provided that such person shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the next business day. 
(i) ?Excavation in new streets. Whenever the common council determines to provide for the permanent improvement or repaving of any street, such determination shall be made not less than 30 days before the work of improvement or repaving shall begin. Immediately after such determination by the common council, the administrator shall notify in writing each person, utility, city department or other agency owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in or under said street or any real property abutting such street, that all such excavation work in such street must be completed within 30 days. After such permanent improvement or repaving, no permit shall be issued to open or excavate such street for a period of five years after the date of improvement or repaving unless in the opinion of the common council an emergency exists which makes it absolutely essential that the permit be issued. 
(j) ?Application for permit. The application for a permit shall be in writing and signed by the applicant or his agent. The applicant shall submit to the administrator, at the time the permit is applied for, sufficient information relating to the work to be done including the general location and nature of the work and the method applicant proposes to use in doing the work. The public works director shall determine if sufficient information is submitted. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-4) 
Secs. 70-109—70-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL PRIVILEGE AGREEMENTS AND PERMITS 

Sec. 70-141. - Exemptions. 
    Small, residential encroachments such as fences, light poles, decorative pillars, etc., do not need to obtain a special privilege permit. The council may also exempt other minimally intrusive encroachments which are not exempted above from the necessity of obtaining a special privilege permit, if the council finds that obtaining a special privilege permit would cause undue hardship. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-5; Ord. No. 97-3, § 1, 4-28-1997; Ord. No. 98-7, § 1, 8-24-1998) 
Sec. 70-142. - Grant of privilege for excavations or obstructions. 
    Privileges for an obstruction, excavation beyond the street line or within a city street or right-of-way, other than those regulated by other city ordinances, may be granted by the common council, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.045. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, § 1(A), 4-28-1997) 
Sec. 70-143. - Application and procedure. 
    Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring such special privilege shall file with the city administrator an application, in writing, on the form furnished for such purpose by the administrator, and shall pay to the administrator the special privilege permit fee, for the purpose of defraying the costs and expenses which the city may incur in the consideration of applicants' special privilege request. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, § 1(B), 4-28-1997) 
Sec. 70-144. - Conditions for granting. 
    A special privilege may be granted only on condition that by acceptance of such special privilege the grantee shall: 
(1) ?Become primarily principally liable for damages to person or property by reason of granting of the privilege. 
(2) ?File with the city administrator a bond of a surety company duly incorporated in the state or duly licensed to do business in this state, in such sum as the common council may require but not exceeding $10,000.00, such bond to be approved by the city attorney or city administrator. Individual sureties are not sufficient. 
(3) ?File with the administrator a certificate of insurance indicating applicant holds a public liability policy in the sum set by the council from time to time on the areas included within the special privilege and naming the city as an additional insured. 
(4) ?Provide that both the bond and insurance policy shall not be canceled until after at least 30 days' notice in writing to the administrator. 
(5) ?Be obligated to remove the obstruction, excavation or similar encroachment upon ten days' notice by the city; and further that grantee shall not be entitled to damages for such removal. 
(6) ?Waive the right to contest, in any manner the validity of Wis. Stats. § 66.045, or the amount of the annual fixed fee as determined by the city. 
(7) ?Pay to the administrator the annual fee fixed by the special privilege board consisting of the mayor, the city administrator, and the public works committee. Such fee shall consist of a fee set by the council from time to time per foot of city right-of-way used, crossed or affected unless a municipal franchise is negotiated, where such franchise fee will be a minimum of five percent of gross revenues. The minimum fee shall be set from time to time by the council. 
(8) ?Put the special privilege into use within one year after approval by the common council. Should grantee fail to do so, the director of public works or city administrator may seek revocation of such privilege. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, § 1(C), 4-28-1997) 
Sec. 70-145. - Public service corporations or co-ops. 
    This article is not applicable to public service corporations or to cooperative associations organized under Wis. Stats. ch. 185 to provide telecommunication services, gas, light, heat or power. However, such exempt organizations shall secure a permit from the public works director for temporary obstructions or excavations in a street or public right-of-way and shall be liable for all injuries to persons or property thereby. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, § 1(D), 4-28-1997) 
Sec. 70-146. - Application of article to temporary obstructions. 
    This article does not apply to such obstruction or excavation which is less than three months in duration, and for which the proper permit has been granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, § 1(E), 4-28-1997) 
Sec. 70-147. - Additional provisions. 
(a) ?Special privilege will be required at any point a holder's facilities cross the plane of the right-of-way. If the facility is aerial, underground or on the surface it will be subject to special privilege. 
(b) ?Any party leasing facilities to a party requiring a special privilege permit will be required to notify the city. The holders of special privilege permits agree that the leasing of their facilities is an item which shall result in the renegotiation of a special privilege agreement. 
(c) ?All holders of encroachment agreements on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for the purpose of providing a service to other customers will be required to apply for a special privilege. 
(d) ?All holders of a special privilege on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived will be required to belong to diggers hotline or similar organizations, as described by Wis. Stats. § 182.0175. 
(e) ?The holder of a special privilege shall provide an as-built map to the director of public works. This map will show the location, depth, size and type of facility, built under the special privilege. 
(f) ?All holders of special privilege must obtain a temporary street occupancy permit before beginning any work involving any excavation in the right-of-way, repairs or maintenance that require the diverting of traffic, adding cable or other appliances to poles or conduit system covered by the special privilege. 
(g) ?The holder of special privilege may not trim any trees within the city right-of-way without receiving permission from the director of public works. 
(h) ?All buried fiber optic cables shall be placed in a conduit with a locating tape or locating wire. 
(i) ?The city retains the right to visually inspect aboveground installations for appearance. Items determined unsightly will require corrective action within 30 calendar days after notification or the special privilege will be subject to revocation. 
(j) ?Vandalism and graffiti must be cleaned up or repaired within 48 hours of discovery or notice. 
(k) ?The city, at its discretion, may require the relocation of a special privilege holder's facilities. This may be for the purpose of city needs or the need to accommodate other users of the right-of-way. If the city requires the relocation of the special privilege holders' facilities, the holder of special privilege will do so at no expense to the city. If the purpose of relocation is to benefit the holder of a special privilege, the costs may be billed to that party. 
(l) ?The special privilege will expire upon such a time the city determines the facilities must be removed to fit the city's needs or the holder of special privilege removes the facilities from the right-of-way. 
(m) ?Items of physical plant that provide high density and volume, must be designed to allow for an alternative route in the event of a service outage. 
(n) ?If in the construction or placing utilities, the holder of special privilege encounters contaminated soils or other adverse environmental conditions, the holder of the special privilege shall undertake the process of remediation. The city will not be responsible for the costs of such activity. 
(o) ?The city will be held harmless for any damage caused to the facilities of the holder of special privilege. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, § 1, 4-28-1997) 
Sec. 70-148. - Permits. 
(a) ?When required. Permits for the temporary use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways or places of the city may be granted to applicants by the director of public works for the purpose of moving any building or structure or of encumbering the street, alley, sidewalk or way with materials necessary in and about the construction or demolition of any building or structure, or for any work involving any excavation in the right-of-way, repairs or maintenance that require the diverting of traffic, adding cable or other appliances to poles or conduit system covered by a special privilege permit, provided that such applicant has complied with the other requirements of this subsection and, if needed, has obtained a building permit as required by chapter 42 of this Code. 
(b) ?Bond. No temporary street occupancy permit shall be issued until the applicant shall execute and file with the administrator a bond in an amount determined by the director of public works, which provides that the applicant will indemnify and save harmless the city from all liability for accidents or damage caused by reason of operations under such permit and will remove such encumbrance upon termination of the operations and will leave the vacated premises in a clean and sanitary condition and repair any and all damage to the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public property of the city resulting from such building or moving operations. 
(c) ?Fee. The fee for a temporary street occupancy permit shall be in the sum set by the council from time to time. 
(d) ?Conditions of occupancy. The permission to occupy or obstruct the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds is intended only for use in connection with the actual erection, alteration, repair, removal, or moving of buildings or structures, for any work involving any excavation in the right-of-way, repairs or maintenance that require the diverting of traffic, adding cable or other appliances to poles or conduit system covered by a special privilege permit, and shall be given upon the following terms and conditions and subject to revocation by the director of public works for violation thereof: 
(1) ?Such temporary obstruction shall cover not more than one-third of any street or alley. 
(2) ?Obstructions shall be sufficiently lighted at night so as to be in full view of the public from all directions. 
(3) ?Sidewalk traffic shall not be interrupted, but temporary sidewalks of not less than four feet in width guarded by a closed fence at least four feet high on both sides may be maintained during the period of occupancy. 
(4) ?The process of moving any building or structure shall be as continuous as practicable until completed, and if ordered by the common council, shall continue during all hours of the day and night. 
(5) ?No building or structure shall be allowed to remain overnight on any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant. 
(6) ?Buildings shall be moved only in accordance with the route prescribed by the director of public works. 
(7) ?Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all parts of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds occupied under the permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and obstructions and placed in a safe condition for public travel at the expense of the permittee. 
(e) ?Termination. All temporary street occupancy permits shall automatically terminate at the end of three months from the date of issuance unless an earlier termination date is specified thereon at the direction of the director of public works. 
(f) ?Removal by city. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the owner or occupant of the premises adjoining any unlawfully obstructed sidewalk shall refuse or neglect to remove such obstruction within 24 hours after being given such notice from the director of public works to do so, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to remove such obstruction and make return of the costs and expenses thereof to the administrator who shall enter such cost on the next annual tax roll as a special charge against the property abutting such obstructed sidewalk, and such sum shall be levied and collected as other special taxes against real estate. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-6; Ord. No. 97-3, § 2, 4-28-1997) 
Sec. 70-149. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Anyone causing any obstruction or excavation made contrary to this article shall be liable to an ordinance violation and prosecution in municipal court. Upon finding a violation of this article, a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $500.00, per day of violation, may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 97-3, § 1(F), 4-28-1997) 
Secs. 70-150—70-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for removal and collection of expenses attributable thereto, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.60(16) and 66.615(3)(f) and (5). 

Sec. 70-181. - Owner's responsibility. 
    The owner, occupant or person in charge of each and every building or structure or unoccupied lot in the city fronting or abutting any street shall clean or cause to be cleaned the sidewalk in front of or adjoining each such home, building or unoccupied lot, as the case may be of snow or ice to the width of such sidewalk within 24 hours after the snow has ceased to fall and shall cause the sidewalk to be kept clear from ice and snow, provided that when the ice has formed on any sidewalk so that it cannot be immediately removed, the persons referred to in this section shall keep the sidewalk sprinkled with salt, sawdust or sand. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-7(a)) 
Sec. 70-182. - City's option to clear sidewalks. 
    In any case where the owner, occupant or person in charge of any building or structure or unoccupied lot shall fail to clear their respective sidewalks of snow and ice as set forth in section 70-181, then the city may elect to clear such sidewalks as follows: The city shall clear or cause to be cleared all snow and ice from the subject's sidewalk, and shall charge the expenses of so doing at a rate as established by resolution of the common council. The charges shall be set forth in a statement which shall be mailed to the owner, occupant or person in charge of the subject property. If such statement is not paid in full within 30 days thereafter, the statement shall be entered in the tax roll as a special tax against such lot or parcel of land as provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-7(b); Ord. No. 91-4, § 1, 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 70-183. - Deposit of snow on streets or sidewalks. 
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice taken and removed from his premises or elsewhere upon any sidewalk, alley, parkway, public place or street in the city; provided, however, that the removal of snow from a sidewalk in front of or abutting his premises, as is required by section 70-181, may be deposited on the alley or street. Snow shall not be piled at or near intersections so as to obstruct the view of pedestrians or operators of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-7(c)) 
Sec. 70-184. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    As an alternative to the remedy provided in section 70-182, or in addition thereto, the city may impose a penalty for violation of any provision of this article a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed during each 24 hours or part thereof during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2-7(d)) 
Secs. 70-185—70-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 70-216. - Permit required for construction, repair or reconstruction. 
    Unless otherwise especially permitted by resolution of the common council, upon written application giving the reason therefor, no person shall construct, repair or reconstruct any driveway across or through any sidewalk or curbing without having first obtained a permit from the administrator for which a fee in the sum set by the council from time to time shall be charged. Such permit shall be issued upon an application form provided by the city and shall contain such information as the common council shall deem necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 4-3-1(a)) 
Sec. 70-217. - Installation requirements. 
(a) ?Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall be at least ten feet wide at the property line for residential properties, and a minimum of 16 feet wide at the property line for all other uses, but shall not exceed 24 feet at the property line. 
(b) ?No driveway shall be closer than ten feet to the extended street line at an intersection. At street intersections a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the street intersection area and shall not occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the common council for effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals. Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in theaters, banks and restaurants; motels; funeral homes, vehicular sales, service, washing and repair stations; garages or public parking lots shall be not less than 200 feet from any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college, university, church, hospital, park, playground, library, public emergency shelter or other place of public assembly. 
(c) ?No driveway apron shall extend out into the street further than the facing of the curb and under no circumstances shall such driveway apron extend into any gutter area. All driveway entrances and approaches shall be so constructed as not to interfere with the drainage of streets, side ditches or roadside areas, or with any existing structure on the right-of-way. When required by the public works committee, so as to provide for adequate surface water drainage along the abutting street, the property owner shall provide any necessary culvert pipe at such owner's expense. 
(d) ?No more than one driveway entrance and approach shall be constructed for any lot or premises except where deemed necessary and feasible without the impairment of safety, convenience and utility of the street by the public works committee. Driveway approaches shall be at least ten feet apart except by special permission from the public works committee, and driveways shall in all cases be placed wherever possible as not to interfere with utilities in place. Any costs of relocating utilities shall be the responsibility of the property owner with approval of the common council necessary before any utility may be relocated and the driveway installed. 
(e) ?Workmanship and materials. All driveway entrances and approaches which are constructed across sidewalks shall be paved in accordance with the requirements for sidewalk construction in section 70-73(c) insofar as such requirements are applicable, including thickness requirements in section 70-73(c). 
(Code 1986, § 4-3-1(b)) 
Sec. 70-218. - Permit applications. 
    Permit applications shall be made at least 24 hours in advance of intended installation, but this shall not be deemed to be a limitation of time within which a permit must be granted, and the public works director shall have such time as reasonably necessary for examination and consideration of any application before granting the permit, subject always to specific direction of the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 4-3-1(c)) 
Sec. 70-219. - Permittee liable for damage or injury. 
    The permittee shall assume all responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or property resulting directly or indirectly during construction or repair of driveway approaches or entrances. When curb or gutter is removed, the new construction shall be of equivalent acceptable material and curb returns provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. Driveway surfaces shall connect with the street pavement and sidewalk in a neat, workmanlike manner. 
(Code 1986, § 4-3-2) 
Sec. 70-220. - Installation of culverts. 
    In areas of the city where it is deemed necessary by the public works committee or its designee to install a culvert for sidewalk, driveway or other access purposes, all decisions about the size, location and composition of the culvert shall be made by the city. In addition, the installation of such culvert shall be made by the city. The complete cost of the culvert, replacement of culvert and its installation shall be charged to the property owner who is the beneficiary of the culvert. Routine maintenance of a culvert, including snow and ice removal as necessary to allow free flow of water, shall be the responsibility of the city without additional charges to the benefitting property owner. 
(Ord. No. 91-14, § 1, 3-25-1991) 
Secs. 70-221—70-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREET USE PERMITS 

Sec. 70-251. - Purpose. 
    The streets in possession of the city are primarily for the use of the public in the ordinary way. However, under proper circumstances the common council may grant a permit for street use, subject to reasonable municipal regulation and control. Therefore, this article is enacted to regulate and control the use of streets pursuant to a street use permit to the end that the health, safety and general welfare of the public and the good order of the city can be protected and maintained. 
(Code 1986, § 7-9-1(a)) 
Sec. 70-252. - Application. 
    A written application for a street use permit by persons or groups desiring the same shall be made on a form provided by the administrator and shall be filed with the administrator. The application shall set forth the following information regarding the proposed street use: 
(1) ?The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2) ?If the proposed street use is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing responsible heads of such organization. 
(3) ?The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for conducting the proposed use of the street. 
(4) ?The date and duration of time for which the requested use of the street is proposed to occur. 
(5) ?An accurate description of that portion of the street proposed to be used. 
(6) ?The number of persons for whom use of the proposed street area is requested. 
(7) ?The proposed use, described in detail, for which the street use permit is requested. 
(Code 1986, § 7-9-1(b)) 
Sec. 70-253. - Representative of applicant or applicant at council meeting. 
    The person or representative of the group making application for a street use permit shall be present when the common council gives consideration to the granting of such street use permit to provide any additional information which is reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be granted. 
(Code 1986, § 7-9-1(c)) 
Sec. 70-254. - Petition. 
    The application shall be accompanied by a petition designating the proposed area of the street to be used and time for such proposed use, such petition to be signed by not less than 75 percent of the residents over 18 years of age residing along that portion of the street designated for the proposed use. Such petition shall be verified and shall be submitted in substantially the following form: 
PETITION FOR STREET USE PERMIT 
We, the undersigned residents of the _____ hundred block of ___________ Street in the City of Mosinee, hereby consent to the ___________ recreational or business use of this street between the hours of _____ and _____ on ________, the _____ day of ________, 19___, for the purpose of ___________ and do hereby petition the Common Council of the City of Mosinee to grant a Street Use Permit for us to use the said portion of said street for said purpose and do hereby agree to abide by such conditions of such use as the Common Council of the City of Mosinee shall attach to the granting of the requested Street Use Permit. 
We designate ___________ as the responsible person or persons who shall sign an application for a Street Use Permit on our behalf. 
(Code 1986, § 7-9-1(d)) 
Sec. 70-255. - Fees. 
    An application for a street use permit for less than one block shall be accompanied by a fee set by the council from time to time for the permit. If the application is for one or more blocks, a fee set by the council from time to time shall accompany the application plus a flat user fee set by the council from time to time if traffic must be rerouted for the street closure. If the application is for an event in which a major activity is the sale or promotion of commercial products or services, the application shall be accompanied by a fee set by the council from time to time, plus a flat user fee set by the council from time to time per day and the applicant shall agree to pay within 20 days of billing all city costs incurred by the occasion of the event. The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted the permit. 
(Code 1986, § 7-9-1(e)) 
Sec. 70-256. - Insurance. 
    The applicant for a street use permit may be required to indemnify, defend and hold the city and its employes and agents harmless against all claims, liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by the city on account of any injury to or death of any person or any damage to property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the permit, the applicant may be required to furnish a certificate of comprehensive general liability insurance with the city. The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted the permit. 
(Code 1986, § 7-9-1(f)) 
Sec. 70-257. - Termination. 
    A street use permit for an event in progress may be terminated by the police department if the health, safety and welfare of the public appears to be endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or the event is in violation of any of the conditions of the permits or ordinances of the city. The chief of police has the authority to revoke a permit or terminate an event in progress if the event organizers fail to comply with any of the regulations in the street use policy or conditions stated in the permit. 
(Code 1986, § 7-9-1(g)) 
Chapter 74 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special assessment therefor saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(7); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(15); administration, ch. 2; finance and taxation, § 2-621 et seq.; businesses, ch. 14. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROOM TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Room tax generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.75. 

Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross receipts means the sales price as defined in Wis. Stats. § 77.51(15b) insofar as applicable. 
    Hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1), in which accommodations are available to the public, except accommodations rented for a continuous period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any hospital, sanitoriums or nursing homes, or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporation and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-1), 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-32. - Penalty for violation of article; forfeiture. 
    Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this article who fails to obtain a permit as required by section 74-35, or who fails or refuses to permit the inspection of his records by the administrator after such inspection has been duly requested by the administrator, or who fails to file a return as provided in this article, or who fails to pay the room tax when required, or who violates any other provisions of this article, shall, in addition to the other charges and penalties imposed by this article, be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(2)(e) for each violation. Each day in violation is deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 2, 10-10-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09, § 2, adopted Oct. 10, 2016, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 74-33. - Imposition of tax. 
(a) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, a tax is imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail, except sales for resale, of rooms or lodging to transients by hotel keepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such tax shall be at the rate of eight percent of the gross receipts from such retail furnishings of rooms or lodgings. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats § 77.52(2)(a)(1). 
(b) ?Sales of rooms to the federal government and persons listed under Wis. Stats. § 77.54(9a) shall be exempt from the imposition of the room tax imposed under this article. The exemption shall be granted only if the following conditions have been met for any sale of a room: 
(1) ?The retailer shall bill the lodging in the name of the exempt entity; and 
(2) ?The retailer must be provided with either: 
a. ?In the case of federal, state or local government units, a tax exempt status number and a letter of authorization or purchase order from the government unit; or 
b. ?In the case of other tax exempt entities, the entity's certificate of exempt status number. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-2), 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 94-4, § 1, 4-27-1994; Ord. No. 2000-01, § 1, 1-31-2000; Ord. No. 2016-09, § 3, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 74-34. - Tax monies. 
(a) ?Collection of tax. This section shall be administered by the administrator. The tax imposed for each calendar quarter, or the first partial quarter, is due and payable on the last day of the month succeeding the calendar quarter for which imposed. A return shall be filed with the administrator, by those furnishing at retail such rooms and lodging, on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishings of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the administrator deems necessary. Every person required to file such quarterly return shall, with their first return, elect to file an annual calendar year or fiscal year return. Such annual return shall be filed within 90 days of the close of each such calendar or fiscal year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain certain such additional information as the city administrator requires. Such annual returns shall be made on forms as prescribed by the city administrator. All such returns shall be signed by the person required to file a return or his duly authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath. The city administrator may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer than one month from the filing date. 
(b) ?Distribution of tax. The percentage of the room tax that is collected for tourism promotion and tourism development purposes shall be placed in a segregated fund of the city to be disbursed for projects and activities at the discretion of the tourism commission in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0615. The percentage of the room tax that is collected for purposes other than tourism promotion and tourism development, shall be placed in the city's general fund in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1m)(dm). 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 2, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 94-4, § 2, 4-27-1994; Ord. No. 2000-01, § 2, 1-31-2000; Ord. No. 2009-11, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2016-09, § 4, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 74-35. - Permit. 
(a) ?Required; application. Every person furnishing rooms or lodging under section 74-33 shall file with the administrator an application for a permit to operate a hotel or motel for each place of business. Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the administrator and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the place of business, and such other information as the administrator requires. The application shall be signed by the owner if a sole proprietor and, if not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act on behalf of such sellers. At the time of making an application, the applicant shall pay to the administrator a fee set by the council from time to time for each permit. 
(b) ?Security or bond. In order to protect the revenue of the city, the administrator may require any person liable for the tax imposed by this article to place with him, before or after a permit is issued, such security, not in excess of $1,000.00 as the administrator determines, or bond suitable to the city in lieu thereof. If any taxpayer fails or refuses to place such security or bond, the administrator may, upon ten days' notice, recover the taxes, interest and penalties from the security or bond placed with the administrator by such taxpayer. No interest shall be paid or allowed by the city to any person for the deposit of such security. 
(c) ?Issuance; scope of validity; display. After compliance with subsections (a) and (b) of this section by the applicant, the administrator shall grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business within the city. Such permit is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-4), 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 74-36. - Revocation of permit. 
    Whenever any person fails to comply with this article, the administrator may, upon ten days' notification and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause why his permit should not be revoked, revoke or suspend any or all of the permits held by such person. The administrator shall give to such person written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his permits. The administrator shall not issue a new permit after the revocation of a permit unless he is satisfied that the former holder of the permit will comply with the provisions of this article. A fee set from time to time by the council shall be imposed for the renewal or issuance of a permit which has been previously suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-5), 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 74-37. - Sale of business. 
    If any person liable for any amount of tax under this article sells the business or stock of goods or quits the business, the successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient money from the purchase price to cover such amount of tax until the former owner produces a receipt from the administrator showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the tax imposed by this article fails to withhold such amount of tax from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the price of the accommodations valued in money. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-6), 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 74-38. - Audit. 
    The administrator may, by audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the city or the refund due to any person under this article. This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any other information within the administrator's possession or information such as that which would be gained from income tax returns which shall be furnished upon request of the administrator. One or more such audit determinations may be made of the amount due for anyone or for more than one period. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-7), 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 74-39. - Failure to file. 
    If any person fails to file a return as required by this article, the administrator shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts under section 74-33. Such estimate shall be made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is in the administrator's possession or which may come into the administrator's possession. On the basis of this estimate, the administrator shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 12 percent thereof. One or more such determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-8), 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 74-40. - Interest. 
    All unpaid taxes under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited with the administrator. All refunded taxes shall bear interest at 12 percent per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month in which such taxes are refunded. An extension of time within which to file a return shall not operate to extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest computation. If the administrator determines that any overpayment of tax has been made intentionally or by reason of carelessness or neglect, or if the tax which was overpaid was not accompanied by a complete return, it shall not allow any interest thereon. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-9), 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 74-41. - Penalty assessment. 
    If due to negligence no return is filed, or a return is filed late, or an incorrect return is filed, the entire tax finally determined shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the tax, exclusive of interest or other penalties. If a person fails to file a return when due, or files a false or fraudulent return with the intent in either case to defeat or evade the tax imposed by this article, a penalty of 25 percent shall be added to the tax required to be paid, exclusive of interest and other penalties. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-10), 12-13-1993) 
Sec. 74-42. - Records and taxation. 
(a) ?Every person liable for the tax imposed by this article shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts and invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the administrator requires. 
(b) ?All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such returns, on file with the administrator, are deemed to be confidential, except the administrator may divulge their contents to the following and no others: 
(1) ?The person who filed the return. 
(2) ?Officers, agents, or employes of the Internal Revenue Service or the state department of revenue. 
(3) ?The assessor, city attorney, mayor and city administrator. 
(4) ?Such other public officials of the city, when deemed necessary. 
(c) ?No person having an administrative duty under this article shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of the records of any person of whom a tax is imposed by this article, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1(7-15-11), 12-13-1993) 
Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on loaded vehicles, or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(16); vehicle accidents with animals, § 10-8; leading animal from motor vehicle, § 10-15; court, ch. 22; vehicles to yield to right-of-way of fire vehicles, § 34-4; traffic visibility, § 42-710; loading requirements, § 42-711; parking requirements, § 42-712; highway access, § 42-714; storage and parking of recreational vehicles, § 42-715; billboard location to prevent traffic hazard, § 42-959; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; disorderly conduct with motor vehicle, § 54-194; junked vehicles, § 54-236 et seq.; improper transportation of solid waste, § 66-33; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; trees and shrubbery obstructing view at intersection or view of traffic signs, § 86-118. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - State traffic laws. 
(a) ?Statutes adopted. Excepted as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. chs. 340 to 348, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including penalties to be imposed and procedures for prosecution, are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any regulation incorporated in this section by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutory regulations in Wis. Stats. chs. 340 to 348 incorporated in this section are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure to the extent legally practicable uniform statewide regulation of vehicle traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the state. Any person who shall within the city violate any provisions of any statute incorporated in this section by reference shall be deemed guilty of an offense under this section. 
(b) ?Other state laws adopted. There are also adopted by reference the following sections of the state statutes, but the prosecution of such offenses under this section shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. chs. 340 through 348, and the penalty for violation of such provisions shall be limited to a forfeiture as provided in this chapter: 
Wis. Stats. § 23.33 All-terrain vehicles Wis. Stats. § 941.01 Negligent operation of vehicle off highway Wis. Stats. § 941.03 Highway obstruction Wis. Stats. § 947.045 Drinking in motor vehicle on highway  
(c) ?Statutes specifically incorporated by reference. Whenever this chapter incorporates by reference specific sections of state statutes, such references shall mean the state statutes as from time to time amended, repealed or modified by the state legislature. 
(d) ?General references. General references in this chapter to state statutory sections or chapters describing or defining procedures or authority for enactment or enforcement of local traffic regulations shall be deemed to refer to the most recent enactments of the state legislature describing or defining such procedures or authorities. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-1; Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 5-29-1990; Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, 10-28-1991) 
Sec. 78-2. - School bus warning lights. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 346.48(2)(b)2., adopted by reference in section 78-1 to the contrary, school bus operators shall use flashing red warning lights in residential and business districts when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at locations at which there are no crosswalk or traffic signals so that pupils must cross the street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-6) 
Sec. 78-3. - Blue warning lights on police vehicles. 
(a) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 346.03(3), 346.94(14), 346.95(3) and 347.25(1), (1m)(a) and (b) and (4), a marked police vehicle under Wis. Stats. § 340.01(3)(a), may be equipped with a blue light and a red light which flash, oscillate or rotate. 
(b) ?If the vehicle is so equipped, the lights shall be illuminated when the operator of the police vehicle is exercising the privileges granted under Wis. Stats. § 346.03. The blue light shall be mounted on the passenger side of the vehicle and the red light shall be mounted on the driver side of the vehicle. The lights shall be designed and mounted so as to be plainly visible and understandable from a distance of 500 feet during normal sunlight and during hours of darkness. No operator of a police vehicle may use the warning lights except when responding to an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm or when necessarily parked on a highway in a position which is likely to be hazardous to traffic using the highway. 
(c) ?The city shall give notice of its intent to equip its police vehicles with flashing, oscillating or rotating blue lights as a class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, at least 90 days before so equipping the first police vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-7) 
Sec. 78-4. - Leaving keys in vehicle; parking vehicles with motor running. 
(a) ?No person shall permit any motor vehicle in his custody to stand or remain unattended on any street, alley or other public area, except an attended parking area, unless either the starting lever, throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift or ignition of the vehicle is locked and the key for such lock is removed from the vehicle. 
(b) ?No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle with the motor or refrigerator unit running for more than five minutes within 300 feet of any residence within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-24) 
Sec. 78-5. - Unattended motorized machinery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any construction, compaction, earth-grading or farm machinery which is self-propelled and moves upon the surface of the earth, and which is owned or controlled by him, to stand for any period of time unattended without locking the ignition system or otherwise rendering such machinery inoperable so as to prevent any person unauthorized by the owner or individual in control thereof from starting such machinery. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-25) 
Sec. 78-6. - Motor vehicles on pedestrian ways and overpasses. 
    No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle on any pedestrian way or pedestrian overpass within the city except municipal or county maintenance vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-43) 
Sec. 78-7. - Operation of motor vehicles in public parking lots and ramps. 
(a) ?Unlicensed operators. No person who does not hold a valid operator's license shall operate a vehicle in any public parking lot or ramp or in any private parking lot or ramp held out for the use of parking for the general public. 
(b) ?Traffic regulations applicable. All provisions of section 78-1 and of the state statutes and laws incorporated in this chapter by reference shall be applicable on any public parking lot or ramp and on any private parking lot, road or ramp held out for use of the general public for parking or vehicular travel. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-32) 
Sec. 78-8. - Driving over curbing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be driven or backed over any curbing in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-46) 
Sec. 78-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-06, § 2, adopted Sept. 11, 2017, repealed § 78-9, which pertained to disturbance of the peace with a motor vehicle, and derived from Code 1986, § 8-1-40. 
Sec. 78-10. - Pedestrian regulations. 
(a) ?Obedience to traffic control devices and regulations. 
(1) ?No person shall fail to obey the instructions of any uniform traffic control device when traveling as a pedestrian on any highway within the city, unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer. 
(2) ?No pedestrian shall cross at a crosswalk except on the right half thereof, whenever practicable. Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway except when the sidewalk is visibly unsafe, obstructed or closed to public travel. 
(b) ?Prohibited pedestrian crossings. No pedestrian shall cross between adjacent intersections, unless such crossing is permitted by official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-42) 
Sec. 78-11. - Railroad regulations. 
(a) ?Obstruction of crossings. No person shall leave standing or stop or permit or allow to stand or stop any railroad train, engine or car upon any street, alley or highway crossing within the city so as to obstruct public travel for a greater period of time than ten minutes without opening such street, alley or crossing for at least ten minutes. Any conductor, engineer, fireman or brakeman on any train or locomotive so obstructing any street, alley or railroad crossing or any yardmaster, flagman, switchman or section hand who shall allow and be responsible for such obstruction shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 78-43. The corporation running or operating such train, engine or cars so obstructing any street or railroad crossing shall be subject to a forfeiture described in section 1-13. 
(b) ?Crossing warning by trains. No person shall operate or permit to be operated a locomotive, railway train, engine or railway car over any graded street or highway crossing within the limits of the city unless a whistle or horn shall be blown a minimum of 80 feet from such crossing and a bell rung continuously until the crossing shall be reached. The blowing of a whistle or horn and the ringing of a bell shall not be necessary where gates are operated automatically or a flagman is stationed at such traveled grade crossing. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-41) 
Sec. 78-12. - Regulation of operation of golf carts on city streets. 
(a) ?Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.18(1)(c), golf carts may be operated to and from the golf course for a distance not to exceed one mile upon city streets. 
(b) ?The following area(s) are designated for operation of golf carts on city streets: 
(1) ?Along Indianhead Drive from the golf course maintenance shop (near the intersection of Golf Club Boulevard and Indianhead Drive) to golf course clubhouse parking lot. 
(c) ?This area shall be signed by the public works department as a designated golf cart travel route. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, § 1, 6-13-2016) 
Secs. 78-13—78-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-41. - State administrative code. 
(a) ?Administrative regulations adopted. The following administrative rules and regulations adopted by the secretary of the state department of transportation and published in the Wisconsin Administrative Code, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are adopted by reference and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this section. 
Wis. Adm. Code - TRANS 305 Standards for Motor Vehicle Equipment Wis. Adm. Code - TRANS 304 SMV Emblem  
(b) ?Noncompliance. No person shall operate or allow to be operated on any highway, street or alley within the city a vehicle that is not in conformity with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section or the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 110.075 and ch. 347, incorporated by reference in section 78-1. 
(c) ?Owner's liability. Any owner of a vehicle not equipped as required by this section who knowingly causes or permits such vehicle to be operated on a highway in violation of this section is guilty of the violation of the same as if he had operated the vehicle. The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 347.04, relating to the nonapplicability of demerit points, shall apply to owners convicted of a violation of this section. 
(d) ?Safety checks. 
(1) ?Operators to submit to inspection. When directed to do so by any law enforcement officer, the operator of any motor vehicle shall stop and submit such vehicle to an inspection and such tests as are necessary to determine whether the vehicle meets the requirements of this section, or that the vehicle's equipment is in proper adjustment or repair. No person, when operating a motor vehicle, shall fail to stop and submit such vehicle to inspection when directed to do so by any law enforcement officer as provided in this section. 
(2) ?Authority of officer. Any law enforcement officer of the city is empowered whenever he shall have reason to believe that any provision of this section is being violated to order the operator of the vehicle to stop and to submit such vehicle to an inspection with respect to brakes, lights, turn signals, steering, horns and warning devices, glass, mirrors, exhaust systems, windshield wipers, tires and other items of equipment. 
(3) ?Vehicle to be removed from highway. Whenever, after inspection as provided by this section, a law enforcement officer determines that a vehicle is unsafe for operation, he may order it removed from the highway and not operated; except for purposes of removal and repair until the vehicle has been repaired as directed in a repair order. Repair orders may be in the form prescribed by the secretary of the department of transportation under Wis. Stats. § 110.075(5), and shall require the vehicle owner or operator to cause the repairs to be made and return evidence of compliance with the repair order to the department of the issuing officer within the time specified in the order. 
(e) ?Penalty for violation of section. Penalty for violation of any provision of this section, including the provisions of the Wisconsin Administration Code, incorporated in this section by reference, shall be as provided in subsection (a) of this section, together with the costs of prosecution and applicable penalty assessment. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-2; Ord. No. 96-3, § 1, 2-26-1996) 
Sec. 78-42. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a) ?Procedures. This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the applicable provisions of state statutes and this section. 
(b) ?Citations. 
(1) ?Uniform citation and complaint. The state uniform traffic citation and complaint described and defined in the state statutes shall be used for enforcement of all provisions of this chapter except those provisions which describe or define nonmoving traffic violations and violations of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.71—346.73. Violations of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.71—346.73 shall be reported to the district attorney and the state uniform traffic citation shall not be used in such cases except upon written request of the district attorney. 
(2) ?Parking citations. The chief of police shall recommend a citation form for use in enforcing the nonmoving traffic offenses in this chapter. When approved by the common council, such citation form shall be used for enforcement of nonmoving traffic regulations created or adopted by this chapter, including violations of nonmoving traffic regulations defined and described in the state statutes adopted by reference in section 78-1, and all provisions regarding nonmoving traffic violations in this chapter. The citation form for nonmoving traffic violations shall contain a notice that the person cited may discharge the forfeiture for violation of a nonmoving traffic regulation and penalty thereof by complying with subsection (c)(2) of this section. Nonmoving traffic citations may be issued by law enforcement officers or by civilian employes of the police department. 
(c) ?Deposits and stipulations. 
(1) ?Uniform traffic offenses. 
a. ?Who may make. Persons arrested or cited for violation of moving traffic offenses created by this chapter shall be permitted to make deposits and stipulations of no contest or released by the arresting officer in accordance with the applicable provisions of the state statutes. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made by persons arrested for violations of this chapter in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.12(1)(b) whenever the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 345.27 are inapplicable to such violations. Stipulations shall conform to the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint under Wis. Stats. § 345.11 and may be accepted within five days of the date of the alleged violation. Stipulations may be accepted by the police department. 
b. ?Delivery or mailing of deposit and stipulation. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under the preceding subsection (c)(1)a must make the deposit required under Wis. Stats. § 345.26 or, if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule established by the chief of police and approved by the common council. Deposits may be brought or mailed within five days of the issuance of the citation in lieu of a court appearance to the police department or the county clerk of courts. 
c. ?Receipt required. Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 345.26(1)(a), 345.27(2), 345.28 and 345.261(1)(b) and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11. The official or person receiving the deposit shall furnish and deliver or mail an original receipt for such deposit to the alleged violator and shall deliver the deposit and stipulation, and a copy of the receipt within seven days to the county clerk of courts. 
(2) ?Nonmoving traffic offenses. 
a. ?Direct payment of penalty permitted. Persons cited (summons not issued) for violation of nonmoving traffic offenses described and defined in this chapter may discharge the penalty thereof and avoid court prosecution by mailing or forwarding within five days of the issuance of the citation to the police department the minimum forfeiture specified for the violation. If not so forwarded, an additional penalty of $10.00 shall be added to the forfeiture amount. If the citation remains unpaid after 20 days of the issuance, the violation shall be charged on a state uniform traffic citation with a deposit as specified in the current uniform state traffic deposit schedule. 
b. ?Registration suspension. If the alleged violator does not pay the forfeiture or appear in court in response to the citation for a nonmoving traffic violation on the date specified in the citation, or, if no date is specified on the citation, within 28 days after the citation is issued, the city may ask the state department of transportation to suspend the registration of the vehicle involved or refuse registration of any vehicle owned by the person pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 345.28(4), and subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
c. ?Deposits returned to administrator. Officers receiving deposits for nonmoving traffic violations under this subsection shall pay over such deposits to the administrator within seven days of receipt. Such payment shall be accompanied by an itemized statement for each deposit of the offense charged and the name of the depositor. 
d. ?Oath. Any officer authorized to accept deposits under Wis. Stats. § 345.26 or this section shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 19.01. 
(3) ?Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited penalty or money deposit under this section shall receipt therefor in triplicate as provided in Wis. Stats. § 345.26(3)(b). Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this section shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 345.26—345.28, and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11. 
(4) ?Registration suspension program. 
a. ?The city shall participate in the state department of transportation traffic violation and registration program as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 345.28 and Wis. Adm. Code Trans. 128, and all amendments or changes thereto. 
b. ?The police department is designated as a delegated authority for purposes of Wis. Stats. §§ 85.13 and 345.28 and Wis. Adm. Code Trans. 128. The police department is authorized to perform, on behalf of the city, all functions required of a local authority under such state statutes and this Code including, but not limited to: 
1. ?Preparing and completing all forms and notices, notifying the state department of transportation of unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations; 
2. ?Specifying whether the registration of vehicles involved in unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations should be suspended and/or whether registration should be refused for any vehicle owned by persons with unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations; 
3. ?Determining the method by which the city will pay the state department of transportation for administration of the program; establishing the effective date for participation; 
4. ?And taking such other action as is necessary to institute and continue participation in the state department of transportation traffic violation and registration program. 
c. ?The chief of police is authorized to assign a member of the police department to perform such acts as are necessary to effectuate this subsection. 
d. ?In addition to all applicable fines and court costs, the cost of using the state department of transportation traffic violation and registration program shall be assessed as permitted by Wis. Stats. § 345.28(4)(d). The police department may refuse to notify the state department of transportation of payment on a citation until all applicable fines and costs, including costs assessed under the preceding sentence, are paid. 
e. ?This subsection shall not be interpreted as requiring that all unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations be processed through the state department of transportation traffic violation and registration program. The city's participation in such program shall be in addition to any and all other means legally available to enforce such citations. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-51; Ord. No. 92-9, § 2, 7-13-1992) 
Sec. 78-43. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a) ?Forfeiture penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a forfeiture as hereafter provided, together with court costs and fees prescribed by Wis. Stats. §§ 814.63(1), (2) and (3) or 814.65(1), (3), (4), (5), the penalty assessment for moving traffic violations and the driver improvement surcharge imposed by Wis. Stats. §§ 165.87 and 346.655, where applicable. Payment of the judgment and applicable court costs, fees, assessments and surcharges may be suspended by the sentencing court for not more than 60 days. Any person 18 years of age or older who shall fail to pay the amount of the forfeiture, court costs, any penalty assessment or driver surcharge or other penalty imposed for violation of any provision of this chapter may, upon order of the court entering judgment therefor and having jurisdiction of the case, be imprisoned until such forfeiture, costs and assessment are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(b) ?Other sanctions. Nothing in this section shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by state statutes to suspend or revoke the operating privileges of the defendant, order the defendant to submit to assessment and rehabilitation programs or to attend traffic safety school in addition to payment of a monetary penalty or in lieu of imprisonment. 
(c) ?Forfeitures for violation of uniform traffic regulations. Forfeitures for violations of any moving traffic regulation set forth in the state statutes, adopted by reference in section 78-1, shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the comparable statute, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to permit prosecution under this chapter for any offense described in Wis. Stats. chs. 341 to 348 for which an imprisonment penalty or fine may be imposed upon the defendant. 
(d) ?Forfeitures for parking violations; forfeitures for uniform statewide parking, stopping and standing offenses. Minimum and maximum forfeitures for violation of nonmoving traffic violations, adopted by reference in section 78-1, as described in Wis. Stats. chs. 341 to 348, shall be set from time to time by the council: 
Offense Forfeiture Wis. Stats. § 346.503 Physically disabled $25.00 Wis. Stats. § 346.505 Special registration plates 10.00 Wis. Stats. § 346.51(1) Improper parking on/off roadway 10.00 Wis. Stats. § 346.52(1) Stopping/ 
standing in prohibited areas 10.00 Wis. Stats. § 346.52(2) Stopping/ 
standing on highway by grade school 10.00 Wis. Stats. § 346.53 Parking/ 
standing where prohibited 10.00 Wis. Stats. § 346.54 How to park/stop on streets 10.00 Wis. Stats. § 346.55(1) Parking on left side of highway 10.00 Wis. Stats. § 346.55(2) Parking vehicle for sale on highway 10.00 Wis. Stats. § 346.55(3) Parking on posted private property 10.00  
(e) ?Other violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise established by this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $15.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(f) ?Other violations. All violations of this article not described in subsections (a) or (b) shall be enforced in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 66.12 and 66.114. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.12(1)(b) in substantially the form provided in the uniform traffic citation within five days of the date of the citation for such violation. Bail deposits may also be made under Wis. Stats. § 66.12. Such deposits shall include a $2.00 clerk's fee and costs of prosecution. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-11(c)) 
Sec. 78-44. - Accident reports. 
    The operator of every vehicle involved in an accident shall comply with Wis. Stats. § 346.70. If the operator is unable to make such report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making such report shall have the duty to comply with this section. Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73, specifically that accident reports filed under this section shall be for the confidential use of the police department and shall not be open to public inspection except as permitted by Wis. Stats. § 346.73. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-5) 
Sec. 78-45. - Registration record of vehicle as evidence. 
    When any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this chapter regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner as shown by the ownership registration of the vehicle supplied by the state department of transportation, or a comparable authority of any other state, shall be deemed to have committed the violation for purposes of enforcement of this chapter and specifically section 78-1, and shall be subject to the applicable forfeiture penalty; provided the defenses defined and described in Wis. Stats. § 346.485(5)(b) shall be a defense for an owner charged with such violation. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-4) 
Sec. 78-46. - Official traffic map. 
(a) ?Established. There is established an official traffic map for the city upon which shall be indicated no parking areas, restricted parking areas, stop signs, arterial intersections, yield signs, special speed limits, one-way highways, school crossings and all other restrictions or limitations contained in this chapter, as from time to time amended or modified by the common council when the laws of the state require the erection or use of official traffic control devices to enforce such restrictions or limitations. 
(b) ?Violations. When official traffic control devices giving notice of the restrictions, prohibitions and limitations shown on the official traffic map are erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section a violation of the restriction, prohibition or limitation shown on the official traffic map shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c) ?Map to be maintained. A copy of the official traffic map shall be maintained and displayed in the office of the police department and circuit court. 
(d) ?Additions to map. The council may from time to time make additions to or deletions from the official traffic map, and the chief of police shall keep such official traffic map current. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-8) 
Secs. 78-47—78-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 78-66. - Official traffic signs and control devices; prohibited signs, signals and markers. 
(a) ?Duty of public works director to erect and install uniform traffic control devices. Whenever traffic regulations created by this chapter, including state traffic regulations adopted by reference in section 78-1, require the erection of traffic control devices for enforcement, the public works director, with the cooperation of the police department, shall procure, erect and maintain uniform traffic control devices conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual promulgated by the state department of transportation, giving notice of such traffic regulation to the users of the streets and highways on which such regulations apply. Whenever state law grants discretion to local authorities in the erecting or placement of a uniform traffic control device, devices shall be erected in such locations and in such a manner as in the judgment of the public works director or his designee will carry out the purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the streets and highways of the city. 
(b) ?Code numbers to be affixed to official traffic control devices. The public works director or his designee shall cause to be placed on each official traffic control sign, guide board, milepost, signal or marker erected under subsection (a) of this section a code number assigned by the state department of transportation, as required by state law. 
(c) ?Prohibited signs and markers in highways. No person, other than an officer authorized by this chapter to erect and maintain official traffic control devices or his designee, shall place within the limits of any street or highway maintained by the city any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument unless permission is first obtained from the public works director or where applicable, the state. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument placed or maintained in violation of this subsection shall be subject to removal as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d) ?Removal of unofficial signs, markers, signals and traffic control devices. The public works director or his designee may remove any sign, signal, marking or other device which is placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or state law. Any charge imposed against premises for removal of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal, marking or device shall be reported by the public works director or his designee to the common council's public works committee for review and certification at its next regular meeting following the imposition of the charge. Any charge not paid on or before the next succeeding November 15 shall be placed upon the tax roll for collection as other special municipal taxes. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-3) 
State Law reference— Authority regarding unauthorized traffic devices, markings, generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 346.41 and 349.09. 
Sec. 78-67. - Unauthorized traffic signs. 
    All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highways or railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal are prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 9-7-5(c)) 
Sec. 78-68. - Ratification of signal devices. 
    All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings in place on the date of adoption of this Code are expressly ratified and confirmed by the council. 
Sec. 78-69. - Operators to obey. 
    Every operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection at which an official traffic control device is erected in accordance with this chapter shall obey the direction of such official traffic control device, as required by the state statutes incorporated by reference in section 78-1. Operators of vehicles approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering a highway as required by Wis. Stats. § 346.46. Operators approaching intersections at which a yield sign has been installed shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles as required by Wis. Stats. § 346.18(6). 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-10) 
Secs. 78-70—78-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-101. - Restrictions on parking; posted limitations. 
(a) ?Twenty-four-hour limitation. No person shall park or leave standing any automobile, truck, tractor, trailer or vehicle of any description on any of the following public streets or public parking lots owned by the city in the city for a period of 24 or more consecutive hours in the same location at any time, except that where more restrictive parking limits have been established the more restrictive limits shall apply. When any law enforcement officer shall find a vehicle standing upon a public street or parking lot in violation of the provisions of this section, he is authorized to move such a vehicle or to require the operator in charge thereof to move such vehicle to a position permitted under this chapter. The law enforcement officer may cause such vehicle to be removed to a proper impoundment and storage area within the city where storage space is available, and, in such case, the owner shall pay the costs of removing such vehicle and the storage fees on such vehicle before he may recover the possession thereof: 
(1) ?On Main Street from Water Street to Fifth Street; 
(2) ?On Fourth Street from Main Street to Pine Street; and 
(3) ?On Third Street from Main Street to Washington Street. 
(b) ?Posted limitations. 
(1) ?The common council may designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones or as zones for parking by physically handicapped persons and may limit the hours in which the restrictions apply. The city shall mark, by appropriate signs, each zone so designated in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 349.13. 
(2) ?Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in a no parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited except physicians on emergency calls or as permitted by state law or elsewhere by this code. 
(3) ?The chief of police is granted the authority, within the reasonable exercise of police power to prohibit, limit the time or otherwise restrict the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles beyond the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 346 and shall also have the authority to restrict the turning or movement of heavy traffic and to impose special weight limitations on any highway or portions thereof which, because of the weakness of the roadbed due to deterioration or climatic conditions or other special or temporary conditions, would likely be seriously damaged or destroyed in the absence of any restrictions on heavy traffic movement or special weight limitations. 
(4) ?No prohibition, restriction or limitation on parking or restriction on movement or turning of heavy traffic and imposition of special weight limits is effective unless official traffic control devices have been placed or erected indicating the particular prohibition, restriction or limitation. 
(5) ?One-hour limitation. No person shall park or leave standing any automobile, truck, tractor, trailer or vehicle of any description on any of the following public streets or public parking lots owned by the city in the city for a period of one or more consecutive hours in the same location at any time, except that where more restrictive parking limits have been established, the more restrictive limits shall apply: 
a. ?On the east side of 2nd Street from Main Street north to the first driveway located behind the Dessert Public Library. 
b. ?On the west side of 3rd Street from the first driveway located south of Main Street south to the first driveway located south of 407 3rd Street. 
(6) ?Two-hour limitation. No person shall park or leave standing any automobile, truck, tractor, trailer or vehicle of any description on any of the following public streets or public parking lots owned by the city in the city for a period of two or more consecutive hours in the same location at any time, except that where more restrictive parking limits have been established, the more restrictive limits shall apply: 
a. ?On the east and west sides of 12th Street from Main Street south to Jackson Street, on school days from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
(7) ?After the parking limitations on any given street have expired, any change of location of not more than one stall following expiration of the parking period allowed shall be and constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(8) ?The director of public works shall properly post the parking restrictions authorized by this section in accordance with the provisions of Wisconsin State Statutes. 
(c) ?Suspension powers of the mayor. For a limited and reasonable period of time, the mayor, with the consent of the council, may suspend the parking time limitations upon notification to the chief of police. If there does not exist sufficient time to notify the common council of his desire to do so because of untimely notice or advance information or request to the mayor, the chief executive is then authorized to take such action without approval of the council. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-20(a)—(c); Ord. No. 2001-05, §§ 1—3, 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1, 1-27-2003; Ord. No. 2007-01, § 1, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 3-30-2009) 
Sec. 78-102. - Parking regulations on school district grounds. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 118.105, the following parking regulations shall apply to the grounds of the Mosinee School District located within the city: All parking on any grounds of the Mosinee School District from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. shall be restricted to areas designated for parking by the school board. When signs are erected by the school board giving notice of such restrictions, all persons shall park only in areas designated and signed for visitor parking. There shall be no parking on such grounds between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except when school functions extend past 11:00 p.m. On such nights there shall be no parking one hour after the function has concluded. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-30(a)) 
Sec. 78-103. - Parking reserved for vehicles of disabled. 
    When official traffic signs indicating such restriction have been erected in accordance with section 78-66, no person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle upon any portion of a street, highway or public or private parking facility reserved for vehicles displaying special registration plates or identification cards or emblems issued by the state department of transportation or, for vehicles registered in another jurisdiction, by such other jurisdiction designating the vehicle as one used by a physically disabled person. The provisions of this section shall be applicable, but not be limited to, the designated handicapped parking area located in the Mosinee Post Office parking lot during the hours that the post office is open. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-23) 
State Law reference— Disabled parking generally, Wis. Stats. § 346.503 et seq. 
Sec. 78-104. - Angle parking. 
    Angle parking or parking diagonally is prohibited on all the streets, alleys and highways of the city except in the places where vehicle parking markers indicate that the same is permissible. All vehicles shall park parallel to, and within one foot of the curb except where streets and parking lots are so marked for angle parking. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-26) 
Sec. 78-105. - Authority of police chief to close streets and restrict parking. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to temporarily close city streets and restrict parking on city streets when, in his judgement, circumstances warrant such restrictions. Temporary closures and restrictions may not extend past six months in duration except by action of the common council. 
(Ord. No. 94-6, § 1(e), 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 78-106. - Unlawful removal of parking citations. 
    No person other than the owner or operator thereof shall remove a city parking ticket from a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-31) 
Sec. 78-107. - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
(a) ?Hazard to public safety. Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon a highway in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public safety. 
(b) ?Removal by operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator in charge, upon request of any traffic officer, to a position where parking is permitted or to a private or public parking or storage premises. 
(c) ?Removal by traffic officer. Any traffic officer after issuing a citation for illegal parking, stopping or standing of an unattended vehicle in violation of this chapter, is authorized to remove such vehicle to a position where parking is permitted. 
(d) ?Removal by private service. The officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to perform vehicle towing services, a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer or a licensed motor vehicle dealer who performs vehicle towing services to remove and store such vehicle in any public storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of the person providing the towing services. 
(e) ?Towing and storage charges. In addition to other penalties provided in this chapter, the owner or operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay all reasonable costs of moving, towing and storage. If the vehicle is towed or stored by a private motor carrier, motor vehicle salvage dealer or licensed motor vehicle dealer, actual charges regularly paid for such services shall be paid. If the vehicle is stored in a public storage garage or rental facility, customary charges for such storage shall be paid. Upon payment, a receipt shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle for the towing or storage charge. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-33) 
Sec. 78-108. - Prohibited in certain specified places. 
(a) ?No person shall stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended and whether temporarily or otherwise, in any of the following places: 
(1) ?Within an intersection; 
(2) ?On a crosswalk; 
(3) ?Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 15 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone unless a different distance is clearly indicated by an official traffic sign or marker or parking meter; 
(4) ?On a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except when parking in such place is clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers or parking meters; 
(5) ?Alongside or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction when such stopping or standing would obstruct traffic or when pedestrian traffic would be required to travel in the roadway; 
(6) ?On the roadway side of any parked vehicle unless double parking is clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers; 
(7) ?Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station or directly across the highway from such entrance; 
(8) ?Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when stopping or standing is prohibited by official traffic signs indicating the prohibition of any stopping or standing; and 
(9) ?Within 25 feet of the nearest rail at a railroad crossing. 
Notwithstanding subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, if snow accumulation at the usual bus passenger loading area makes it difficult to load or discharge bus passengers, the driver may stop a motor bus to load or discharge passengers on a crosswalk at an intersection where traffic is not controlled by a traffic control signal or a traffic officer. 
(b) ?During the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. during school days, no person may stop or leave any vehicle standing, whether temporarily or otherwise, upon the near side of a through highway adjacent to a schoolhouse used for any children below the 9th grade. If the highway adjacent to the schoolhouse is not a through highway, the operator of a vehicle may stop upon the near side thereof during such hours, provided such stopping is temporary and only for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. This subsection shall not apply to a city when the common council by ordinance permits parking of any vehicle or of school buses only on the near side of specified highways adjacent to schoolhouses during specified hours. 
(c) ?Parking in driveways. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle in any private driveway without the permission of the owner or lessee of the property upon which such driveway is located, whether or not such driveway is posted to limit or restrict parking. 
(d) ?Parking vehicle for repair or to display for sale. No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street, alley, public right-of-way or municipal parking lot in the city for the purpose of repairing such vehicle, or to display such vehicle for sale. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-22) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 346.52. 
Sec. 78-109. - Parking of heavy or oversized vehicles. 
(a) ?No person owning or having control of any truck, trailer, truck power unit, tractor, semitrailer, bus or any other vehicle or combination of vehicles weighing in excess of 10,000 pounds gross weight, or over 16 feet in length, or having an enclosed area of a height of more than eight feet from the roadway, shall park such vehicle upon any street, avenue or public way in the city except upon those streets within a business district as defined by Wis. Stats. § 340.01. 
(b) ?The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the lawful parking of such equipment or vehicles upon any street, avenue or public way in the city for the actual loading or unloading of goods, wares or merchandise; provided, however, that the loading and unloading, as used in this section, shall be limited to the actual time necessary for such operation or activity. 
(c) ?The restrictions of this section shall not be applicable to motor homes or recreational vehicles of any weight or size used solely for the purpose of transporting persons and not used for living arrangements, provided that the recreational vehicles are stored or parked in accordance with section 42-715. 
(d) ?The common council may, in its sole discretion, designate specific truck parking zones as it may deem necessary. 
(e) ?No operator of a school bus or other bus, regardless of its size, shall park such vehicle in a residential district, on the street, on a lawn, in the alley, in a driveway or anywhere else except for such time as is reasonably necessary to facilitate the loading and unloading of the vehicle, except that school buses may be parked at any Mosinee School District building when required. 
(f) ?Any vehicle unlawfully parked under this section may be removed from the street by order of the chief of police, and the expense of so moving and storing such vehicle shall be paid by the operator or owner of such vehicle as a forfeiture in addition to the penalties in section 1-13. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-29; Ord. of 8-11-1997, § 1; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 12-10-2012) 
Secs. 78-110—78-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED PARKING 

Sec. 78-131. - Zones. 
    No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, for any purpose, upon the following highways or parts of highways at any time: 
(1) ?On the southeast side of Fourth Street from Pine Street to Fremont Street. 
(2) ?On the east and west sides of Rangeline Road from Western Avenue to Pasha Avenue. 
(3) ?On the northwest side of 11th Street from Jackson Street to Fremont Street. 
(4) ?On the northwest side of Fremont Street from 11th Street to 12th Street. 
(5) ?On the northwest side of Eighth Street from Pine Street to High Street. 
(6) ?On the southeast side of Second Street in front of the Mosinee Post Office between the appropriately marked signs except for persons conducting postal business. 
(7) ?On the west side of Depot Street for 250 feet north from the Mosinee Paper Corporation. 
(8) ?On the north side of Main Street from 11th Street to a point 904 feet north of 11th Street. 
(9) ?On the south side of STH 153 from Second Street to its intersection with Old Highway 51. 
(10) ?On the north side of STH 153 between the Wisconsin River bridge spans. 
(11) ?On both sides of STH 153 from Old Highway 51 to 100 feet east of Orbiting Drive. 
(12) ?On the south side of Parker Avenue between George Street and Rangeline Road. 
(13) ?On the west side of Water Street from Main Street to the driveway at 307 Water Street, and on the east side of Water Street from the parking lot at 306 Water Street to Washington Street. 
(14) ?On Washington Street from Water Street to Fifth Street. 
(15) ?On Fifth Street from Washington Street to Main Street. 
(16) ?On West View Drive from State Highway 153 to North View Drive. 
(17) ?On Golf Club Boulevard from State Highway 153 to Indianhead Drive. 
(18) ?On East View Drive from State Highway 153 to South Park View Circle. 
(19) ?On South View Drive from West View Drive to Golf Club Boulevard. 
(20) ?On South Park View Circle from Golf Club Boulevard to Indianhead Drive. 
(21) ?On North Park View Circle from Golf Club Boulevard to Indianhead Drive. 
(22) ?On North View Drive from Golf Club Boulevard to Indianhead Drive. 
(23) ?On Indianhead Drive from the intersection of North Park View Circle and South Park View Circle to North View Drive. 
(24) ?On the south side of Indianhead Drive from North View Drive to Golf Club Boulevard. 
(25) ?On Indianhead Drive from Golf Club Boulevard to Fairway Drive. 
(26) ?On North View Drive from West View Drive to Golf Club Boulevard. 
(27) ?On the south side of Fremont from Third Street to the Dessert Park parking lot driveway entrance. 
(28) ?On the north side of Edgewood Drive from its intersection with Wilson Street east to the Edgewood Park property line. 
(29) ?On the north side of Fremont Street from its intersection with 3rd Street west to the alley. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-27; Ord. No. 93-4, 1-25-1993; Ord. No. 93-7, 6-28-1993; Ord. No. 97-5, 7-28-1997; Ord. No. 98-3, § 1, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 9-27-1999; Ord. No. 2005-06, §§ 1—11, 9-26-2005; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 5-20-2009; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 6-6-2018) 
Sec. 78-132. - During certain periods. 
    When signs or parking meters are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle for longer than the period specified upon any of the following highways, streets of parts thereof, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers: 
(1) ?All-night parking on any street or highway between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day from November 1 to April 1. 
(2) ?In front of 401 Sixth Street during church services. 
(3) ?In the designated areas within school zones during the times specified on school days. 
(4) ?On the east side of 8th Street beginning at intersection of Pine Street and extending north 110 feet, on school days from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-28; Ord. No. 2000-02, § 1, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-10-2011) 
Sec. 78-133. - Downtown area parking restrictions. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park or leave standing, any truck, van, bus or sport utility vehicle upon any of the following highways, streets, or parts thereof, except for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers: 
(1) ?On both sides of Main Street from 2nd Street to a point 105 feet west of 2nd Street. 
(2) ?On both sides of Main Street from 3rd Street to a point 103 feet east of 3rd Street. 
(3) ?On the north side of Main Street from 3rd Street west to 4th Street. 
(4) ?On the south side of Main Street from 3rd Street to a point 105 feet west of 3rd Street. 
(5) ?On both sides of 4th Street from Pine Street to a point 100 feet north of Pine Street. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 7-10-2006) 
Secs. 78-134—78-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SNOW CONDITIONS 

Sec. 78-146. - Declaration of emergency; parking restrictions. 
(a) ?A snow emergency shall be declared by the chief of police by giving notice to the news media. 
(b) ?During the period of such snow emergency no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon any highway or street in the city from 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-20(d); Ord. No. 2009-01, § 2, 2-23-2009) 
Sec. 78-147. - Parking restrictions during temporary snow removal or street maintenance. 
(a) ?No person shall park, place or leave standing any automobile, truck or other vehicle on any street or public way after one hour from the time such area has been designated and marked with signs or barriers by the police department and/or the public works director indicating no parking due to snow removal. 
(b) ?Whenever it is necessary to clear or repair a city roadway or any part thereof, the public works director and/or police department shall post such highways or parts thereof with signs bearing the words "No Parking—Street Maintenance Work." Such signs shall be erected at least two hours prior to the time that street maintenance work is to be commenced. No person shall park a motor vehicle in violation of such signs. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-21) 
Secs. 78-148—78-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-166. - U-turns. 
    U-turns are prohibited at the following locations: 
(1) ?On Main Street at its intersection with Fourth Street. 
(2) ?On Main Street at its intersection with Third Street. 
(3) ?On Third Street at its intersection with Washington Street. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-16) 
Sec. 78-167. - Through streets designated. 
    In the interest of public safety and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.07, the streets or portions thereof set forth in this section are declared to be through highways, and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the public works director in accordance with section 78-66. 
(1) ?That part of Interstate Highway 39 within the city limits. 
(2) ?That part of State Trunk Highway 153 within the city limits. 
(3) ?Old Highway 51 from the north city limits to State Trunk Highway 153. 
(4) ?Old Highway 51 from State Trunk Highway 153 to Bird Lane. 
(5) ?Main Street from Old Highway 51 to Fourth Street. 
(6) ?Main Street from Fourth Street to the west city limits. 
(7) ?Fourth Street from Main Street to Fremont Street. 
(8) ?Western Avenue from Fremont Street to Rangeline Road. 
(9) ?Fifth Street from Main Street to Western Avenue. 
(10) ?Eighth Street from High Street to Western Avenue. 
(11) ?11th Street from Main Street to Western Avenue. 
(12) ?Pasha Avenue from Novak Street to Rangeline Road. 
(13) ?That portion of Rangeline Road within the city limits from Western Avenue to Main Street. 
(14) ?That portion of Rangeline Road within the city limits from Western Avenue to the south city limits. 
(15) ?Ranger Street from Old Highway 51 to its east termination. 
(16) ?Golf Club Boulevard from State Trunk Highway 153 to Indianhead Drive. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-12) 
Secs. 78-168—78-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED 

Sec. 78-191. - Speed limits. 
(a) ?State speed limits adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.57, 346.58 and 346.59, relating to the maximum and minimum speed of vehicles are adopted as part of this section as if fully set forth in this section, except as specified by this section pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.11(3)(c), where the common council has determined that the statutory speed limits are unreasonable, unsafe and imprudent and has modified such limits. 
(b) ?Increased or established. The speed limits are increased or established as set forth in this subsection (b) upon the following streets or portions thereof between the limits designated: 
(1) ?Alleys and parking lots. Fifteen miles per hour in any alley or parking lot held open for use by the public. 
(2) ?Residential zones. 
a. ?Twenty-five miles per hour on all city streets except as indicated in subsections (1), (3) and (5) of this section. 
b. ?Twenty-five miles per hour on State Trunk Highway 153 from Water Street to Wisconsin Street. 
(3) ?Outlying districts. 
a. ?Thirty-five miles per hour on State Trunk Highway 153 from Wisconsin Street to Bobcat Drive and from Water Street to Owen Street. 
b. ?Thirty-five miles per hour on Old Highway 51 from State Trunk Highway 153 to Bird Lane and from Ranger Street to Ring Road. 
c. ?Thirty-five miles per hour on Rangeline Road from the south city limits to the north city limits. 
d. ?Thirty-five miles per hour on Main Street from 11th Street to Rangeline Road. 
e. ?Thirty-five miles per hour on that portion of Bird Lane within the city limits. 
f. ?Forty miles per hour on Old Highway 51 from Ring Road to the north city limits. 
g. ?Forty-five miles per hour on State Trunk Highway 153 from Owen Street to Golf Club Boulevard. 
h. ?Fifty-five miles per hour on State Trunk Highway 153 from Golf Club Boulevard to the east city limits. 
i. ?Fifty-five miles per hour on those portions of Spring Road, Oak Road, South Road, Balsam Road, Cessna Road and Benny Lane located within the city limits. 
j. ?Sixty-five miles per hour on that portion of Interstate Highway 39 located within the city limits. 
(c) ?Speed limits decreased. The speed limits are decreased as set forth in this subsection (c) upon the following streets or portions thereof between the limits designated: 
(1) ?School zones. Fifteen miles per hour when passing a school building when children are going to or from school or playing within the sidewalk area at or about the school. School zones are hereby designated: 
a. ?Fourth Street between its intersection with High and Jackson Streets. 
b. ?Fifth Street between its intersection with High and Jackson Streets. 
c. ?High Street between its intersection with 4th and 11th Streets. 
d. ?Pine Street between its intersection with Sixth and 11th Streets. 
e. ?Sixth Street between its intersection with Pine and High Streets. 
f. ?11th Street between its intersection with Pine and Jackson Streets. 
g. ?12th Street between its intersection with Main and Fremont Streets. 
h. ?13th Street between its intersection with Main and Jackson Streets. 
i. ?Jackson Street between its intersection with 12th and 14th Streets. 
j. ?11th Street between its intersection with Wisconsin and Short Streets. 
k. ?Wisconsin Street between its intersection with 11th and 12th Streets. 
l. ?12th Street between its intersection with Wisconsin and Short Streets. 
(2) ?School crossings. Fifteen miles per hour at the following intersections when children are present: 
a. ?Fourth and High Streets. 
b. ?Fifth and High Streets. 
c. ?Sixth and High Streets. 
d. ?Sixth and Pine Streets. 
e. ?Seventh and High Streets. 
f. ?Eighth and High Streets. 
g. ?Eighth and Pine Streets. 
h. ?Ninth and High Streets. 
i. ?Ninth and Pine Streets. 
j. ?11th and High Streets. 
k. ?11th and Fremont Streets. 
l. ?12th and Jackson Streets. 
m. ?12th and Fremont Streets. 
n. ?Western Avenue and 11th Street. 
o. ?13th and Jackson Streets. 
p. ?14th and Jackson Streets. 
q. ?11th and Wisconsin Streets. 
r. ?12th and Wisconsin Streets. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-11; Ord. No. 2002-10, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 8-15-2011; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 4-10-2017) 
Sec. 78-192. - Mosinee School Districts limits; vehicle operation. 
(a) ?No person shall at any time operate a motor vehicle upon any Mosinee School District grounds at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. 
(b) ?No person shall at any time operate a motor vehicle upon school district grounds, other than a school bus and emergency vehicle, in or upon any drive designated for buses only by sign during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and during the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on any weekday during the months school is in session. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-30(b), (c)) 
Secs. 78-193—78-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate heavy traffic generally, Wis. Stats. § 349.17. 

Sec. 78-211. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Heavy traffic means: 
(1) ?All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic tires; and 
(2) ?All vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than motor buses, designed or used for transporting property of any nature and having a gross weight of more than 15,000 pounds. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-13(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-212. - Prohibited routes. 
    Heavy traffic is prohibited from using any city street or highway not designated as a heavy traffic route. This division shall not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using a city street or highway for the purpose of obtaining orders for supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from any place of business or residence which has an entrance on such street or highway. Furthermore, this division will not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using any city streets over which are routed state trunk highways. When being driven to the site of any construction, repair or maintenance of electric, gas or water service, vehicles owned and operated by a public utility will be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-13(b)) 
Sec. 78-213. - Administration of division. 
    The public works director, in cooperation with the police department, shall administer this division. Administration shall include: 
(1) ?Posting of signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted giving notice of this division and of the heavy traffic routes established in this division. Yellow signposts may also be used to designate heavy traffic routes. 
(2) ?Maps. Maps of the city showing heavy traffic routes shall be prepared and shall be available upon request by heavy traffic operators and owners. 
(3) ?Construction equipment. 
a. ?The public works director may grant temporary permits to allow heavy construction equipment to use city streets or highways not designated as heavy traffic routes. These permits may be granted only when use of a nondesignated route is necessary for the equipment to reach a construction site. No permit may be issued unless the person or corporation owning the equipment agrees to reimburse and hold the city harmless for any damage done to the city streets by the equipment and/or any personal injury or property damage caused in part or in whole by the street damage. 
b. ?City-owned or operated equipment is specifically excluded from the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-13(c)) 
Sec. 78-214. - Liability. 
    Any operator, corporation, owner or agent whose heavy traffic vehicle damages any city streets or highways in violating this division shall be liable and required to pay the city the cost of repair or replacement of the damaged street or highway. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-13(d)) 
Sec. 78-215. - Streets designated class B highways. 
    All highways within the city are hereby designated class B highways, subject to the weight limitations imposed on class B highways by the state statutes adopted by reference in section 78-1, except the following enumerated highways or parts of highways are designated as heavy traffic routes: State Trunk Highway 153 from the east city limits through the city to the west city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-13(e); Ord. No. 90-13, § 1, 9-10-1990) 
Sec. 78-216. - Designation. 
    The following are designated as heavy traffic routes: 
(1) ?That portion of Interstate Highway 39 within the city limits. 
(2) ?That portion of State Trunk Highway 153 within the city limits. 
(3) ?Old Highway 51 from Maple Ridge Road to Flanner Road. 
(4) ?Old Highway 51 from Ring Road to Bird Lane. 
(5) ?That portion of Bird Lane within the city limits from Old Highway 51 to its west termination. 
(6) ?Main Street from Old Highway 51 to Fourth Street. 
(7) ?Fourth Street from Main Street to Fremont Street. 
(8) ?Western Avenue from Fremont Street to Rangeline Road. 
(9) ?Rangeline Road. 
(10) ?Westview Drive. 
(11) ?Southview Drive. 
(12) ?Golf Club Boulevard. 
(13) ?South Parkview Circle. 
(14) ?North Parkview Circle. 
(15) ?Northview Drive. 
(16) ?East View Drive. 
(17) ?Indianhead Drive from its intersection with Eastview Drive to its intersection with Golf Club Boulevard. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-13; Ord. No. 90-13, § 1, 9-10-1990; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 5-9-2005) 
Sec. 78-217. - Temporary load limitations. 
    The public works director may reduce the load limit on any of the streets on the city heavy traffic routes when the construction or condition thereof in his judgment warrants such action. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 4-27-98; Ord. No. 98-5, § 1, 4-27-1998) 
Sec. 78-218. - Certain weights prohibited. 
    The public works director may prohibit vehicles with a gross vehicle rating, actual gross weight or registered weight in excess of 20,000 pounds and a vehicle/trailer combination not to exceed 40 feet maximum from using certain streets or portions thereof at any time and for any purpose except to make a delivery or pickup at an address or business fronting on such streets by posting appropriate signs at the terminus and all cross streets between terminus on such streets. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 4-27-1998; Ord. No. 98-5, § 2, 4-27-1998) 
Secs. 78-219—78-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STOPS 

Sec. 78-236. - Controlled intersections designated. 
(a) ?Complete stops required. It shall be unlawful for any person driving or operating any motor vehicle or other vehicle to drive or cause the vehicle to be driven into an intersection designated and declared by this division to be a stop zone and signalized intersection without first coming to a full and complete stop. 
(b) ?Designation of location of stop signs. In the interest of public safety, stop signs shall be installed at the following locations to control highways over which the city has exclusive jurisdiction: 
(1) ?On State Trunk Highway 153 at its intersection with Old Highway 51 except for traffic turning northbound. 
(2) ?On Old Highway 51 southbound at its intersection with Main Street. 
(3) ?On Main Street at its intersection with Old Highway 51. 
(4) ?On Edison Street at its intersection with Brown Street. 
(5) ?On Washington Street eastbound at its intersection with Third Street. 
(6) ?On Main Street at its intersection with Fourth Street. 
(7) ?On Pine Street at its intersection with Second Street. 
(8) ?On Pine Street at its intersection with Third Street. 
(9) ?On Pine Street at its intersection with Sixth Street. 
(10) ?On Pine Street at its intersection with Eighth Street. 
(11) ?On Jackson Street at its intersection with 12th Street. 
(12) ?On Jackson Street at its intersection with 13th Street. 
(13) ?On Jackson Street at its intersection with 1Fourth Street. 
(14) ?On Jackson Street at its intersection with 16th Street. 
(15) ?On Jackson Street at its intersection with 18th Street. 
(16) ?On Fremont Street westbound at its intersection with Second Street. 
(17) ?On Fremont Street at its intersection with 12th Street. 
(18) ?On Fremont Street at its intersection with 1Fourth Street. 
(19) ?On Wisconsin Street at its intersection with 12th Street. 
(20) ?On Wisconsin Street at its intersection with 16th Street. 
(21) ?On Creske Street at its intersection with 16th Street. 
(22) ?On Davis Street at its intersection with 12th Street. 
(23) ?On Second Street at its intersection with Third Street. 
(24) ?On Third Street at its intersection with High Street. 
(25) ?On Sixth Street at its intersection with High Street. 
(26) ?On Eighth Street at its intersection with Pine Street. 
(27) ?On 12th Street at its intersection with Fremont Street. 
(28) ?On 12th Street at its intersection with 16th Street. 
(29) ?On 13th Street at its intersection with Jackson Street. 
(30) ?On 13th Street at its intersection with Fremont Street. 
(31) ?On 14th Street at its intersection with Wisconsin Street. 
(32) ?On 14th Street at its intersection with 16th Street. 
(33) ?On 16th Street at its intersection with Wisconsin Street. 
(34) ?On 16th Street at its intersection with Mosinee Avenue. 
(35) ?On 17th Street at its intersection with Wisconsin Street. 
(36) ?On 18th Street at its intersection with Wisconsin Street. 
(37) ?On 19th Street at its intersection with Wisconsin Street. 
(38) ?On 19th Street at its intersection with Mosinee Avenue. 
(39) ?On 20th Street at its intersection with Wisconsin Street. 
(40) ?On 20th Street at its intersection with Mosinee Avenue. 
(41) ?On West Fourth Street at its intersection with Elm Street. 
(42) ?On West Fourth Street at its intersection with Novak Street. 
(43) ?On Landfried Avenue at its intersection with Elm Street. 
(44) ?On Landfried Avenue at its intersection with Novak Street. 
(45) ?On Pasha Avenue at its intersection with Novak Street. 
(46) ?On Novak Street at its intersection with Pasha Avenue. 
(47) ?On Elm Street at its intersection with West Fourth Street. 
(48) ?On Wilson Street at its intersection with Landfried Avenue. 
(49) ?On Willow Street at its intersection with Edgewood Drive. 
(50) ?On Edgewood Drive at its intersection with Wilson Street. 
(51) ?On Edgewood Drive at its intersection with Willow Street. 
(52) ?On Pinecrest Avenue at its intersection with Wilson Street. 
(53) ?On George Street at its intersection with Parker Avenue. 
(54) ?On Rangeline Road at its intersection with Western Avenue. 
(55) ?On Rangeline Road at its intersection with Main Street. 
(56) ?On Southview Drive at its intersection with Westview Drive. 
(57) ?On Northview Drive at its intersection with Indianhead Drive. 
(58) ?On North Parkview Circle at its intersection with Indianhead Drive. 
(59) ?On South Parkview Circle at its intersection with Eastview Drive. 
(60) ?On Owen Street at its intersection with Orbiting Drive and Berry Street. 
(61) ?On Old Highway 51 at its intersection with Bird Lane. 
(62) ?On River Road at the two railroad crossings. 
(63) ?On Bird Lane at the railroad crossing. 
(64) ?On Oconto Road at the railroad crossing. 
(65) ?On Maple Ridge Road at the railroad crossing. 
(66) ?On Flanner Road at the railroad crossing. 
(67) ?On Edwards Drive at its intersection with Ring Road. 
(68) ?On Lark Street at its intersection with Edison Street. 
(69) ?On Vane Street at its intersection with Edison Street. 
(70) ?On Hall Street at its intersection with Cherry Street. 
(71) ?On Hoyne Street at its intersection with Owen Street. 
(72) ?On Hoyne Street at its intersection with Super Street. 
(73) ?On Berry Street at its intersection with Super Street. 
(74) ?On Super Street at its intersection with Luke Street. 
(75) ?On Super Street northbound at its intersection with Hoyne Street. 
(76) ?On Benny Lane at its intersection with Balsam Road. 
(77) ?On Cessna Road at its intersection with Balsam Road. 
(78) ?On the alley northbound between Second and Third Streets at its intersection with Pine Street. 
(79) ?On the alley northbound between Water and Second Streets at its intersection with Washington Street. 
(80) ?On the alley northbound between Second and Third Streets at its intersection with Washington Street. 
(81) ?On the school district parking lot exits onto Pine Street. 
(82) ?On the school district parking lot exits onto Ninth Street. 
(83) ?On the parking lot exits located at 101 Main Street onto Second Street. 
(84) ?On the parking lot exits located at 101 Main Street onto the alley between Water and Second Streets. 
(85) ?At the parking lot exits located at 408 Second Street onto Second Street. 
(86) ?On the parking lot exits located at 490 Old Highway 51 onto Super Street. 
(87) ?On the parking lot exits located at 1105 Western Avenue onto Mosinee Avenue. 
(88) ?On Third Street at its intersection Pine Street. 
(89) ?On Second Street at its intersection with Washington Street (two signs). 
(90) ?On Third Street at its intersection with Washington Street (two signs). 
(91) ?On Fourth Street at its intersection with Washington Street (two signs). 
(92) ?On Fifth Street at its intersection with Washington Street (one sign). 
(93) ?On Water Street at its north intersection with Washington Street (one sign). 
(94) ?On South View Drive at its intersection with Golf Club Boulevard. 
(95) ?On North View Drive at its intersection with Golf Club Boulevard (two signs). 
(96) ?On North Park View Circle at its intersection with Golf Club Boulevard. 
(97) ?On South Park View Circle at is intersection with Golf Club Boulevard. 
(98) ?On Golden Hawk Way at its intersection with Oconto Road. 
(99) ?On Golden Hawk Way at its intersection with Maple Ridge Road. 
(100) ?On Avanti Drive at its intersection with Oconto Road. 
(101) ?On Avanti Drive at its intersection with Maple Ridge Road. 
(102) ?On Pepper Court at its intersection with Old Highway 51. 
(103) ?On Short Street at its intersection with 12th Street (two signs). 
(104) ?Reserved. 
(105) ?On Rosewood Street at its intersection with Pinecrest Avenue. 
(106) ?On Wilson Street at its intersection with Edgewood Drive. 
(107) ?On Short Street at its intersection with 10th Street. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-14; Ord. No. 98-2, § 1, 5-11-98; Ord. No. 98-9, § 1, 11-24-1998; Ord. No. 2006-05, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 3-25-2008; Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 5-11-2015; Ord. No. 2016-04, §§ 1, 2, 5-9-2016; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 1, 11-13-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 1-19-2019) 
Secs. 78-237—78-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - YIELD 

Sec. 78-261. - Yield to traffic; signs. 
(a) ?Operator to yield right-of-way. The common council hereby authorizes the use of yield of right-of-way signs within the city. The operator of a vehicle, when approaching any intersection at which has been installed a yield of right-of-way sign, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from an intersecting street, or which are approaching so closely on the intersecting street as to constitute a hazard of collision and, if necessary, shall reduce speed or stop in order to so yield. The following are authorized yield sign intersections: 
(1) ?On Old Highway 51 at its intersection with Main Street for southbound vehicles turning westbound. 
(2) ?On Main Street at its intersection with Old Highway 51 for eastbound vehicles turning southbound. 
(3) ?On Old Wausau Road at its intersection with Depot Street. 
(4) ?On High Street at its intersection with Second Street. 
(5) ?On Fairway Drive at its intersection with Indianhead Drive. 
(6) ?On Stone Ridge Drive at its intersection with Indianhead Drive. 
(7) ?On Beaver Street at its intersection with 20th Street. 
(8) ?On Fremont Street at its intersection with 6th Street for westbound and eastbound vehicles. 
(9) ?On Fremont Street at its intersection with 7th Street for westbound and eastbound vehicles. 
(10) ?On Jackson Street at its intersection with 9th Street for westbound and eastbound vehicles. 
(11) ?On Fremont Street at its intersection with 9th Street for westbound and eastbound vehicles. 
(12) ?On Jackson Street at its intersection with 7th Street for westbound and eastbound vehicles. 
(b) ?Yield signs to be erected. The public works director is authorized to erect yield right-of-way signs conforming to the Wisconsin Official Traffic Control Device Manual at the following intersections on highways in the exclusive jurisdiction of the city, provided that if the intersected highway is part of a designated through highway, the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 349.07(7)(a) apply: 
(1) ?On Indianhead Drive at its intersection with Golf Club Boulevard. 
(2) ?On Old Golf Club Road at its intersection with Golf Club Boulevard. 
(3) ?On Washington Street at its intersection with 4th Street for westbound and eastbound vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-15; Ord. No. 90-3, § 1, 2-12-1990; Ord. No. 92-16, § 2, 11-23-1992; Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 6-13-2011; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2013-03, §§ 1, 2, 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 6-12-2017; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 8-14-2017; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 2, 11-13-2017) 
Secs. 78-262—78-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-291. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or any other public place in the city. 
    Parade permit means a permit required by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12-1(b), (c)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-292. - Public conduct during. 
(a) ?Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b) ?Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c) ?Parking on parade route. The chief of police may prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and no person shall park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12-10) 
Secs. 78-293—78-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 78-311. - Required; exceptions. 
(a) ?No person shall participate in or form any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the chief of police. 
(b) ?This division shall not apply to: 
(1) ?Funeral processions. 
(2) ?Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
(3) ?A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12-2) 
Sec. 78-312. - Application. 
(a) ?Filing. A person seeking a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by him. 
(b) ?Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(c) ?Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1) ?The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
(2) ?If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3) ?The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4) ?The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
(5) ?The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
(6) ?The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
(7) ?The hours such parade will start and terminate. 
(8) ?A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(9) ?The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
(10) ?The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
(11) ?The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
(12) ?If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person on whose behalf it is proposed to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(13) ?Any additional information which the chief of police finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(d) ?Late applications. The chief of police and common council, where good cause is shown, may consider any application which is filed less than 30 days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(e) ?Fee. There shall be no fee required. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12-3) 
Sec. 78-313. - Standards for issuance. 
    The chief of police shall forward, with a recommendation, the application to the common council for action. The common council shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it finds that: 
(1) ?The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2) ?The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3) ?The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4) ?The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5) ?The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6) ?The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(7) ?The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12-4) 
Sec. 78-314. - Notice to city and other officials. 
    Immediately upon receiving of a parade permit application, the chief of police shall send a copy to the following: 
(1) ?Mayor. 
(2) ?Fire chief. 
(3) ?The public works director. 
(4) ?Administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12-6) 
Sec. 78-315. - Contents. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following: 
(1) ?Starting time. 
(2) ?Minimum speed. 
(3) ?Maximum speed. 
(4) ?Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5) ?The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6) ?The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7) ?Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12-7) 
Sec. 78-316. - Duties of permittee. 
    A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12-8) 
Sec. 78-317. - Possession. 
    The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12-9) 
Secs. 78-318—78-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Bicycles and play vehicles generally, Wis. Stats. § 346.77 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-351. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $5.00 nor more than $50.00, plus costs of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1(8-2-7(f)), 3-25-1991) 
Sec. 78-352. - Manner of operation. 
    No bicycle shall be allowed to proceed in any street in the city by inertia or momentum with the feet of the rider removed from the bicycle pedals. No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or practice any trick or fancy riding in any street in the city, nor shall any bicycle rider carry or ride any other person so that two persons are on the bicycle at one time, unless a seat is provided for a second person. 
(Code 1986, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 78-353. - Lighting equipment. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle upon a highway during the hours of darkness unless equipped as required in Wis. Stats. § 347.489. 
(Code 1986, § 8-2-2) 
Sec. 78-354. - Warning signal required. 
    No bicycle shall be operated on the streets of the city unless equipped with either a warning bell or horn. 
(Code 1986, § 8-2-3) 
Sec. 78-355. - Parking a bicycle. 
    No person shall leave a bicycle at such a place or in such a way as to create a hazard to pedestrians, automobile operators or to anyone else. 
(Code 1986, § 8-2-4) 
Sec. 78-356. - Riding abreast. 
    Persons riding or using bicycles or other similar vehicles along or upon any public street, avenue, lane, alley or other public road, ground or way within the city shall not ride more than two abreast excepting in a general parade or public demonstration. 
(Code 1986, § 8-2-5) 
Sec. 78-357. - Rules of the road. 
    The provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 346 shall be applicable to the operation of bicycles, where appropriate. 
(Code 1986, § 8-2-6) 
Sec. 78-358. - In-line skates. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    In-line skates means skates with wheels arranged singly in a tandem line rather than in pairs. 
(Ord. No. 95-4, § 1(8-4-1), 8-14-1995) 
Sec. 78-359. - Restrictions on use. 
(a) ?Any person riding upon in-line skates shall ride in a careful and prudent manner and with due regard under the circumstances for the safety of all persons using the roadway. 
(b) ?Use of in-line skates shall be permitted on all streets in the city except the following: 
(1) ?Main Street from Old Highway 51 to the west city limit. 
(2) ?Old Highway 51 in its entirety. 
(3) ?STH 153 from Old Highway 51 to the east city limit. 
(4) ?Fourth Street from Main Street to Fremont Street. 
(5) ?Western Avenue from Fremont Street to the west city limit. 
(Ord. No. 95-4, § 1(8-4-2), 8-14-1995) 
Secs. 78-360—78-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 78-381. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street, alley, public highway, sidewalk, bicycle lane, bicycle route, bicycle way or other public right-of-way in the city unless the bicycle is registered and has affixed thereto a registration plate as provided in this division. This division shall apply to all permanent and temporary residents of the city and to such nonresidents who operate bicycles upon the streets of the city habitually or frequently, either in going to or from school, or to and from work, or for other purposes; but shall not apply to casual travelers or tourists passing through the city on their bicycles, nor to those residents of other cities, villages and townships who are validly and currently registered with their respective jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1(8-2-7(a)), 3-25-1991) 
Sec. 78-382. - Fee; inspection. 
(a) ?Registration shall be made with the police department who shall provide the appropriate forms. Upon payment of a registration fee set by the council from time to time, the police department shall issue a registration plate for the bicycle which shall permit the bicycle to be operated within the city as provided in this article. Registration shall be nonexpiring. 
(b) ?The registration shall be permanent from the date of issuance; provided, however, that the bicycle remains with the registered owner and at the registered address. In the event of a sale or other transfer of such bicycle to a new owner, a transfer of registration must be completed in conformity with the provisions of section 78-384. 
(c) ?No person shall be entitled to register a bicycle when that person is believed by the police department to have no claim to, or evidence of, ownership of the bicycle or have no right to possession of such bicycle. 
(d) ?The police department may inspect each bicycle before registering it, and may refuse to register any bicycle that the registering officer believes to be in an unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1(8-2-7(b)), 3-25-1991) 
Sec. 78-383. - Display of registration plate. 
(a) ?No bicycle shall be displayed, used or considered registered until a registration plate, which shall remain legible at all times, is affixed to the bicycle. It shall remain so affixed until the bicycle is either dismantled or destroyed. Such registration plate may be removed from the bicycle by the police department for cause. The registration plate shall be securely attached to the stem of the operator's seat facing the front of the bicycle. 
(b) ?No person shall intentionally destroy, mutilate or alter the registration plate affixed to any bicycle or remove, without the permission of the owner, any registration plate from any bicycle. If a replacement plate must be issued, the fee shall be set by the council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1(8-2-7(c)), 3-25-1991) 
Sec. 78-384. - Transfer and cancellation. 
    Within ten days after any bicycle registered under this article changes ownership, is transferred or dismantled and/or taken out of operation, the person in whose name the bicycle has been registered shall report such information to the police department. In the event of a change of ownership or other transfer of the bicycle wherein the bicycle remains in use in the city, the license plate will remain with the bicycle. If a bicycle is dismantled and/or taken out of operation, the license plate will not remain with the bicycle, but shall be immediately destroyed by the person disposing of or dismantling the bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1(8-2-7(d)), 3-25-1991) 
Sec. 78-385. - Buying or selling bicycles. 
    Every person in the business of buying, selling or exchanging bicycles in the city shall maintain for three years from the date of the transaction a record containing the brand name, color, type and serial number of each bicycle bought, sold or exchanged and shall record the name and address of the person buying, selling or exchanging a bicycle. This record shall be open to inspection by a representative of the city police department during reasonable business hours. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1(8-2-7(e)), 3-25-1991) 
Secs. 78-386—78-415. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ABANDONED, WRECKED AND DISCARDED VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Junked vehicles and appliances, § 54-236 et seq. 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles generally, Wis. Stats. § 342.40. 

Sec. 78-416. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street means any public highway or alley and shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of any public way where any part thereof is open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Unattended means unmoved from its location with no obvious sign of continuous human use. 
    Vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or manufactured home, whether or not such vehicle is registered under state law. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-417. - Presumptions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following irrebuttable presumptions shall apply: 
(1) ?A vehicle shall be presumed unattended if it is found in the same position 48 hours after issuance of a traffic ticket or citation and if such traffic ticket or citation remains placed upon the windshield during such 48 hours. 
(2) ?Any vehicle left unattended for more than 48 hours on any public street or public ground or left unattended for more than 48 hours on private property without the consent of the property owner is deemed abandoned; provided, however, that the vehicle shall not be deemed abandoned under this subsection if left unattended on private property outside of public view or if designated as not abandoned by the chief of police. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-1(c)) 
Sec. 78-418. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building, or a vehicle stored on a premises licensed for storage of junk or junked vehicles, or to a vehicle parked in a paid parking lot or space where the required fee has been paid. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-1(d)) 
Sec. 78-419. - Abandonment constitutes public nuisance. 
    No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or manufactured home on any public street or highway or private or public property in the city, for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. Whenever any such vehicle has been left unattended on any street or highway in the city, or upon private or public property without the permission of the property owner or other person charged with the lawful jurisdiction thereof for more than 48 hours, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-1(a)) 
Sec. 78-420. - Removal and impoundment. 
    Any vehicle in violation of this article shall be removed and impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of under the provisions of section 78-421. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-2) 
Sec. 78-421. - Impoundment procedures. 
(a) ?Removal. Any police officer who discovers any motor vehicles, trailer, semitrailer or manufactured home on any public street or highway or private or public property in the city which has been abandoned shall cause the vehicle to be removed to a suitable place of impoundment. Upon removal of the vehicle the police officer shall notify the police chief or his designee of the abandonment and of the location of the impounded vehicle. 
(b) ?Storage and reclaimer. Any abandoned vehicle which is determined by the police chief or his designee to be abandoned shall be retained in storage for a period of ten days after certified mail notice, as provided in this section, has been sent to the state titled owner and/or secured party of record with the state motor vehicle division, except that if the police chief or his designee determines an abandoned vehicle to have a value of less than $100.00, or that the cost of towing and storage charges for impoundment will exceed the value of the vehicle, it may be junked or sold by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer after having been retained in storage for a period of seven days and after certified mail notice has been sent to the state titled owner or secured party of record with the state motor vehicle division, provided that it is first determined that the vehicle is not reported stolen or wanted for evidence or other reason. Any such vehicle which may be lawfully reclaimed may be released upon the payment of all accrued charges, including towing, storage and notice charges and upon presentation of the vehicle title or other satisfactory evidence to the police chief or his designee to prove an ownership or secured party interest in such vehicle. 
(c) ?Notice to owner or secured party. Certified mail notice shall notify the state titled owner of the abandoned vehicle, if any, and/or the secured party of record with the state motor vehicle division, if any, that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned and impounded by the city; that the determined value of the abandoned vehicle or if the cost of towing and storage charges will exceed the determined value of the vehicle; that if the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or other reason, the vehicle may be reclaimed upon the payment of all accrued charges, including towing, storage and notice charges, within ten days of the date of notice, unless the vehicle has been determined to have a value less than $100.00; or that the cost of towing and storage charges for impoundment will exceed the value of the vehicle, in which case the vehicle may be reclaimed within seven days upon the payment of such charges; and that the owner or secured party may, upon request, be granted a hearing relating to the determinations made with respect to such vehicle within the period that such vehicles may be reclaimed. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-3) 
Sec. 78-422. - Disposal. 
    Any abandoned vehicle impounded by the city which has not been reclaimed or junked or sold by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer pursuant to the provisions of this article, may be sold by public auction sale, or public sale calling for the receipt of sealed bids. A class I notice, including the description of the vehicle, the name and address of the state titled owner and secured party of record, if known, and the time of sale, shall be published before the sale. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-4) 
Sec. 78-423. - Report of sale or disposal. 
    Within five days after the direct sale or disposal of a vehicle as provided for herein, the chief of police or his designee shall advise the state department of transportation, division of motor vehicles, of such sale or disposal on a form supplied by such division. A copy of the form shall be given to the purchaser of the vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 342.40(e). 
Sec. 78-424. - Owner responsible for impoundment and disposal costs. 
(a) ?The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle. Costs not covered from the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a civil action by the city against the owner. 
(b) ?Payment of removal and impoundment costs is not required when the vehicle has been impounded for purposes of law enforcement investigation. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-6) 
Sec. 78-425. - Conflict of article provisions with other Code provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between this article and any other provisions of the Code of Ordinances, this article shall control. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4-7) 
Secs. 78-426—78-455. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MINIBIKES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES 

Sec. 78-456. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance and narcotic drug means as designated in Wis. Stats. § 961.571. 
    Fermented malt beverages means as designated in Wis. Stats. § 125.02(6). 
    Intoxicating liquor means as designated in Wis. Stats. § 125.02(8). 
    Minibike and all-terrain vehicle (as defined in Wis. Stats. § 340.01(29), (30)) means any self-propelled device primarily used for transportation or sport including, but not limited to, motorcycles, go-carts, motorized bicycles, off-the-road trail bikes and all-terrain vehicles except snowmobiles as defined in Wis. Stats. § 350.01. 
(Ord. No. 92-11, § 1(8-1-44(a)), 7-27-1992) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-457. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    The penalty for the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the cost of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 92-11, § 1(8-1-44(d)), 7-27-1992) 
Sec. 78-458. - Restrictions on operation. 
    No person shall operate a minibike or all-terrain vehicle within the city in the following manner: 
(1) ?At a rate of speed that is unreasonable or improper under the circumstances. 
(2) ?In any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of another. 
(3) ?While under the influence of intoxicating liquor, fermented malt beverages, narcotics or other controlled substances. 
(4) ?In such a way that the exhaust of the engine makes an excessive or unusual noise. 
(5) ?Without a functioning muffler. 
(6) ?Upon any public highway, street or alley, or upon any sidewalk or parkway unless such vehicle is registered as required by Wis. Stats. ch. 341, and its operation and operator are specifically permitted to operate the vehicle by state statutes. 
(7) ?Upon any public parks, or any lands operated or leased by the city. 
(8) ?Upon the private property of another without the written consent of the owner or lessee. Written and dated consent shall be limited to the year in which consent is given. Failure to post private property does not imply consent. Any motor driven craft, minibike, all-terrain vehicle or self-propelled device shall, at all times, have the consent of the property owner before operation of such craft or vehicle on private lands. 
(9) ?Upon any cemetery, burial ground, school or church property without the written consent of the owner. 
(10) ?Upon any designated snowmobile trail except on those snowmobile trails designated as open for all-terrain vehicle use. 
(Ord. No. 92-11, § 1(8-1-44(b)), 7-27-1992) 
Sec. 78-459. - Liability of parent or guardian. 
    No parent or guardian of any child under the age of 18 years shall authorize or permit such child to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-11, § 1(8-1-44(c)), 7-27-1992) 
Secs. 78-460—78-490. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SNOWMOBILES AND OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES 

Sec. 78-491. - State snowmobile laws adopted. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of the state statutes are adopted by reference and made a part of this article as if fully set forth in this section. Acts required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated in this section by reference are intended to be made part of this section. 
Wis. Stats. § 350.01 Definitions. Wis. Stats. § 350.02 Operation of snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of highways. Wis. Stats. § 350.03 Right-of-way. Wis. Stats. § 350.04 Snowmobile races, derbies and routes. Wis. Stats. § 350.045 Public utility exemption. Wis. Stats. § 350.047 Local utility exemption. Wis. Stats. § 350.05 Operation by youthful operators restricted. Wis. Stats. § 350.055 Safety certification program established. Wis. Stats. § 350.07 Driving animals. Wis. Stats. § 350.08 Owner permitting operation. Wis. Stats. § 350.09 Headlamps, taillamps and brakes, etc. Wis. Stats. § 350.10 Miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile operation. Wis. Stats. § 350.12 Registration of snowmobiles. Wis. Stats. § 350.125 Completion of application for registration by snowmobile dealers. Wis. Stats. § 350.13 Uniform trail signs and standards. Wis. Stats. § 350.15 Accidents and accident reports. Wis. Stats. § 350.17 Enforcement. Wis. Stats. § 350.18 Local ordinances. Wis. Stats. § 350.19 Liability of landowners. Wis. Stats. § 350.99 Parties to a violation. Wis. Stats. § 350.101 Intoxicated snowmobiling. Wis. Stats. § 350.102 Preliminary breath screening test. Wis. Stats. § 350.1025 Application of intoxicated snowmobiling law. Wis. Stats. § 350.103 Implied consent. Wis. Stats. § 350.104 Chemical tests. Wis. Stats. § 350.106 Report arrest to department. Wis. Stats. § 350.107 Officer's action after arrest for operating a snowmobile while under influence of intoxicant. Wis. Stats. § 350.11 Penalties. Wis. Stats. § 350.135 Interference with trail signs and standards. Wis. Stats. § 350.137 Uniform rail crossing standards. Wis. Stats. § 350.138 Rail crossings requiring permits. Wis. Stats. § 350.139 Established rail crossing.  
(Ord. No. 92-12, § 1(8-3-1), 7-13-1992) 
Sec. 78-492. - Applicability of traffic regulations to snowmobiles. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any street, highway or alley within the city in violation of the traffic regulation provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1), and 346.94(1), (6), (6m) and (9). 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-2) 
Sec. 78-493. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Snowmobile accident means a collision, accident or other casualty involving a snowmobile. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-8(d)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-494. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, forfeit not more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof may be imprisoned in the county jail for not exceeding 90 days; provided, however, that no person shall forfeit an amount in excess of the maximum fine or forfeiture allowed in state statutes for the same offense and further provided that the penalty and forfeiture for parking violations on highways shall be the amount applicable to such violations by owners or operators of motor vehicles under this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-10) 
Sec. 78-495. - Accidents and accident reports. 
(a) ?If he can do so without serious danger to his own snowmobile or to persons on board, the operator of a snowmobile involved in a snowmobile accident within the city shall stop his snowmobile and shall render to other persons affected thereby such assistance as may be practicable and necessary to save them from or minimize any danger caused by the accident and shall give his name and address and identification of his snowmobile to any person injured and to the owner of any property damaged in the accident. 
(b) ?If the snowmobile accident comes within Wis. Stats. § 350.15, every operator of a snowmobile involved in such accident shall, as soon as possible, notify the police department of the accident and comply with the statute. 
(c) ?If the operator of a snowmobile is physically incapable of making the report required by this section and there was another occupant in the snowmobile at the time of the accident capable of making the report, that occupant shall make such report. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-8) 
Sec. 78-496. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public highway within the city at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. No person shall operate a snowmobile on any trail designated in section 78-501 or in any public park or recreation area at a speed in excess of the posted limit. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-3) 
Sec. 78-497. - Unattended vehicles. 
    No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile owned or operated by him to remain unattended on any public highway or public property while the motor is running or with the starting key left in the ignition. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-4) 
Sec. 78-498. - Operation on sidewalks. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any sidewalk, pedestrian way or upon the area between the sidewalk and the curbline of any street in the city, except as specifically authorized by section 78-501 or for the purpose of crossing to obtain immediate access to an authorized area of operation. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-5) 
Sec. 78-499. - Vehicle operation. 
(a) ?On private property. It shall be unlawful to operate any snowmobile or any other motor-driven craft or vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use on the city streets, alleys, parks, parking lots, or on any public lands or private lands or parking lots held open to the public. The operator shall at all times have the express consent of the owner before operation of such craft or vehicle on private property not owned or controlled by him. 
(b) ?By improper persons. No owner or person having charge or control of a snowmobile shall authorize or permit any person to operate such snowmobile who is not permitted under state law to operate such snowmobile, or who is under the influence of an intoxicant or a dangerous or narcotic drug. 
(c) ?Under influence. Wis. Stats. § 350.101 shall apply to the operation of a snowmobile any place within the city. 
(d) ?In parks. No person shall drive a snowmobile in any park within the city except upon designated snowmobile trails as shall be designated by the common council. 
(e) ?Written consent of owner required. The consent required under Wis. Stats. § 350.10(6), (11), (12) and (13) and in subsection (a) of this section shall be written consent, dated and limited to the year in which the consent is given. If the property is owned or leased by more than one person, the consent of each must be obtained. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-6) 
Sec. 78-500. - Operation by youthful operators. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Leased lands does not mean lands leased by an organization of which the operator or his parent or guardian is a member. 
(b) ?Age restriction. No person under the age of 12 years may operate a snowmobile unless the person is accompanied either by a parent or guardian or by a person over 18 years of age. 
(c) ?Snowmobile safety permit or operator's license required. No person over the age of 12 years, but under the age of 16 years, may operate a snowmobile unless he holds a valid snowmobile safety certificate or is accompanied by a person over 18 years of age or by a person over 14 years of age having a snowmobile safety certificate issued by the department. Any person who is over the age of 12, and under the age of 16, who holds a snowmobile safety certificate shall carry it while operating a snowmobile and shall display it to a law enforcement officer on request. Persons enrolled in a safety certification program approved by the department may operate a snowmobile in an area designated by the instructor. 
(d) ?Exceptions. This section does not apply to the operation of snowmobiles by an operator under the age of 16 years upon lands owned or leased by the operator's parent or guardian. As used in this section, the term "leased lands" does not include lands leased by an organization of which the operator or the operator's parent or guardian is a member. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 350.05. 
Sec. 78-501. - Snowmobile routes and trails. 
(a) ?Routes designated. Except as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 350.02 and 350.045, or for snowmobile events authorized in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 350.04, no person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public right-of-way, in any public park, or on any other public municipal property in the city except upon snowmobile routes and trails designated by the common council. The designated route to be used within the city limits shall be adopted by resolution by the common council, a copy of which shall be on file with the administrator. 
(b) ?Declaring trails closed. The chief of police shall have the power to declare the stated snowmobile routes and trails either open or closed. 
(c) ?Markers to be obeyed. No person shall fail to obey any route or trail sign, marker or limit erected in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-9) 
Sec. 78-502. - Snowmobile access to trails. 
(a) ?Intent of section. The intent of this section is to provide a means for persons to travel on a snowmobile from a residence within the limits of the city to a designated snowmobile route or trail using the shortest distance necessary. 
(b) ?Statutory authority. This section is adopted as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 350.18. 
(c) ?Conditions. This section designates the roadways and/or shoulders of specific highways for snowmobile travel by persons residing in or staying at a lodging establishment within the limits of the city to travel for the shortest distance that is necessary to reach the snowmobile trail or route that is closest to that residence or lodging establishment subject to the following conditions: 
(1) ?Snowmobiles shall be operated on the extreme right side of the roadway and travel with the flow of traffic. 
(2) ?Snowmobiles shall be operated in single file. 
(3) ?Snowmobiles shall have their headlights on at all times. 
(4) ?Snowmobile operators shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicular traffic and pedestrians. 
(d) ?Speed. A snowmobile operated on a portion of the roadway or shoulder of a highway pursuant to this section shall observe roadway speed limits except that between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., snowmobiles may not exceed ten mph when operated within 150 feet of a dwelling. 
(e) ?Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by any law enforcement officer of the city. 
(f) ?Penalties. State snowmobile penalties as found in Wis. Stats. § 350.11(1)(a) are adopted by reference except for those exceeding city authority. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 1-22-1996) 
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Water, sewer, solid waste and electrical rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction saved from repeal, § 1-9(a)(14); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 14; health and sanitation, ch. 38; land use regulations, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Public utilities generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.06 et seq., 196.01 et seq.; water and sewage generally, Wis. Stats. § 144.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Connection to sewer and water systems compulsory. 
(a) ?When required. Whenever a sewer or water main becomes available to any building used for human habitation, the administrator shall notify the owner or his agent in writing in the manner prescribed by Wis. Stats. § 801.07(4) or by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the owner or his agent. 
(b) ?Contents of notice. The notice required by this section shall direct the owner or his agent to connect the building to such mains in the manner prescribed by the Mosinee Water and Sewer Utility and to install such facilities and fixtures as may be reasonably necessary to permit passage of sewage incidental to such human habitation into the sewer system and to furnish an adequate supply of pure water for drinking and prevent creation of a health nuisance. 
(c) ?The Mosinee Water and Sewer Utility may cause connection at expense of owner. If the owner or his agent fails to comply with the notice of the Mosinee Water and Sewer Utility within ten days of service or mailing thereof, the utility may cause connection to be made, and the expense shall be assessed as a special tax against the property. 
(d) ?Installment option. The owner or his agent may, within 30 days after completion of the work, file a written option with the administrator stating that the owner or agent cannot pay the cost of connection in one sum and electing that such sum is levied in five equal annual installments with interest at a rate determined on the money loaned to cover the cost of the project. 
(e) ?Privies, cesspools, or waterless toilets prohibited after connection with sewer. After connection of any building used for human habitation to a sewer main, no privy, cesspool or waterless toilet shall be used in connection with such human habitation. 
(Code 1986, § 6-1-9) 
Sec. 82-2. - Operation of valves and hydrants; unauthorized use of water; penalty for violation of section. 
    Any person who shall, without authority of the director of public works, allow contractors, masons or other unauthorized persons to take water from their premises, operate any valve connected with the street or supply mains, or open any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, or who shall wantonly damage or impair the hydrant shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 per incident, plus the estimated cost of the water used. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-26; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 11-14-1994) 
Sec. 82-3. - Duties of public works director. 
    The public works director shall have the following duties: 
(1) ?Coordinate and supervise the operation of the water and sewer utility; 
(2) ?Schedule, assign and inspect the work of a crew engaged in installing, cleaning and repairing water mains, sewers, fire hydrants, manholes and valves of various sizes; 
(3) ?Supervise and coordinate all activities concerned with the installation and repair of water meters; 
(4) ?Handle customer complaints and resolve them to satisfaction; 
(5) ?Submit monthly activity report to the common council; 
(6) ?Make periodic inspections of pumping stations, reservoirs and other departmental facilities; and 
(7) ?Perform such other duties as may be directed by the city administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-11) 
State Law reference— Authority, Wis. Stats. § 66.068(7). 
Secs. 82-4—82-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER UTILITY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Mw municipal well recharge area overlay district no. 2, § 42-611 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-36. - State code adopted. 
    The city adopts by reference the state plumbing code, Wis. Adm. Code ILHR chs. 81—87. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-49(g)) 
Sec. 82-37. - Article not to supersede other ordinances. 
    This article does not supersede the state plumbing code and any city plumbing ordinances, but is supplementary to them. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-49(h)) 
Sec. 82-38. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the city water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-49(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-39. - Compliance with public service commission rules by users. 
    All persons now receiving a water supply from the city water utility, or who may hereafter make application therefor, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by the rules and regulations as filed with the state public service commission. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-22) 
Sec. 82-40. - Duty of public works director with respect to safety of the public. 
    It shall be the duty of the public works director to see that all open ditches for water mains, hydrants and service pipes are properly guarded to prevent accident to any person or vehicle, and, at night, there shall be displayed an amber signal light in such manner as will, so far as possible, ensure the safety of the public. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-45) 
Sec. 82-41. - Turning on water. 
    The water cannot be turned on for a consumer except by a duly authorized employe of the utility. When a plumber has completed a job, he must leave the water turned off. This does not prevent him from testing his work. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-30) 
Sec. 82-42. - Inspection of premises. 
    During reasonable hours any officer or authorized employe of the utility shall have the right of access to the premises supplied with service, for the purpose of inspection or for the enforcement of the utility's rules and regulations. At least once every 12 months the utility will make a systematic inspection of all unmetered water taps for the purpose of checking waste and unnecessary use of water. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-39) 
Sec. 82-43. - Establishment of service. 
(a) ?Application for water service shall be made in writing on a form furnished by the water utility. The application will contain the legal description of the property to be served, name of the owner, the exact use to be made of the service, and the size of the supply pipe and meter desired. (Note particularly any special refrigeration and/or air conditioning water-consuming appliances.) 
(b) ?Service will be furnished only if the: 
(1) ?Premises have a frontage on a properly platted street or public strip in which a cast iron or other long-life water main has been laid, or where the property owner has agreed to and complied with the provisions of the utility's filed main extension rule; 
(2) ?Property owner has installed or agrees to install a service pipe from the curbline to the point of use, and laid not less than six feet below the surface of an established or proposed grade, and according to the utility's specification; and 
(3) ?Premises have adequate piping beyond the metering point. 
(4) ?Premises are currently located within the corporate limits of the City of Mosinee. 
(c) ?The owner of a multiunit dwelling has the option of being served by individual metered water service to each unit. The owner, by selecting this option, is required to provide interior plumbing and meter settings to enable individual metered service to each unit and individual disconnection without affecting service to other units. Each meter and meter connection will be a separate water utility customer for the purpose of the filed rules and regulations. 
(d) ?No division of the water service of any lot or parcel of land shall be made for the extension and independent meterage of the supply to an adjoining lot or parcel of land. No division of a water supply service shall be made at the curb for separate supplies therefrom for two or more separate premises having frontage on any street or public service strip whether owned by the same or different parties. 
(e) ?The public works director is empowered to withhold approval of any application wherein full information of the purpose of such supply is not clearly indicated and set forth by the applicant property owner. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-23; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 1, 4-22-2002) 
Sec. 82-44. - Service contract. 
(a) ?The minimum service contract period shall be one year, unless otherwise specified by special contract or in the applicable rate schedule. Where a customer, at his request, has been disconnected (meter removed) prior to expiration of his minimum contract period and his account is not delinquent, and where thereafter he requests the reconnection of service in the same or other location, a reconnection charge payable in advance, shall be collected. (See section 82-136 for applicable rate.) The minimum contract period is renewed with each reconnection. 
(b) ?A reconnection charge shall also be required from consumers whose services are disconnected (shut off at the curbstop) because of nonpayment of bills when due, not including disconnection for failure to comply with deposit or guarantee rules. (See section 82-136 for applicable rate.) 
(c) ?A consumer shall be considered as the same consumer provided the reconnection is requested for the same location by any member of the same family, or if a place of business, by any partner or employe of the same business. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-24) 
Sec. 82-45. - Water for construction. 
(a) ?When water is requested for construction purposes, or for filling tanks or other such uses, an application therefor shall be made to the public works director, in writing, upon an application form provided for that purpose in the water utility office, giving a statement of the amount of construction work to be done, or the size of the tank to be filled, etc. Payment for the water for construction shall be made in advance at the scheduled rates. The service pipe must be installed inside the building from where the water must be drawn. No connection with the service pipe at the curb shall be made without special permission from the public works director. 
(b) ?In no case will any employe of the utility turn on water for construction work unless the contractor first presents a permit. Upon completion of the construction work, the contractor must return the original permit to the water utility, together with a statement of the actual amount of construction work performed. 
(c) ?Consumers shall not allow contractors, masons or other persons to take water from their premises without first showing a permit from the utility. Any consumer failing to comply with this provision will have water service discontinued. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-25) 
Sec. 82-46. - Protective devices. 
(a) ?Generally. The owner or occupant of every premises receiving water supply shall apply and maintain suitable means of protection of the premises supply, and all appliances thereof, against damage arising in any manner from the use of the water supply, variation of water pressure or any interruption of water supply. Particularly, such owner or occupant must protect water-cooled compressors for refrigeration systems by means of high pressure safety cutout devices. There shall likewise be provided means for the prevention of the transmission of water ram or noise of operation of any valve or appliance through the piping of their own or adjacent premises. 
(b) ?Relief valves. On all closed systems (i.e., systems having a check valve, pressure regulator or reducing valve, water filter or softener) an effective pressure relief valve shall be installed either in the top tapping or the upper side tapping of the hot water tank, or on the hot water distributing pipe connection at the tank. A one-half-inch drainpipe shall be connected to the relief valve for discharge on the floor or into a sink or open drain through an air gap. No stop valve shall be placed between the hot water tank and the relief valve or on the drainpipe. 
(c) ?Air chambers. An air chamber or approved shock absorber shall be installed at the terminus of each riser, fixture branch or hydraulic elevator main for the prevention of undue water hammer. The air chamber shall have a diameter not less than that of the pipe it serves and a length not less than 15 diameters of the supply pipe. Where possible, the air chamber should be provided at its base with a valve and drain cock for water drainage and replenishment of air. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-48) 
Sec. 82-47. - Stop boxes. 
    The consumer shall protect the stop box in the terrace and shall keep the stop box free from dirt and other obstructions. The utility shall not be liable for failure to locate the stop box and shut off the water in case of a leak on the consumer's premises. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-34) 
Sec. 82-48. - Repairs to mains. 
    The utility reserves the right to shut off the water in the mains temporarily, to make repairs, alterations or additions to the plant or system. When the circumstances will permit sufficient delay, the company will give notification, by newspaper publication or otherwise, of the discontinuance of the supply. No rebate will be allowed to consumers for such temporary suspension of supply. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-44) 
Sec. 82-49. - Handling water mains and service pipes in sewer or other trenches. 
    Contractors must ascertain for themselves the existence and location of all service pipes. Where they are removed, cut or damaged in the construction of water service, the contractor must at his own expense cause them to be replaced or repaired at once. He must not shut off the water service pipes from any consumer for a period exceeding six hours. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-46) 
Sec. 82-50. - Settling main or service trenches. 
    Trenches in unpaved streets shall be refilled with moist, damp earth, or by means of water tamping. When water tamping is used, the water shall be turned into the trench after the first 12 inches of backfill has been placed, and then the trench shall be kept flooded until the remainder of the backfill has been put in. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-47) 
Sec. 82-51. - Service connections (or water laterals). 
(a) ?No water service shall be laid through any trench having cinders, rubbish, rock or gravel fill, or any other material which may cause injury to or disintegration of the service pipe, unless adequate means of protection are provided by sand filling or such other insulation as may be approved by the public works director. Service pipes passing through curb or retaining walls shall be adequately safeguarded by provision of a channel space or pipe casing, not less than twice the diameter of the service connection. The space between the service pipe and channel or pipe casing shall be filled and lightly caulked with an oakum, mastic cement or other resilient material, and made impervious to moisture. 
(b) ?In backfilling the pipe trench, the service pipe must be protected against injury by carefully hand tamping the ground filling, free from hard lumps, rocks, stones or other injurious material around and at least six inches over the pipe. 
(c) ?All water supplies shall be of undiminished size from the street main in to the point of meter placement. Beyond the meter outlet valve the piping shall be sized and proportioned to provide, on all floors, at all times, an equitable distribution of water supply for the greatest probable number of fixtures or appliances operating simultaneously. All such service shall comply with the provisions of the state plumbing code and shall be inspected by the building inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-28) 
Sec. 82-52. - Thawing frozen services. 
    See Wis. Adm. Code PSC § 185.89. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-33) 
Sec. 82-53. - Replacement and repair of service pipe. 
(a) ?Where the property owner requests that a larger service lateral be installed to replace an existing smaller diameter pipe, an allowance set by the council from time to time will be made as a deduction in the costs, providing the new service is to be installed in the same ditch as the existing service pipe. 
(b) ?The service pipe from the main to and through the curbstop will be maintained and kept in repair and when worn out, replaced at the expense of the utility. The property owner shall maintain the service pipe from the curbstop to the point of use. 
(c) ?If a consumer fails to repair a leaking or broken service pipe from the curb to the point of metering or use within such time as may appear reasonable to the water department after notification has been served on the consumer by the water department, the water will be shut off and will not be turned on again until the repairs have been completed. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-37) 
Sec. 82-54. - Vacation of premises. 
    When premises are to be vacated, the utility shall be notified in writing at once, so that it may remove the meter and shut off the supply at the curb cock. The owner of the premises shall be liable to prosecution for any damage to the property of the water department by reason of failure to notify the utility of the vacancy. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-43) 
Secs. 82-55—82-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METERS 

Sec. 82-76. - Service piping for meter settings. 
(a) ?In cases where a new customer whose service is to be metered installs the original service piping or where an existing metered customer changes his service piping for his own convenience, or where an existing flat rate customer requests to be metered, the customer shall, at his expense, provide a suitable location and the proper connections for the meter. The water department should be consulted as to the type and size of meter setting. Where it is possible to set meters in the basement, or other suitable place within the building, a short nipple shall be inserted after the stop and waste cock, then a union, and then another nipple and coupling of the proper length. The nipple attached to the union and coupling shall be cut to a standard length provided by the plans of the water department (which may require a horizontal run of 18 inches in such pipe line) which may later be removed for the insertion of the meter into the supply line. 
(b) ?No permit will be given to change from metered to flat rate service. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-29) 
Sec. 82-77. - Complaint tests. 
    If a customer requests, the utility shall promptly make an accuracy test in addition to the periodic or installation test if 24 months or more has elapsed since the last complaint test of the same meter in the same location. If less than 24 months has expired, there will be a charge set by the council from time to time per inch of nominal size or fraction thereof, payable in advance. If the meter is found fast in excess of two percent, any payment that was made for the test will be refunded and there will be an adjustment for past billings. (See Wis. Adm. Code PSC §§ 185.71—185.78.) 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-32) 
Sec. 82-78. - Installation. 
    Meters will be furnished and placed by the utility and are not to be disconnected or tampered with by the consumer. All meters shall be so located that they shall be protected from obstructions and permit ready access thereto for reading, inspection and servicing, such location to be designated or approved by the water department. All piping within the building must be supplied by the consumer. Where additional meters are desired by the consumer, he shall pay for all piping and an additional amount sufficient to cover the cost of maintenance and depreciation as set by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-35) 
Sec. 82-79. - Repairs. 
(a) ?Meters will be repaired by the water department and the cost of such repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the utility. 
(b) ?Repair of any damage to a meter resulting from the carelessness of the owner of the premises, his agent or tenant, or from the negligence of any one of them to properly secure and protect same, including any damage that may result from allowing a water meter to become frozen or to be injured from the presence of hot water or steam in the meter, shall be paid for by the consumer or the owner of the premises. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-36) 
Sec. 82-80. - Failure to read. 
(a) ?Where the utility is unable to read a meter after two successive attempts, the fact will be plainly indicated on the bill, and either an estimated bill will be computed, or the minimum charge applied. The difference shall be adjusted when the meter is again read, that is, the bill for the succeeding quarter will be computed with the gallons or cubic feet in each block of the rate schedule doubled and credit will be given on that bill for the amount of the minimum bill paid the preceding month. Only in unusual cases or where approval is obtained from the customer shall more than two consecutive estimated bills be rendered. 
(b) ?If the meter is damaged (see section 82-105) or fails to operate, the bill will be based on the average use during the past year unless there is some reason why the use is not normal. If the average use cannot be properly employed, the bill will be estimated by some equitable method. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-31) 
Secs. 82-81—82-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCONNECTION AND REFUSAL OF SERVICE 

Sec. 82-101. - Reasons for disconnection. 
    Service may be disconnected or refused for any of the following reasons: 
(1) ?Failure to pay a delinquent account or failure to comply with the terms of a deferred payment agreement. 
(2) ?Violation of the utility's rules and regulations pertaining to the use of service in a manner which interferes with the service of others or to the operation of nonstandard equipment, if the customer has first been notified and provided with reasonable opportunity to remedy the situation. 
(3) ?Failure to comply with deposit or guarantee arrangements as provided for in this article. 
(4) ?Diversion of service around the meter. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-41(a)) 
Sec. 82-102. - Disconnection for delinquent accounts. 
(a) ?A bill for service is delinquent if unpaid after the due date shown on the bill. The utility may disconnect service for a delinquent bill by giving the customer, at least eight calendar days prior to disconnection, a written disconnect notice which may be included with the bill for service. For purposes of this section, the due date shall not be less than 20 days after issuance. 
(b) ?The utility may disconnect without notice where a dangerous condition exists for as long as the condition exists. Service may be denied to any customer for failure to comply with the applicable requirements of the rules and regulations of the public service commission or of this division, or if a dangerous or unsafe condition exists on the customer's premises. 
(c) ?The utility shall notify the county department of health and social services at least five calendar days prior to any scheduled disconnection of residential service if the customer or responsible person has made a written request for this procedure. The utility shall apprise customers of this right upon application for service. If service to a residential customer which has been disconnected has not been restored within 24 hours after disconnection, the utility shall notify the appropriate county sheriff's department of the billing name and service address and that a threat to health and life might exist to persons occupying the premises. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-41(b)) 
Sec. 82-103. - Deferred payment agreement. 
(a) ?The utility shall offer deferred payment agreements to residential customers. The deferred payment agreement shall provide that service will not be discontinued for the outstanding bill if the customer pays a stated reasonable amount of the outstanding bill and agrees to pay a stated reasonable portion of the remaining outstanding balance in installments until the bill is paid. In determining what amounts are reasonable, the parties shall consider the: 
(1) ?Size of the delinquent account; 
(2) ?Customer's ability to pay; 
(3) ?Customer's payment history; 
(4) ?Time that the debt has been outstanding; 
(5) ?Reasons why the debt has been outstanding; and 
(6) ?Any other relevant factors concerning the circumstances of the customer. 
(b) ?In the deferred payment agreement it shall state immediately preceding the space provided for the customer's signature and in boldface print at least two sizes larger than any other used thereon, the following: 
"IF YOU ARE NOT SATISFIED WITH THIS AGREEMENT, DO NOT SIGN. IF YOU DO SIGN THIS AGREEMENT YOU GIVE UP YOUR RIGHT TO DISPUTE THE AMOUNT DUE UNDER THE AGREEMENT EXCEPT FOR THE UTILITY'S FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO FOLLOW THE TERMS OF THIS AGREEMENT." 
(c) ?A deferred payment agreement shall not include a finance charge. 
(d) ?If an applicant for service has not fulfilled the terms of a deferred payment agreement, the utility shall have the right to disconnect service or refuse service in accordance with these rules and under such circumstances, it shall not be required to offer subsequent negotiation of a deferred payment agreement prior to disconnection. 
(e) ?Any payments made by the customer in compliance with a deferred payment agreement, or otherwise, shall be first considered made in payment of the previous account balance with any remainder credited to the current bill. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-41(c)) 
Sec. 82-104. - Dispute procedures. 
(a) ?Attempt to resolve; opportunity to enter deferred payment agreement. Whenever the customer advises the utility's designated office prior to the disconnection of service that all or part of any billing as rendered is in dispute, or that any matter related to the disconnection is in dispute, the company shall investigate the dispute promptly and completely, advise the customer of the results of the investigation, attempt to resolve the dispute, and provide the opportunity for the customer to enter into a deferred payment agreement, when applicable, in order to settle the dispute. 
(b) ?Informal review. After the customer has pursued the available remedies with the utility, he may request that the public service commission's staff informally review the disputed issue and recommend terms of settlement. 
(c) ?Formal review; payment of bill or posting of bond. Any party to the dispute after informal review may make a written request for a formal review by the public service commission. If the public service commission decides to conduct a formal hearing on the dispute, the customer must pay 50 percent of the bill in dispute or post a bond for that amount on or before the hearing date. Failure to pay the amount or post the bond will constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. Service shall not be disconnected because of any disputed matter while the disputed matter is being pursued under the disputes procedure. In no way does this relieve the customer from the obligation of paying charges which are not disputed. 
(d) ?Form of disconnection notice. The form of disconnection notice to be used is as follows: 
DISCONNECTION NOTICE 
Dear Customer: 
The bill enclosed with this notice includes your current charge for utility service and your previous unpaid balance. 
You have eight days to pay the utility service arrears or your service is subject to disconnection. 
If you fail to pay the service arrears, or fail to contact us within the eight days allowed to make reasonable time payment arrangements, we will proceed with disconnection action. 
To avoid the inconvenience of service interruption and an additional charge of (amount) reconnection, we urge you to pay the full arrears IMMEDIATELY AT ONE OF OUR OFFICES. 
If you have entered into a deferred payment agreement with us and have failed to make the time payment you agreed to, your service will be subject to disconnection unless you pay the amount due within eight days. 
If you have a reason for delaying the payment, call us and explain the situation. 
PLEASE CALL THIS TELEPHONE NUMBER, (appropriate telephone number), IMMEDIATELY IF: 
1. ?You have a question about your utility service arrears. 
2. ?You are unable to pay the full amount of the bill and are willing to enter into a time payment agreement with us. 
3. ?There are any circumstances you think should be taken into consideration before service is discontinued. 
4. ?Any resident is seriously ill. 
Illness provision. 
If there is an existing medical emergency in your home and you furnish the utility with a statement signed by either a licensed Wisconsin physician, or a public health official, we will delay disconnection of service up to 21 days. The statement must identify the medical emergency and specify the period of time during which disconnection will aggravate the existing emergency. 
Deferred payment agreements. 
If, for some reason, you are unable to pay the full amount of the utility service arrears on your bill, you may contact the utility to discuss arrangements to pay the arrears over an extended period of time. 
This time payment agreement will require: 
1. ?Payment of a reasonable amount at the time the agreement is made. 
2. ?Payment of the remainder of the outstanding balance in monthly installments over a reasonable length of time. 
3. ?Payment of all future utility service bills in full by the due date. 
In any situation where you are unable to resolve billing disputes or disputes about the grounds for proposed disconnection through contacts with our utility, you may make an appeal to the Wisconsin Public Service Commission, Madison, Wisconsin. 
(UTILITY NAME) 
(e) ?If the utility is not able to collect any bill for water service even though deposit and guarantee rules are on file, the bill may be put upon the tax roll as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.069. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-41(d)) 
Sec. 82-105. - Surreptitious use of water; disconnection; reconnection. 
(a) ?When the utility has reasonable evidence that a consumer is obtaining his supply of water, in whole or in part, by means of devices or methods used to stop or interfere with the proper metering of the utility service being delivered to his equipment, the utility reserves the right to estimate and present immediately a bill for service unmetered as a result of such interference and such bill shall be payable subject to a 24-hour disconnection of service. When the utility shall have disconnected the consumer for any such reason, the utility will reconnect the consumer upon the following conditions: 
(1) ?The consumer will be required to deposit with the utility an amount sufficient to guarantee the payment of the consumer's bills for utility service to the utility. 
(2) ?The consumer will be required to pay the utility for any and all damages to its equipment on the consumer's premises due to such stoppage or interference with its metering. 
(3) ?The consumer must further agree to comply with reasonable requirements to protect the utility against further losses. 
(b) ?Wis. Stats. §§ 98.26 and 943.20, as relating to water service, are adopted and made a part of this section by reference. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-42) 
Secs. 82-106—82-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEPOSITS, FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 82-126. - Customer's deposits. 
(a) ?New residential service. The utility may require a cash deposit or other guarantee as a condition of new residential service if, and only if, the customer has an outstanding account balance with the utility which accrued within the last six years, and which at the time of the request for new service remains outstanding and not in dispute. 
(b) ?Existing residential service. The utility may require a cash deposit or other guarantee as a condition of continued service if, and only if, either or both the following circumstances apply: 
(1) ?Service has been shut off or discontinued within the last 12 months for violation of this article or for nonpayment of a delinquent bill for service which is not in dispute. 
(2) ?Credit information obtained by the company subsequent to the initial application indicates that the initial application for service was falsified or incomplete to the extent that a deposit would be required under this article. 
(c) ?Commercial and industrial service. If the credit for an applicant for commercial or industrial service has not been established to the satisfaction of the utility, he may be required to make a deposit or otherwise guarantee to the utility payment of bills for service. 
(d) ?Conditions of deposit. See Wis. Adm. Code PSC § 185.36(4). 
(e) ?Refund of deposits. The utility shall review the payment record of each residential customer with a deposit on file at not less than 12-month intervals and shall not require or continue to require a deposit unless a deposit could be required under the conditions stated in this section. In the case of a commercial or industrial customer the utility shall refund the deposit after 24 consecutive months of prompt payment if the customer's credit standing is satisfactory to the company. Payment shall be considered prompt if it is made prior to notice of disconnection for nonpayment of a bill not in dispute. Any deposit or portion thereof refunded to a customer shall be refunded by check unless both the customer and the company agree to credit the regular bill, or unless service is terminated, in which case the deposit with accrued interest shall be applied to the final bill and any balance returned to the customer promptly. 
(f) ?Other conditions. A new or additional deposit may be required upon reasonable written notice of the need therefor if such new or additional deposit could have been required under the circumstances when the initial deposit was made. Service may be refused or disconnected for failure to pay a deposit request as provided in this article. When service has been disconnected for failure to make a deposit, or for failure to pay a delinquent bill, or for failure to comply with the terms of a deferred payment agreement, and satisfactory arrangements have been made to have service restored, a reconnection charge, as specified elsewhere in this article, shall be paid by the customer as a condition to restoration of service. 
(g) ?Guarantee contracts. 
(1) ?The utility may accept, in lieu of a cash deposit, a contract signed by a guarantor satisfactory to the company, whereby payment of a specified sum not exceeding the cash deposit requirement is guaranteed. The term of a guarantee contract shall be two years, but shall automatically terminate after the customer has closed his account, or at the guarantor's request upon 30 days' written notice to the utility. 
(2) ?Upon termination of a guarantee contract or whenever the company deems the same insufficient as to amount or surety, a cash deposit or a new or additional guarantee may be required upon reasonable written notice to the customer. Service to any customer who fails to comply with these requirements may be refused, or upon eight days' written notice, disconnected. 
(3) ?The utility shall mail the guarantor copies of all disconnect notices sent to the customer whose account he has guaranteed unless the guarantor waives such notice in writing. 
(4) ?In lieu of a cash deposit or guarantee, an applicant for new service who has an outstanding account accrued within the last six years with the utility shall have the right to receive service from the company under a deferred payment agreement, as provided in this article for the outstanding account balance. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-40) 
Sec. 82-127. - Refunds of monetary deposits. 
    All monies deposited as security for payment of charges arising from the use of temporary water supply on a metered basis, or for the return of a sprinkling valve wheel or reducer, if the water is used on an unmetered basis, will be refunded to the depositor on the termination of the use of water, the payment of all charges levied against the depositor, and the return of the wheel and reducer. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-27) 
Sec. 82-128. - Charges for water wasted due to leaks. 
    See Wis. Adm. Code, PSC § 185.35(6). 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-38) 
Sec. 82-129. - Billing. 
    Bills for water service are rendered quarterly and become due and payable on the first of the month following the period for which service is rendered. A late payment charge set from time to time by the council will be added to bills not paid within 20 days of issuance. This late payment charge will be applied to the total unpaid balance for utility service, including unpaid late payment charges. This late payment charge is applicable to all customers. The utility customer may be given a written notice that that bill is overdue no sooner than 20 days after the bill is issued and unless payment or satisfactory arrangement for payment is made within the next eight days, service may be disconnected pursuant to Wis. Adm. Code PSC ch. 185. A charge set from time to time by the council will be made for processing checks that have been returned for insufficient funds. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-2(c)) 
Sec. 82-130. - Combined metering. 
    When a consumer's premises has several buildings, each supplied with service and metered separately, the full service charge will be billed for each meter separately and the readings will not be cumulated. If these buildings are all used in the same business and are connected by the consumer, they can be metered in one place. If the utility, for its own convenience, installs more than one meter, the readings will be cumulated for billing. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-2(d)) 
Sec. 82-131. - General service; metered; MG-1. 
(a) ?Quarterly service charges: 
Five-eighths-inch meter set by the council from time to time. 
Three-quarters-inch meter set by the council from time to time. 
One-inch meter set by the council from time to time. 
1¼-inch meter set by the council from time to time. 
1½-inch meter set by the council from time to time. 
Two-inch meter set by the council from time to time. 
2½-inch meter set by the council from time to time. 
Three-inch meter set by the council from time to time. 
Four-inch meter set by the council from time to time. 
(b) ?Volume charge: 
First 8,000 gallons used each quarter (minimum charge) set from time to time by the council. 
Next 22,000 gallons used each quarter, per 1,000 gallons, set from time to time by the council. 
Next 70,000 gallons used each quarter, per 1,000 gallons, set from time to time by the council. 
Next 900,000 gallons used each quarter, per 1,000 gallons, set from time to time by the council. 
Over 1,000,000 gallons used each quarter, per 1,000 gallons, set from time to time by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-2) 
Sec. 82-132. - Public service; MPA-1. 
(a) ?Water service supplied to municipal buildings, schools, etc., shall be metered and the regular metered service rates applied. 
(b) ?Water used on an intermittent basis for flushing service, street sprinkling, flooding skating rinks, drinking fountains, etc., shall be metered where meters can be set to measure the service. Where it is impossible to measure the service, the water department shall estimate the volume of water used based on the pressure, size of opening and period of time water is allowed to be drawn. The estimated quantity used shall be billed at the rate set by the council from time to time per 1,000 gallons. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-3) 
Sec. 82-133. - Building and construction water service; MZ-1. 
(a) ?For single-family and small commercial buildings, the minimum service charge (MG-1) for the size of meter to be installed shall be applied. 
(b) ?For large commercial, industrial or multiple apartment buildings, a temporary metered installation shall be made and general, metered rates (MG-1) shall be applied. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-4) 
Sec. 82-134. - Public fire protection service; F-1. 
(a) ?For public fire protection service to the city, the annual charge shall be set by the council from time to time to cover the use of mains and hydrants up to and including the terminal hydrant and connection on each main existing on December 31, 1978. 
(b) ?For all extensions of fire protection service, a charge set by the council from time to time per lineal foot of main shall be charged per annum on the basis of the length of main put into use between hydrants placed, plus a charge set by the council from time to time net per hydrant added to the system after December 31, 1978. 
(c) ?This service shall include the use of hydrants for fire protection service only, and such quantities of water as may be demanded for the purposes of extinguishing fires. For all other purposes, the metered or other rates set forth, or as may be filed with the public service commission, shall apply. 
(d) ?The above base annual charge set by the council from time to time includes 94,744 feet of main, four-inch and larger, and 118 hydrants. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-1) 
Sec. 82-135. - Seasonal, emergency or temporary service; MGT-1. 
    Seasonal customers shall be served at the general service rate (MG-1), except that each customer served under this rate shall pay an annual seasonal service charge equal to four times the applicable quarterly service charge. Water use in any quarter shall be billed at the applicable volume schedule in MG-1, and the charge shall be added to the annual seasonal service charge. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-5) 
_____
Sec. 82-136. - Reconnection charges; R-1. 
    Reconnection charges shall be as follows: 
During Normal 
Business Hours After Normal 
Business Hours Reinstallation of meter, including valving at curbstop Set by the council from time to time Set by the council from time to time Valve turned on at curbstop Set by the council from time to time Set by the council from time to time Note: No charge for disconnection  
(Code 1986, § 5-2-6) 
_____
Secs. 82-137—82-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 82-151. - Cross-connection and interconnection restricted. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the City of Mosinee may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the City of Mosinee and by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in accordance with section NR 810.15(2), Wisconsin Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, §§ 1, 2, 2-28-2011) 
Sec. 82-152. - Duty to inspect. 
    It shall be the duty of the City of Mosinee to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where cross connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be established by the City of Mosinee and as approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 810. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 3, 2-28-2011) 
Sec. 82-153. - Right of entry. 
    Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the city utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a connection to the public water system of the City of Mosinee for cross connections. If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under Wis. Stats. § 66.122. On request the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 4, 2-28-2011) 
Sec. 82-154. - Enforcement. 
    The City of Mosinee is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this article exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under chapter 68, Wis. Stats., except as provided in section 82-155. Water services to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 5, 2-28-2011) 
Sec. 82-155. - Emergency discontinuance. 
    If it is determined by the City of Mosinee that a cross connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Clerk of the City of Mosinee and delivered to the customer's premises, services may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under chapter 68, Wis. Stats., within ten days of such an emergency discontinuance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 6, 2-28-2011) 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE WELL ABANDONMENT 

Sec. 82-161. - Purpose of article. 
    The purposes of this article are to prevent contamination of groundwater and to protect public health, safety and welfare by ensuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells; wells which may serve as conduits for contamination; or wells which may be illegally cross connected to the municipal water system, are properly abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2(a), 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 82-162. - Applicability of article provisions. 
    This article applies to all wells located on premises served by the city municipal water system. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2(b), 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 82-163. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Municipal water system means a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption when such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25 yearround residents owned or operated by a city, village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district or public institution or a privately owned water utility serving any of the above. 
    Noncomplying means a well or pump installation which does not comply with the provisions of Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 812, in effect at the time the well was constructed, a contamination source was installed, the pump was installed or work was done on either the well or pump installation. 
    Pump installation means the pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a well including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps. 
    Unsafe means a well or pump installation which produces water which is contaminated with substances in exceedance of the standards of Wis. Adm. Code chs. NR 809 or 140, or for which a health advisory has been issued by the state department of natural resources. 
    Unused means a well or pump installation which is not in use or does not have a functional pumping system. 
    Well, as defined in Wis. Adm. Code NR § 812.07(19). 
    Well abandonment means the filling and sealing of a well according to the provisions of Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 812. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2(c), 1-28-1991) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-164. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any well owner violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by forfeiture of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00, plus the cost of prosecution. Each day of violation is a separate offense. If any person fails to comply with this article for more than ten days after receiving written notice of the violation, the city may impose a penalty and cause the well abandonment to be performed and the expense to be assessed as a special tax against the property. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2(h), 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 82-165. - Abandonment required. 
    All wells located on premises served by the municipal water system shall be abandoned within the terms of this article and Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 812 by December 31, 1991, or no later than one year from the date of connection to the municipal water system, whichever occurs last, unless a well operation permit has been obtained by the well owner from the city. All dug wells must be abandoned in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 812. Dug wells shall not be permitted within the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2(d), 1-28-1991; Ord. No. 2002-01, § 1, 2-25-2002) 
Sec. 82-166. - Well operation permit. 
    The city may grant a permit to a private well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed five years, provided that the conditions of this article are met. An owner may request renewal of a well operation permit by submitting information verifying that the conditions of this article are met. The city or its agent may conduct inspections or have water quality tests conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain or verify information necessary for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the administrator. The cost of the private well operation permit shall be set by the council from time to time, payable to the administrator. The following conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit: 
(1) ?The well and pump installation must comply with the requirements of Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 812. 
(2) ?A minimum of one safe water sample be taken prior to issuance or reissuing the permit to establish that the water is bacteriologically safe. No exception to this condition may be made for unsafe wells, unless the state department of natural resources approves, in writing, the continued use of the well. Owners of private wells are responsible for all testing procedures and expense. 
(3) ?There are no cross connections between the well and pump installation and the municipal water system. 
(4) ?The well and pump system must be evaluated by a licensed well driller or pump installer and certified to comply with ch. NR 812, subch. IV, prior to initially issuing a permit and no less than every ten years afterwards. 
(5) ?Submission of written documentation, to the city, of the well and pump inspection indicating compliance with ch. NR 812 requirements using the standardized forms provided by the department of natural resources. 
(6) ?The proposed use of the well and pump installation can be justified as being necessary in addition to water provided by the city water system. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2(e), 1-28-1991; Ord. No. 2002-01, § 2, 2-25-2002; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 3-14-2011) 
Sec. 82-167. - Abandonment procedures. 
    The following procedures shall apply to the abandonment of all wells: 
(1) ?All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this article shall be abandoned according to the procedures and methods of Wis. Adm. Code ch. NR 812. All debris, pump, piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment. All abandonment procedures shall be at the owner's expense. 
(2) ?The owner of the well, or the owner's agent, shall notify the administrator at least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the well shall be observed by a representative or agent of the city. 
(3) ?An abandonment report form, supplied by the state department of natural resources, shall be submitted by the well owner to the administrator and the state department of natural resources within ten days of the completion of the well abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2(f), 1-28-1991) 
Sec. 82-168. - Fees. 
    The cost of obtaining a five-year well operation permit shall be set by the council from time to time. The cost of well abandonment activities shall be set by the council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 91-1, § 2(g), 1-28-1991) 
Secs. 82-169—82-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER UTILITY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Pollution discharge elimination generally, Wis. Stats. § 147.01 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority means the common council, or its duly authorized committee, agent or representative. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) or (BOD 5 ) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed as milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the public sewer or other place of disposal beginning outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Compatible pollutants means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, phosphorus or pH, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES permit for the publicly owned treatment works receiving the pollutants if such works were designed to treat such additional pollutants to a substantial degree. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater or septage shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Ground garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be no greater than one-half inch in any dimension and will be carried freely in suspension under normal flow conditions in public sewers. 
    Incompatible pollutants means wastewater or septage with pollutants that will adversely affect or disrupt the wastewater treatment processes or effluent quality or sludge quality if discharged to a wastewater treatment facility. 
    Industrial waste means the wastewater from industrial process, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage, including cooling water and the discharge from sewage pretreatment facilities. 
    Licensed disposer means a person holding a license under Wis. Stats. § 146.20(3)(a). 
    Municipal wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Parts per million shall be a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Person means any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, government agency or other entity. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7.0 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 -7 . 
    Public sewer means any sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the corporate boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with city funds. 
    Sanitary sewage means a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with small quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Septage means scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from a septic tank, soil absorption field, holding tank, vault toilet or privy. This does not include the waste from a grease trap. 
    Sewage means the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "municipal wastewater." 
    Sewer service areas means the areas presently served and anticipated to be served by a sewage collection system. 
    Sewer service charge means a service charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of use-related capital expenses as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including replacement of such facilities. 
    Sewer system means the common sanitary sewers within a sewerage system which are primarily installed to receive wastewaters directly from facilities which convey wastewater from individual structures or from private property, and which include service connection Y fittings designed for connection with those facilities. The facilities which convey wastewater from individual structures, from private property to the public sanitary sewer, or its equivalent, are specifically excluded from the definition of the term "sewerage collection system"; except that pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of structures may be included as part of a sewer system when such units are cost effective and are owned and maintained by the sewerage system owner. 
    Sewerage system means all structures, conduits and pipes, by which sewage is collected, treated and disposed of, except plumbing inside and in connection with buildings served, and service pipes, from building to street main. 
    Slug load means any substance released at a discharge rate and/or concentration which causes interference to wastewater treatment processes. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes," published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm drain ( storm sewer ) means drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of the rainfall that is drained into the sewers. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, septage or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods, and is referred to as "nonfilterable residue." 
    Unpolluted water means water of quality equal or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away, store, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and septage and dispose of the effluent. 
    Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, septage, industrial wastes and sludge; sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment. 
    Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit means a document issued by the state department of natural resources which establishes effluent limitations and monitoring requirements for the municipal wastewater treatment facility. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-202. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or rules or regulations of the city or who shall connect a service pipe or discharge without first having obtained a permit therefor; or who shall violate any provisions of state statute, Wisconsin Administrative Code or any other materials which are incorporated by reference shall, upon conviction, forfeit an amount as provided in section 1-13 and the costs of prosecution. This, however, shall not bar the city from enforcing the connection duties set out in the provisions of this article for mandatory hookup. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-86) 
Sec. 82-203. - Management of sewer utility. 
(a) ?The management, operation and control of the sewer system for the city is vested in the common council. All records, minutes and all written proceedings thereof shall be kept by the common council. The administrator shall keep all the financial records. 
(b) ?The common council shall have the power to construct sewer lines for public use, and shall have the power to lay sewer pipes in and through the alleys, streets and public ground of the city; and generally, to do all such work as may be found necessary or convenient in the management of the sewer system. The common council shall have power by themselves, their officers, agents and servants to enter upon any land for the purpose of making examination or supervise in the performance of their duties under this article, without liability therefor; and the council shall have power to purchase and acquire for the city all real and personal property which may be necessary for construction of the sewer system, or for any repair, remodeling or additions thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-1) 
State Law reference— Authority, Wis. Stats. § 66.069. 
Sec. 82-204. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural waterway within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters, without first obtaining a Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (WPDES permit). 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-33) 
Sec. 82-205. - City responsibility. 
    It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against the city or acting representative by reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage or freezing of any service pipes; nor from any damage arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or any other work that may be deemed necessary. The right is reserved to cut off the service at any time for the purpose of repairs, or any other necessary purpose, any permit granted, or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the sewer service within any section of the sewerage system, the city shall, if practicable, give notice to each and every consumer within the affected section, of the time when such service will be so shut off. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-22) 
Sec. 82-206. - Condemnation of real estate. 
    Whenever any real estate or any easement therein, or use thereof, shall in the judgment of the city be necessary to the sewer system; and whenever, for any cause, an agreement for the purchase thereof, cannot be made with the owner thereof, the city shall proceed with all necessary steps to take such real estate easement, or use by condemnation in accordance with state statutes and the Uniform Relocation and Real Property Policy Act, if federal funds are used. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-3) 
Sec. 82-207. - Title to real estate and personal property. 
    All property, real, personal and mixed, acquired for the construction of the sewer system, and all plans, specifications, diagrams, papers, books and records connected therewith the sewer system, and all buildings, machinery and fixtures pertaining thereto, shall be the property of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-4) 
Sec. 82-208. - Disposition of revenue. 
    The amounts received from the collection of charges authorized by this article shall be credited to a sanitary sewerage account which shall show all receipts and expenditures of the sewerage system. Charges collected for replacement expenses shall be credited to a segregated, nonlapsing replacement account. These funds are to be used exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by the city, the credits to the sanitary sewerage account shall be available for the payment of the requirements for operation, maintenance, repairs and depreciation of the sewerage consistent with 40 CFR 35.929. Any surplus outside the preview of 40 CFR 35.929, in such account, shall be available for the payment of principal and interest of bonds issued and outstanding, or which may be issued, to provide funds for said sewerage system, or part thereof, and all or a part of the expenses for additions and improvements and other necessary disbursement or indebtedness, and the common council may resolve to pledge each surplus or any part thereof for any such purpose. All present outstanding sewer system general obligation bonds, including the refunding bonds, shall be paid from this fund as to both principal and interest. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-72) 
Sec. 82-209. - Excess revenues. 
    Excess revenues collected from a user class will be applied to operation and maintenance costs attributable to that class for the next year. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-74) 
Sec. 82-210. - Annual audit. 
    The common council shall conduct an annual audit, the purpose of which shall be to maintain the proportionality between users and user classes of the user charge system, and to ensure that adequate revenues are available relative to increasing operation, maintenance and replacement costs. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-75) 
Sec. 82-211. - Handling water mains and service pipes in sewer or other trenches. 
    Contractors must ascertain for themselves the existence and location of all service pipes. Where they are removed, cut or damaged in the construction of a sewer, the contractor must at his own expense cause them to be replaced or repaired at once. He must not shut off the water service pipes from any consumer for a period exceeding six hours. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2-46(b)) 
Sec. 82-212. - Regulation of plumbers. 
    No plumber, pipefitter or other person will be permitted to do any plumbing or pipe fitting work in connection with the sewer system without first receiving a license from the state and obtaining permission from the city. All service connections to the sewer main shall comply with the state plumbing code. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-10) 
Sec. 82-213. - Damages. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure of pertinence or equipment which is a part of the sewerage system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-80) 
Sec. 82-214. - Written notice of violation. 
(a) ?Any person connected to the sewerage system found to be violating a provision of this article shall be served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within a period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b) ?Any licensed disposer discharging to the wastewater treatment facility or to a public sewer, found to be violating a provision of this article or of any conditions of the city approval for septage disposal, may have their approval immediately revoked. This revocation shall be done in writing and state the reason for revoking the septage disposal approval. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-81) 
Sec. 82-215. - Continued violations. 
    Any person, partnership or corporation, or any officer, agent or employe thereof, who shall continue any violation beyond the notice time limit provided in section 82-214 shall, upon conviction, be subject to section 1-13, together with the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, such violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed five days. Each day in which any violation is continued beyond the notice time limit in section 82-214 shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-83) 
Sec. 82-216. - Liability to city for losses. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation which the city may suffer as a result thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-84) 
Sec. 82-217. - Damage recovery. 
    The sewer system shall have the right of recovery from all persons, any expense incurred by such system for the repair or replacement of any sewer pipe damaged in any manner by any person by the performance of any work under their control, or by any negligent acts. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-85) 
Sec. 82-218. - Septic tanks. 
    The maintenance and use of septic tanks and other private sewage disposal systems within the area of the city serviced by its sewer system are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a health hazard. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-12) 
Secs. 82-219—82-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USER RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 82-241. - General provisions. 
    The rules and regulations set forth in this division shall be considered a part of the contract with every person who is connected with the sewer system of the city, and every such person by connecting with the sewer system shall be considered as expressing his assent to be bound thereby. Whenever any of such rules and regulations, or such others as the common council may hereafter adopt are violated, the service shall be shut off from the building or place of such violation (even though two or more parties are receiving service through the same connection) and shall not be reestablished except by order of the common council or its duly authorized agent, and on payment of all arrears, the expenses and established charges of shutting off and putting on, and such other terms as the council may determine, and a satisfactory understanding with the party that no further cause for complaint shall arise. In case of such violation, the common council, furthermore, may declare any payment made for the service by the parties committing such violation, to be forfeited, and the payment shall thereupon be forfeited. The right is reserved to the council to change the rules, regulations, and sewer rates and contracts in all proper cases. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-5) 
Sec. 82-242. - Mandatory hookup. 
(a) ?The owner of each parcel of land adjacent to a sewer main on which there exists a building usable for human habitation or in a block through which such system is extended, shall connect to such system within 365 days of notice in writing from the city. Upon failure to do so, the city may cause such connection to be made and bill the property owner for such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days, such notice shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 144.06; provided, however, that the owner may within 30 days after the completion of the work file a written option with the administrator stating that he cannot pay such amount in one sum and ask that there be levied in installments, and that the amount shall be so collected with interest at the rate of the prevailing cost of borrowed money to the city, the unpaid balance being a special tax lien, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 144.06. The common council shall have the authority to set the number of payment installments to be imposed. 
(b) ?In lieu of subsection (a) of this section, the city, at its option, may impose a penalty for the period that the violation continues, after ten days' written notice to any owner failing to make a connection to the sewer system of an amount equal to 150 percent of the minimum quarterly charge for sewer service payable quarterly for the period in which the failure to connect continues, and upon failure to make such payment, such charge shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property, all pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 144.06. 
(c) ?This section ordains that the failure to connect to the sewer system fails to ensure preservation of public health, comfort and safety, and is contrary to the minimum health standards of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-11) 
Sec. 82-243. - Application for service. 
(a) ?Every person connecting with the sewer system shall file an application in writing to the city, in such form as is prescribed for that purpose. Blanks for such applications will be furnished at the office of the administrator. The application must state fully and truly all the use which will be allowed except upon further application and permission regularly obtained from the city. If the applicant is not the owner of the premises, the written consent of the owner must accompany the application. Persons connected to the sewer system of the city are referred to in this article as "users." 
(b) ?The application may be for service to more than one building, or more than one unit of service through one service connection; and, in such cases, charges shall be made accordingly. 
(c) ?If it appears that the service applied for will not provide adequate service for the contemplated use, the city may reject the application. If the city shall approve the application, it shall issue a permit for services as shown on the application. 
(d) ?The premises to receive the service must be currently located within the corporate limits of the City of Mosinee. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-13; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 2, 4-22-2002) 
Sec. 82-244. - Application for septage disposal. 
(a) ?Between August 1 and September 1 of each year every licensed disposer wishing to discharge septage to the city wastewater treatment works shall file a nonrefundable filing fee and an application in writing to the city in such a form as is prescribed for that purpose. During the months of July and August, forms for such application will be furnished at the office of the administrator. The application must state fully and truly the type, frequency, quantity, quality and location of generated septage to be disposed at the city wastewater treatment works. 
(b) ?During the month of September, the city will evaluate the applications and make a determination as to the amount and conditions of septage disposal at the city wastewater treatment facility. The city shall approve or reject all applications by October 1 of each year. If the city cannot accept all the proposed septage disposal, then consideration shall be given first to those generators of septage that are within the sewer service area. 
(c) ?All city approvals for septage disposal shall have the conditions that any time the wastewater treatment works has operational problems, maintenance problems or threat of WPDES permit violation that are indirectly or directly related to septage disposal, the city may immediately restrict septage disposal until such time as corrective action or mitigative measures have been taken. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-14) 
Sec. 82-245. - Tap permits. 
    After sewer connections have been introduced into any building or upon any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations, extensions or attachments, unless the party ordering such tapping or other work shall exhibit the proper permit for the same from the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-16) 
Sec. 82-246. - Excavations. 
(a) ?In making excavations in streets or highways for laying service pipe or making repairs, the paving and earth removed must be deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public. 
(b) ?No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or highway open at any time without barricades; and during the night, warning lights must be maintained at such excavations. 
(c) ?In refilling the opening, after the service pipes are laid, the earth must be laid in layers of not more than nine inches in depth, and each layer thoroughly compacted to prevent settling. This work, together with the replacing of sidewalks, ballast and paving, must be done so as to make the street as good, at least, as before it was disturbed, and satisfactory to the city. No opening of the street for tapping the pipes will be permitted when the ground is frozen. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-23) 
Sec. 82-247. - Tapping the mains. 
(a) ?No person, except those having special permission from the common council, or persons in their service and approved by them, will be permitted, under any circumstances to tap the mains or collection pipes. The kind and size of the connection, materials and pipe size, shall be that specified in the permit or order from the common council to ensure that new sewers and connections to the sewer system are properly designed and constructed. 
(b) ?Pipes should always be tapped on the side, and not within six inches (15 cm) of the joint, or within 24 inches (60 cm) of another lateral connection. All service connections to mains must comply with the state plumbing code. Service connections to an existing sewer main shall be made by means of a saddled wye or specially adapted tee. Connections to existing tees or wyes shall be made with an approved bonded rubber. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-24) 
Sec. 82-248. - Installation of house laterals. 
(a) ?All service pipes (laterals) on private property will be installed in accordance with Wis. Adm. Code ch. ILHR 82, "Design, Construction, Installation, Supervision and Inspection of Plumbing"; specifically Wis. Adm. Code ILHR § 82.04, "Building Sewers." 
(b) ?Per Wis. Adm. Code ILHR § 82.04(5), all laterals will be inspected. "The building sewer and/or private interceptor main sewer shall be inspected upon completion of placement of the pipe and before backfilling; and tested before or after backfilling." 
(c) ?The cost of installing building service laterals including, but not limited to, the costs for materials, labor, connections and permit fees shall be paid by the person connecting with the sewer. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-25) 
Sec. 82-249. - Maintenance of services. 
    The owner shall maintain sewer service from the street main to the house and including all controls between the same, without expense to the city, except when they are damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of the city. All sewer services must be maintained free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property. When any sewer service is to be relaid and there are two or more buildings on such service, each building shall be disconnected from such service, and a new sewer service shall be installed for each building. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-2) 
Sec. 82-250. - Backflow preventer. 
    All floor drains shall have a backflow prevention valve installed at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-19) 
Sec. 82-251. - Use of sewer system by others. 
    No user shall allow others or other services to connect to the sewer system through his lateral, except as provided in the state plumbing code. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-18) 
Sec. 82-252. - Inspection. 
    Every user shall permit the common council, or their duly authorized agent, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter their premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the drains and sewer connections operate; and they must at all times, frankly provide full disclosure to all questions put to them relative to its use, all in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-21) 
Sec. 82-253. - Repair. 
    All users shall keep their own service pipes in good repair and protected from frost, at their own risk and expense, and prevent any unnecessary overburdening of the sewer system, and shall comply with the provisions of the state plumbing code. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-17) 
Sec. 82-254. - Vacating of premises; discontinuance of service. 
    Whenever premises served by the system are to be vacated, or whenever any person desires to discontinue service from the system, the city must be notified in writing. The owner of the premises shall be liable for any damages to the property which may be discovered having occurred to the property of the system other than through the fault of the system or its employes, representatives or agents. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-20) 
Sec. 82-255. - Extensions. 
(a) ?The city shall extend sewer mains to a new person in accordance with the charges and conditions of this section. 
(b) ?When an extension main is required by the prospective user, such person shall make an application for such an extension in writing to the city by filing a written application for the extension with the administrator. After the filing of such an application, the city shall first determine the logical location of the next manhole. Next, the city shall determine the length and location of the extension, taking into consideration the prospective demands for service, the capacity of downstream facilities, and the orderly development of the particular area. No extension shall be made for a distance less than to the next manhole. All sewer extensions shall be constructed in compliance with local and state laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(c) ?The person who requests the extension shall pay the entire cost of the extension, including the manholes that are part of the extension. If more than one user is involved, the entire cost shall be divided among these users. This is only one method of allocating costs, and these costs can be allocated based on a given community's preference. 
(d) ?After making the decision as to the length and location of the extension and prior to the time of making the charge to the person, the city shall determine the benefits to be received by any parcel that can be served by such extension. Before making a determination as to benefits received, the common council shall first divide the area to be served into logical building lots. The common council may consider the recommendations of the landowner in determining such building lots if the landowner as a part of his application accompanies such application with a proposed division of such land into lots for sale or use. In determining the amount to be paid by the original users if more than one user is involved, the division of the charge shall be made by considering each building lot owned by one of the original applicants as a separate user. 
(e) ?When the city receives a future contribution, it shall after receiving the money, pay the money to the previous contributors by paying to each of the previous contributors equal amounts by counting each previous contributing lot as a separate contributor. The city shall not make payments to a previous contributor if ten years have expired from the date of the original contribution. Such money paid shall be retained by the city. 
(f) ?The right to contribution shall follow the land and not the contributor with the reimbursement to go to the person who is the owner of the receiving lot at the time of the reimbursement. If a contributor owns more than one lot at the time of contribution, he shall be required to designate one of the lots as the lot entitled to contribution and the owner of such a lot at the time of any contribution shall receive the reimbursements for all of the lots owned by the original contributor at the time of the original contribution. Such lot designation shall be filed with the administrator and may be filed in the office of the county register of deeds. The owner of such designated lot may, by filing a corrective designation, change such designation to another lot owned by him as long as such new lot is one of the lots to be served by such extension. The total amount of reimbursement shall be the total payment made by him, less the benefits conferred upon the lots owned by him at the time of his contribution. 
(g) ?In addition to the charge made as provided in this section to each lot, each user shall pay the full cost of the lateral from the main to his building. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-26) 
Sec. 82-256. - Septage acceptance location. 
(a) ?Septage shall only be discharged to the city's sewerage system by city-approved and state licensed disposers and at locations, times and conditions as specified by the common council. 
(b) ?Septage discharges to city specified manholes may, under special circumstances, be allowed provided discharge rates are restricted as necessary to facilitate mixing, prevent a backup in the receiving sewer and prevent a slug load to the wastewater treatment facility. Discharges may be limited to the normal working hours of the utility and require written documentation of the discharge to be submitted to the city within one working day of the discharge to the city sewers or wastewater treatment facility. 
(c) ?Septage discharges to the city septage holding facility at the wastewater treatment facility may be limited to the posted normal working hours of the facility. As with discharges to a manhole, documentation of the discharge shall be submitted to the city within one working day of the discharge to the city septage holding facility. 
(d) ?Blanks for documentation of the discharge will be furnished at the office of administrator and will include the following: 
(1) ?Name, address and telephone number of the hauler. 
(2) ?License number. 
(3) ?Type of septage. 
(4) ?Quantity of septage. 
(5) ?Estimated quality of septage. 
(6) ?Location, date, time and feed rate of discharge to the sewerage system. 
(7) ?Source of septage. 
(8) ?Name and address of septage generator. 
(9) ?Other information. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-27) 
Sec. 82-257. - Submission of basic data. 
    Each establishment desiring to make a new connection to public sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall file with the public works department a report that shall include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be discharged. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-50(b)) 
Secs. 82-258—82-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 

Sec. 82-281. - Accidental discharge. 
    Any person found to be responsible for accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system which causes damage to the treatment facility and/or receiving body of water shall, in addition to a forfeiture, pay the amount to cover damages, both values to be established by the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-82) 
Sec. 82-282. - Prohibitions and limitations on sewer discharge. 
(a) ?No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described liquids or solid wastes to any sanitary sewer or to the wastewater treatment facility: 
(1) ?Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or surface drainage or any other connections from inflow sources to the sanitary sewer. Such waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or other waterway with permission of the city. 
(2) ?Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, lubricating oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas or other substances which by themselves or by interaction with other substances may cause fire or explosion hazards, or in any other way be injurious to persons, property or the operation of the wastewater facilities. 
(3) ?Any waters or waste containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, which will injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant or interfere with the disposal of sludge. 
(4) ?Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel or the wastewater facility. 
(5) ?Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0. 
(6) ?Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, rocks, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair or fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(7) ?Any discharge into the sanitary sewerage system that is in violation of the requirements of the WPDES permit and the modifications thereof. 
(8) ?Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or cause the wastewater at the treatment facility to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(9) ?Any water or wastes which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight of oils, fat or grease. 
(10) ?Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(11) ?Any waters or waste containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, mercury and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment facility exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials. 
(12) ?Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the common council. 
(13) ?Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the common council in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(14) ?Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug load. 
(15) ?Incompatible pollutants containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment facility effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(16) ?Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(17) ?Materials which exert or cause: 
(18) ?Unusually high BOD 5 , chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements, such as, but not limited to, whey in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment facility. It shall be unlawful for any person to introduce sewage into the system which shows an excess of a BOD of suspended solids concentration of over 300 mg/l (normal domestic sewage); a surcharge shall be based on the excess BOD or suspended solids at the rate set by the council from time to time. The city reserves the right to test the sewage at any point within the connection system of the user or consumer. 
(19) ?Unusual flow or concentrated wastes constituting a slug load. 
(20) ?Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate. 
(21) ?Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure the sewer system, or any building, machinery or fixture pertaining thereto, or, to willfully and without authority of the city, bore or otherwise cause to leak, any tunnel, aqueduct, reservoir, pipe or other thing used in the system for holding, conveying or distributing sewage. 
(c) ?Users discharging toxic pollutants or prohibited substances enumerated in subsection (a) of this section shall pay, in addition to the penalties assessed for violation of this article, the full cost of increased operation, maintenance and replacement caused by such discharge. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-30) 
Sec. 82-283. - Septage disposal. 
    No person or licensed disposer shall dispose of septage into any storage area or sewer manhole located within the city without written approval of the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-31) 
Sec. 82-284. - Special agreements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the common council and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater treatment facility, either before or after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater treatment facility by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the city without recompense by the person, provided that all rates and provisions set forth in this article are complied with. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-32) 
Secs. 82-285—82-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Performance standards for industrial developments, § 42-736 et seq. 

Sec. 82-306. - High strength; toxic industrial discharges. 
(a) ?If any waters, septage or wastes are discharged, or proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in division 3 of this article and which in the judgment of the common council, may have deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life, health or constitute a public nuisance, the common council may: 
(1) ?Reject the wastes; 
(2) ?Require pretreatment to an acceptable limit for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3) ?Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4) ?Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 82-284. 
(b) ?The toxic pollutants subject to prohibition or regulation under this article shall include, but need not be limited to, the list of toxic pollutants or combination of pollutants established by section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act of 1977 and subsequent amendments. Effluent standards or prohibitions for discharge to the sanitary sewer shall also conform to the requirements of section 307(a) and associated regulations. 
(c) ?Pretreatment standards for those pollutants which are determined not to be susceptible to treatment by the treatment works or which would interfere with the operation of such works shall conform to the requirements and associated regulations of section 307(b) of the Clean Water Act of 1977 and subsequent amendments. The primary source for such regulations shall be 40 CFR 403, General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-52) 
Sec. 82-307. - Control manholes. 
(a) ?Requirement. All building sewers serving manufacturing or industrial processing plants or service stations (gas and oil) which are connected to a public sewer system shall have installed therein a manhole for periodic sewage sampling purposes. The manhole shall be of approved design and shall be located on public right-of-way where possible. When manholes are installed on private property they shall be readily accessible at all times. 
(b) ?Location. When located on private property, sampling manholes shall be within five feet of the lot line fronting on the public right-of-way, and authorized representatives shall be guaranteed the right of access. 
(c) ?Construction. Sampling manholes shall be a minimum of 36 inches in diameter and constructed in watertight and substantial manner and may be of concrete, precast concrete or cast iron. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-53) 
Sec. 82-308. - Measurement of flow. 
    The volume of flow used for computing the sewer service and the cost recovery charges for nonseptage disposal shall be based upon the water consumption of the person as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the water utility. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-54) 
Sec. 82-309. - Provision for deductions. 
    If a person discharging industrial waste into the public sewers produces evidence satisfactory to the city that more than ten percent of the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the public sewer, then the determination of the water consumption to be used in computing the waste volume discharged into the public sewer may be made a matter of agreement between the city and the industrial waste discharger. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-55) 
Sec. 82-310. - Metering of waste. 
    Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the common council if this volume cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained by the discharger. A maintenance schedule must be accepted by the common council. Following approval and installation such meters may not be removed without the consent of the common council. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-56) 
Sec. 82-311. - Waste sampling. 
(a) ?Industrial wastes and septage discharged into the public sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration of such wastes. The determination shall be made by the industry or the licensed disposer as often as may be deemed necessary by the common council. 
(b) ?Sampling shall be conducted in such a manner as to be representative of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the common council. 
(c) ?Installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities shall be the responsibility of the establishment discharging the waste or septage and shall be subject to the approval of the common council. Access to sampling locations shall be granted to the common council or its duly authorized representative at all times. Every care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to ensure their preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample was taken. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-57) 
Sec. 82-312. - Analyses. 
(a) ?All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association and Wis. Adm. Code NR ch. 219. Sampling methods, location times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the common council. 
(b) ?Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial wastes shall be made by the establishment discharging them, or its agent, as designated and required by the common council. The common council may also make its own analyses on the wastes and these determinations shall be binding as a basis for charges. If the person discharging the waste contests the determination, the common council may elect to have an independent laboratory determine the character and concentration of the waste. Such independent laboratory shall be acceptable to both the common council and the person discharging the waste. All costs incurred by the independent laboratory in making the determination shall be assumed by the discharger. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-58) 
Sec. 82-313. - Pretreatment. 
    Where required, in the opinion of the common council, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures, processes or operation of the wastewater treatment works, the person shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be required to render such wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers. If a person discharging the waste contests the determination, the common council may elect to have an independent laboratory determine the character and concentration of the waste. Such independent laboratory shall be acceptable to both the common council and the person discharging the waste. All costs incurred by the independent laboratory in making the determination shall be assumed by the discharger. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-59) 
Sec. 82-314. - Submission of information for council review. 
    Plans, specifications, any other pertinent information relating to proposed flow equalizations, pretreatment or processing facilities shall be submitted for review of the common council prior to the start of their construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-60) 
Sec. 82-315. - Grease and/or sand interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the industrial discharger and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the discharger shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the common council. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the discharger's personnel, must be performed by currently licensed disposal firms. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-61) 
Secs. 82-316—82-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 82-336. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Debt service charges means all costs associated with repayment of debts incurred for the construction and/or rehabilitation of the wastewater collection system and treatment facility. 
    Normal domestic strength wastewater means wastewater with concentrations of BOD 5 and suspended solids no greater than 200 and 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l), respectively. 
    Normal user means a user whose contributions to the wastewater treatment facility consist only of normal domestic strength waste originating from a house, apartment, flat or other living quarters occupied by a person constituting a distinct household, business or commercial enterprise. 
    Operation and maintenance costs means all costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities. These costs, including costs associated with extraneous (clear water) flows, shall be divided proportionately among the various sewer users according to their equivalent user factors. 
    Replacement costs means all costs associated with establishing a fund to accumulate the necessary resources to replace equipment as required to maintain capacity and performance during the design life of the facility. 
    Sewer service charge means a service charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of capital expenses as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including replacement of such facilities. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-40(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-337. - Policy. 
    It shall be the policy of the city to obtain sufficient revenues to pay the cost of: 
(1) ?The annual debt retirement payment on any bonded indebtedness, 
(2) ?Any required cash reserve account payment, and 
(3) ?Operation and maintenance of the sewage works, including a replacement fund (i.e., a cash account to be used for future expenditures for obtaining or installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the sewage works during the service life for which such works were designed and constructed), through a system of user charges as defined in this division. The system shall ensure that each user of the sewage works pays a proportionate share of the costs of such works. Any excess revenue collected from a user class for operation, maintenance and replacement costs will be applied to that class for the following year. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-40(b)) 
Sec. 82-338. - Connection charge. 
    Persons attaching to a sewer main shall have the lateral from the sewer main installed at his own expense. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-15) 
Sec. 82-339. - Classification of users. 
(a) ?Residential, commercial and industrial. All sewer users shall be classified by the city as: 
(1) ?Residential/commercial (domestic strength); or 
(2) ?Industrial customers. 
(b) ?Basis for service charge. The minimum quarterly billing shall be sufficient to pay the billing and customer related administration expenses. A portion of the debt service may be budgeted by levying an ad valorem tax in accordance with law. The unit price per volume shall be sufficient to pay the remaining annual costs of operation and maintenance, including any replacement fund, of the sewerage facilities. The method for determining the user charges is given in the user charge schedule set by the council from time to time and further mentioned in this division and section 82-340. The common council shall provide the initial estimates of number of users, costs, etc., to calculate the first year's user charges. The rates in this division shall be reviewed not less than biennially. Such review shall be performed by the common council. Rates shall be adjusted, as required, to reflect actual number and size of users and actual costs. Users will be notified annually of the portion of service charges attributable to operation and maintenance. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-41) 
Sec. 82-340. - Reassignment of sewer users. 
    The common council will reassign sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater sampling programs and other related information indicate a change of categories is necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-42(d)) 
Sec. 82-341. - Payment; penalty. 
    The sewerage service charge shall be for the corresponding period of the water bills, and shall be payable to the city not later than 20 days after the end of each period. A penalty of 1½ percent per month shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed for final payment. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-70) 
Sec. 82-342. - Charges a lien. 
    All sewage charges shall be a lien upon the property service pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.076(7), and shall be collected in the manner therein provided. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-71) 
Sec. 82-343. - Additional charges. 
    Additional charges shall be imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises served by public sewer and wastewater facilities located outside the boundaries of the city to equalize local capital costs. Such additional charges shall result in a minimum charge for each user according to the schedule for debt repayment from utility revenues. Such additional charges shall be added to the sewer bill for each billing period. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-73) 
Sec. 82-344. - Sewer service charges; determinations. 
    A sewer service charge is imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises served by the public sewer and wastewater facilities or otherwise discharging sewage, including industrial wastes, into the public sewer and wastewater facilities. Such sewer service charge shall be payable as provided in this division, and, in amounts determinable as follows: 
(1) ?Category A. Category A is defined as normal or domestic strength wastewater having organic concentrations of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 )* no greater than _____ milligrams per liter (mg/l) and suspended solids* no greater than _____ milligrams per liter (mg/l). The sewer service charge for category A wastewater is as follows: 
Customer Sewer Service Charge Per Year With One Customer on Each Meter 
Meter Size 
(inches) Debt 
Portion Operation and 
Maintenance 
Portion Total 
Charge ? 5/8 As established by the council from time to time 1? As established by the council from time to time 1¼ As established by the council from time to time 1½ As established by the council from time to time 2? As established by the council from time to time 2½ As established by the council from time to time 3? As established by the council from time to time 4? As established by the council from time to time  
In addition, a volumetric charge is assessed. The volumetric charge is based on a waste strength of 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l SS. 
*?This base concentration is calculated by subtracting the industrial load (category B) and I/I from the wastewater treatment facility's influent load. 
V.C. = CV × V V.C. = Total volumetric charge V = Total volume of water used during billing period in units of 100 cubic feet CV = Volume unit price = $_____ per 100 cubic feet $_____ is for operation and maintenance $_____ is for debt retirement  
(2) ?Category B. Category B is defined as wastewater having organic concentrations of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ) greater than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/or suspended solids (SS) greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l). The minimum category B charge will be based on a concentration of _____ mg/l BOD 5 and _____ mg/l SS. The equation for the monthly category B is as follows: 
SSC = Total sewer service charge SSC = Category A charge (fixed plus volumetric) plus High Strength Surcharge High Strength Surcharge = 
(CB × BOD 5 ) + (CS = SS) CB = BOD 5 Unit Price = $_____ per 1,000 pounds CS = SS Unit Price = $_____ per 1,000 pounds BOD 5 = (1,000) pounds of BOD 5 discharged during billing period in excess of domestic strength wastewater SS = (1,000) pounds of SS discharged during billing period in excess of domestic strength wastewater  
(3) ?Category C. Category C is defined as septage which has organic concentrations of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/or suspended solids (SS) greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l). The equation for the charge is as follows: 
SC = Service Charge SC = (CB × BOD 5 ) + (CS × SS) CB = BOD 5 Unit Price = $_____ per 1,000 pounds CS = SS Unit Price = $_____ per 1,000 pounds BOD 5 = mg/l × 8.34 × _____ MGD SS = mg/l × 8.34 × _____ MGD  
(Code 1986, § 5-3-42) 
Sec. 82-345. - General sewer service rates; unmetered. 
(a) ?Class. Available for sewage contributors discharging domestic strength (250 mg/l or less) sewage into the sanitary system. 
(b) ?Quarterly service charges. 
Five-eighths- and three-quarters-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
One-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
1¼-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
1½-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
Two-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
2½-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
Three-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
Four-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
Six-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
Eight-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
Ten-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
12-inch water meter, as established by the council from time to time. 
(c) ?Volume charge. 
(1) ?Each 1,000 gallons of sewage discharged to the sanitary sewer, an amount as set by the council from time to time. 
(2) ?Credit for water not discharged to the sanitary sewer. See the sewer utility operating rules and regulations. 
(d) ?Billing. Billing shall be the same as Schedule MG-1 (water rate). 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-76) 
Sec. 82-346. - Commercial and industrial sewer service rates; metered. 
(a) ?Class. Available to commercial and industrial customers discharging waste that is stronger (over 250 mg/l of BOD and suspended solids) than domestic sewage that is discharged to the sanitary sewer system. 
(b) ?Quarterly service charge. The quarterly service charge shall be the same as Schedule SMG-1, General Sewer Service. 
(c) ?Volume charge. The charge shall be as set by the council from time to time per 1,000 gallons discharged, plus as set by the council from time to time per pound of BOD and as set by the council from time to time per pound of suspended solids discharged into the sanitary sewer. At no time shall the volume charge be less than the volume charge at the domestic rate. 
(d) ?Credit for water not discharged into sanitary sewer. If, at the expense of the customer (see rules), the volume of waste not discharged into the sanitary sewage system is determined, the customer will be given credit for the quantities of sewage so diverted from the sanitary sewer. 
(e) ?Billing. The billing shall be the same as Schedule MG-1 (water rate). 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-77) 
Sec. 82-347. - Charge for haulers of septic and holding tank wastes. 
    Haulers of septic and holding tank wastes will be charged for 95 percent of the truck tank capacity times the established rate per 1,000 gallons of waste. 
(Ord. No. 95-12, § 1(5-3-12(b)), 10-9-1995) 
Sec. 82-348. - Additional authority to establish connection and lateral charges. 
    The common council may at any time establish specific connection and lateral charges for any main not covered by any other provisions in this article or when the city has made an extension and the city has failed to provide lateral or connection charges. It is further provided that the common council may amend or alter any connection or lateral charge after its establishment under the terms of this article or previous ordinances or resolutions. 
(Code 1986, § 5-3-28) 
Sec. 82-349. - Regional sanitary sewer availability charge. 
(a) ?Regional sanitary sewer availability charge established. Pursuant to the authority granted under section 82-348, a regional sanitary sewer availability charge ("RSSAC") is hereby established to provide for the recovery of construction, improvement, and/or extension costs and expenses that have been incurred by the city or advanced to the city by contract, for purposes of facilitating extension(s) of the city's sanitary sewer system to provide service to a specific geographic area. 
(b) ?Regional sewer availability charge assessed. Each new sanitary sewer user, or existing user located within the geographic area depicted in exhibit "A", attached to Ordinance No. 2005-01, shall be charged a regional sanitary sewer availability charge ("RSSAC"). For purposes of this section a "new sanitary sewer user" shall mean any person connecting to the city's sanitary sewer system after March 1, 2005, and an "existing user" shall mean any person having an existing connection to the city's sanitary sewer system as of March 1, 2005. The RSSAC charge shall be assessed as follows: For property located within the geographic area depicted in exhibit A, the charge per acre shall be $1,949.12 with four percent interest added per annum. 
(c) ?Payment due. 
(1) ?Payment of the RSSAC. The city clerk, or their designee, shall collect the RSSAC required under this section prior to the time of application for a building permit, or upon approval of this section for existing users, unless prior payment of the initially applicable RSSACs has been made to the city for the applicable property as part of a development agreement with the city. 
(2) ?[Lien.] Each RSSAC assessed by or pursuant to this section is hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot, land or premises served by a connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
(3) ?[Payment.] The RSSAC charges pursuant to this section shall be payable to the city at the city hall building. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 1, 1-24-2005) 
Chapter 86 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Land use regulations, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 58; planning, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; waterways, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Public works director. 
    The public works director shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to council confirmation. The term of office of the public works director shall commence on May 1 following the appointment. The public works director shall take the official oath, which oath shall be filed in the office of the administrator, and shall hold office for one year. The public works director shall hold office pursuant to and fulfill the duties set out in state law. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3-13) 
State Law reference— Weed commissioner generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.97 and 66.98. 
Secs. 86-2—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOXIOUS WEEDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Noxious weeds generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.96; nuisance weeds, Wis. Stats. § 66.955. 

Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Noxious weeds means any weed, grass or similar plant growth which if allowed to pollinate would cause or produce hayfever in human beings or would cause a skin rash through contact with the skin. Noxious weeds shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
Cirsium Arvense (Canada Thistle) 
Ambrosia artemisifolia (Common ragweed) 
Ambrosia trifida (Great ragweed) 
Euphorbia esula (Leafy spurge) 
Convolvulus arvensis (Creeping Jenny) (Field Bind Weed) 
Tragopogon dubius (Goat's Beard) 
Rhus radicans (Poison ivy) 
Cirsium vulgaries (Bull thistle) 
Pastinaca sativa (Wild parsnip) 
Arctium minus (Burdock) 
Xanthium strumarium (Cocklebur) 
Amaranthus retroflexus (Pigweed) 
Chenopodium album (Common lambsquarter) 
Rumex Crispus (Curled dock) 
Cannabis sativa (Hemp) 
Plantago lancellata (English plantain) 
Noxious grasses shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
Agrostia alba (Redtop) 
Dactylis glomerata (Orchard) 
Phleum pratensis (Timothy) 
Poa pratensis (Kentucky blue) 
Sorghum halepense (Johnson) 
Setaria (Foxtail) 
(Code 1986, § 6-1-5) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-32. - Destruction. 
(a) ?The administrator shall annually, on or before May 15, publish, as required by law, a notice that every person is required by law to destroy all noxious weeds on lands in the city which the person owns, occupies or controls. A joint notice with other towns or municipalities may be utilized. 
(b) ?If the owner or occupant shall neglect to destroy any weeds as required by such notice, then the public works director shall give five days' written notice by mail to the owner or occupant of any lands upon which the weeds shall be growing to the effect that the public works director, after the expiration of the five days' period, will proceed to destroy or cause to be destroyed all such weeds growing upon such lands and that the costs thereof will be assessed as a tax upon the lands upon which such weeds are located under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.96. In case the owner or occupant shall further neglect to comply with such five-day notice, then the public works director shall destroy such weeds or cause them to be destroyed in the manner deemed to be the most economical method and the expense thereof, including the cost of billing and other necessary administrative expenses, shall be charged against such lots and be collected as a special tax thereon as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.60(16a). 
(c) ?As provided for in Wis. Stats. § 66.96(2), the city shall require that all noxious weeds shall be destroyed prior to the time in which such plants would mature to the bloom or flower state. The growth of noxious weeds in excess of eight inches in height from the ground surface shall be prohibited within the city corporate limits. 
(Code 1986, § 6-1-5) 
State Law reference— Weed commissioner generally, Wis. Stats. §§ 66.97, 66.98. 
Secs. 86-33—86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES AND SHRUBS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-61. - Intent and purpose of article. 
    It is the policy of the city to regulate and establish policy for the control of planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in or upon all public areas and terrace areas of the city to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public areas; to promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the city; to prohibit the undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance of trees and shrubs located in public areas; and to guard all trees and shrubs both public and private within the city against the spread of disease, insects or pests. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-1(a)) 
Sec. 86-62. - Application of article provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to trees and shrubs growing or hereafter planted in or upon public areas and terrace areas and also to all trees and shrubs growing or to be planted in or upon any private premises which shall threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of the public or of any public areas. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-1(b)) 
Sec. 86-63. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boulevard areas means the land between the normal location of the street curbing and sidewalk. Where there is no sidewalk, the area four feet from the curbline shall be deemed to be a boulevard for the purpose of this article. The term "boulevard" shall also mean terrace. 
    Clear-sight triangle means a triangle formed by the curblines of two intersecting rights-of-way and a third line connecting the points along the right-of-way lines 25 feet from the point of intersection that creates a full-view zone between a height of two-and-one-half feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets, alleys and highways. 
    Major alteration means trimming a tree beyond necessary trimming to comply with this article. 
    Public areas means all public parks and other lands owned, controlled or leased by the city. 
    Public nuisance means any tree or shrub, or part thereof, which by reason of its condition interferes with the use of any public area; infected with a plant disease; infested with injurious insects or pests; injurious to public improvements or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property. 
    Public trees and shrubs means all trees and shrubs located or to be planted in or upon public areas. 
    Shrubs means any woody vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems and bearing foliage from the ground up. 
    Tree means any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk bearing its foliage or crown well above ground level to heights of 16 feet or more. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-2; Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 2-12-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-64. - Authority of city forester to enter private premises. 
(a) ?The public works committee of the common council shall carry out the provisions of this article. The public works committee may designate a person to perform the duties of forester under Wis. Stats. ch. 27, and may authorize such forester to perform the duties and exercise the powers imposed on the committee by this article. 
(b) ?The city forester or his authorized representative may enter upon private premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining any tree or shrub located upon or over such premises and in carrying out any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-3) 
State Law reference— City forester generally, Wis. Stats. § 27.09. 
Sec. 86-65. - Interference with the city forester. 
    No person shall interfere with the city forester or his authorized representative while they are engaged in carrying out any work or activities authorized by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-4) 
Secs. 86-66—86-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE DISEASES 

Sec. 86-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public nuisance means: 
(1) ?Dutch Elm disease. 
(2) ?Elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.). 
(3) ?Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch Elm disease fungus or in a weakened condition which harbors any of the elm bark beetles, Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.). 
(4) ?Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying concentrate. 
(5) ?Any other deleterious or fatal tree disease. 
(6) ?Oak wilt fungus, also known as ceratocystis fagacearum, is a disease of oak trees carried by way of grafted root systems between infected and healthy trees or by insects carrying spores. 
    Public property means owned or controlled by the city including, without limitation because of enumeration, public sites, parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards and the terrace strip between the lot line and the curb or improved portion of any public way. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-5(b); Ord. No. 2000-07, § 2, 2-12-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-87. - Abatement—Generally. 
(a) ?Dutch Elm and other tree diseases a public nuisance. Whereas the common council has determined that there are many trees growing on public and private premises within the city, the loss of which would substantially depreciate the value of public and private property, impair the use and enjoyment of public and private premises and erode the tax base of the city, and that the health and life of such trees is threatened by fatal diseases such as Dutch Elm disease, which is spread by the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.), the council hereby declares its intention to control and prevent the spread of such disease and the insect pests and vectors which carry such diseases and specifically declares Dutch Elm disease and the elm bark beetles which carry such disease to be public nuisances. 
(b) ?Inspection. 
(1) ?The public works committee shall inspect or cause to be inspected at least twice each year all premises and places within the city to determine whether any public nuisance exists thereon. The public works committee or its designee shall also inspect or cause the inspection of any elm tree reported or suspected to be infected with the Dutch Elm disease or any elm bark bearing materials reported or suspected to be infested with elm bark beetles. 
(2) ?Whenever necessary to determine the existence of Dutch Elm disease or elm bark beetles in any tree, the person inspecting such tree shall remove or cut specimens from the tree in such manner as to avoid permanent injury thereto and deliver such specimens to the forester who shall forward them to an appropriate testing laboratory for analysis to determine the presence of such nuisances. 
(3) ?The forester and agents or employes shall have authority to enter upon private premises at reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of this division. 
(c) ?Abatement of nuisances; duty of forester and public works committee. 
(1) ?The forester, with the approval of the public works committee, shall order, direct, supervise and control the abatement of public nuisances by spraying, removal, burning or by other means which is determined to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch Elm disease fungus, other deleterious tree diseases or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such diseases. 
(2) ?Whenever the forester, after inspection or examination, shall determine that a public nuisance exists on public property in the city, he shall immediately abate or cause the abatement of such nuisance in such manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch Elm disease, other deleterious tree diseases, or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such disease fungus. 
(3) ?When the forester shall determine with reasonable certainty that a public nuisance exists upon private premises, he shall immediately serve or cause to be served personally or by registered mail upon the owner of such property, if he can be found, or upon the occupant thereof, a written notice of the existence of such nuisance and of a time and place for a hearing, not less than 14 days after service of such notice, on the abatement action to be taken. Such notice shall describe the nuisance and recommend procedures for its abatement, and shall further state that unless the owner shall abate the nuisance in the manner specified in the notice, or shall appear at the hearing to show that such nuisance does not exist or does not endanger the health of trees in the city, the forester shall cause the abatement thereof at the expense of the property served. If the owner cannot be found, such notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. If after the hearing held pursuant to this subsection, it shall be determined by the public works committee that a public nuisance exists, it shall forthwith order the immediate abatement thereof. Unless the property owner abates the nuisance as directed within five days after such hearing, the forester shall proceed to abate the nuisance and cause the costs thereof to be assessed against the property in accordance with the procedures provided in this division. The forester may extend the time allowed the property owner for abatement work but not to exceed ten additional days. 
(d) ?Spraying. 
(1) ?Whenever the forester shall determine that any tree or part thereof is infected with a deleterious or fatal tree disease or is in a weakened condition or harbors elm bark beetles, he may cause all trees within a 1,000-foot radius thereto be sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying concentrate or other insecticide. 
(2) ?In order to facilitate the work and minimize the inconvenience to the public of any spraying operations conducted under this section, the forester shall cause to be given advance public notice of such operations by newspaper, radio, television, public service announcements or other effective means and shall also cause the posting of appropriate warning notices in the areas and along the streets where trees are to be sprayed at least 24 hours in advance of spraying. When any residue or concentrate from municipal spraying operations can be expected to be deposited on any public street, the forester shall also notify the chief of police, who shall take all necessary steps to make and enforce temporary parking and traffic regulations on such streets as conditions require. Temporary no parking notices shall be posted in each block of any affected street at least 24 hours in advance of spraying operations. 
(3) ?When appropriate warning notices and temporary no parking notices have been given and posted in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the city shall not allow any claim for damages to any vehicle caused by such spraying operations. 
(4) ?When trees on private property are to be sprayed, the forester shall notify the owner of such property and proceed in accordance with the requirements of subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(e) ?Handling and abatement of infected oak wood trees. To prevent the oak wilt fungus from producing spores and to prevent overland spread of this fungus, any diseased material of the red oak group wilting the previous year, shall be declared hazardous and a public nuisance for the following year from April 1 until October 1. If that occurs, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1) ?During this period, if wounding occurs or pruning is necessary in response to an emergency, a tree wound dressing shall be applied immediately to each wound. The cut surface of stumps from living non-infected oaks shall be immediately painted with a tree wound dressing. 
(2) ?Any hazardous oak wood to be used as fuel wood or to be salvaged for other purposes must be debarked or else completely covered by clear, heavy plastic, between April 1 until October 1 of the year following the appearance of oak wilt symptoms. 
(3) ?Stumps of trees of the red oak group removed due to oak wilt shall be completely covered, removed or debarked to the ground line to eliminate all possibilities of spore formation and overland disease spread. 
(4) ?In accordance with section 86-88, oak wilt trees or parts thereof not removed on or before April 1 by the property owner shall be removed by the city within 20 days after notification and the cost thereof assessed against the property. 
(5) ?If the city forester finds that oak wilt threatens to cross property boundaries, the forester may require root graft disruption to prevent the spread of disease in this manner. In accordance with section 86-88, the charge or any portion thereof, for any necessary root graft barriers may be assessed against the property on which the root barriers are placed. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-5(a), (c)—(e); Ord. No. 2000-07, § 4, 2-12-2001) 
Sec. 86-88. - Same—Assessment of costs. 
(a) ?Fifty percent of the costs of abating any public nuisance or spraying trees shall be charged to and assessed against the parcel or lot abutting on the street, alley, terrace, boulevard or parkway upon or in which such tree is located or the parcel or lot upon which such tree stands in accordance with Wis. Stats. §§ 66.60(16a) or 27.09. The cost of abating any such nuisance or part thereof which is located in or upon any park or public grounds shall be borne by the city. 
(b) ?The cost of abating a public nuisance or spraying elm trees or elm wood located on private premises when done at the direction and under the supervision of the forester shall be assessed to the property on which such nuisance, tree or wood is located as follows: 
(1) ?The forester shall keep a strict account of the cost of such work or spraying and the amount chargeable to each lot or parcel and shall report such work, charges, description of lands to which charged and names and addresses of the owners of such lands to the common council on or before October 15 of each year. 
(2) ?Upon receiving the forester's report, the common council shall hold a public hearing on such proposed charges, giving at least 14 days' advance notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing to interested persons by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by mail to the owner of each property proposed to be charged. Each property owner shall be notified of the amount proposed to be assessed against his premises and the work for which such charge is being made. 
(3) ?After such hearing, the council shall affirm, modify and affirm or disapprove such assessments by resolution and shall cause a copy thereof to be published. Upon adoption and publication of such resolution, assessments made thereby shall be deemed final. 
(4) ?The administrator shall mail notice of the amount of such final assessment to each owner of property assessed at the owner's last known address, stating that unless paid within 30 days of the date of the notice, such assessment will be entered on the tax roll as a tax against the property, and all proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such assessment. 
(5) ?The city declares that in making assessments under this section, it is acting under its police power, and no damages shall be awarded to any owner for the destruction of any diseased or infested tree or wood or part thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-6) 
Secs. 86-89—86-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 86-111. - Adoption of state statutes. 
    Wis. Stats. §§ 27.09 and 86.03 are adopted and incorporated in this section by reference. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-14) 
Sec. 86-112. - Prohibited acts. 
(a) ?Damage to public trees. No person shall, without the consent of the owner in the case of a private tree or shrub, or without written permits from the city forester in the case of a terrace area tree, public tree or shrub do or cause to be done by others any of the following acts: 
(1) ?Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire sign, unprotected electrical installation or other device or material to, around or through a tree or shrub. 
(2) ?Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub. 
(3) ?Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or shrub, or place cement or other solid substance around the base of the same. 
(4) ?Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for the protection of a public tree or shrub, or close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to permit access of air, water and fertilizer. 
(5) ?Attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, or fasten any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree; except that the city may tie temporary no parking signs to trees when necessary in conjunction with street improvement work, tree maintenance work or parades. 
(6) ?Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree. 
(b) ?Excavations. All trees on any parkway or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work, shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by those responsible for such work as to prevent any injury to such trees. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or install pavement within a radius of less than one and one-half feet for every inch of trunk diameter at diameter breast height (dbh) or four and one-half feet above ground line from any public tree without a permit from the city forester. 
(c) ?Interference with forester. 
(1) ?No person shall interfere with or prevent any acts of the forester or his agents or employes while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this article. 
(2) ?No person shall refuse to permit the forester or his duly authorized representative to enter upon his premises at reasonable times to exercise the duties imposed by this article. 
(d) ?Refusal to abate nuisance. No person shall permit any public nuisance to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him when ordered by the forester to abate such nuisance. 
(e) ?Trimming, cutting or pruning of oak trees from April 1 to October 1. No person shall, without a written permit from the city forester, do or cause to be done by others any of the following acts: 
(1) ?Cutting, trimming or pruning any oak trees, or allowing the cutting, trimming or pruning of oak trees between April 1 and October 1 of each year without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(2) ?Transporting or allow to be transported any wood or bark known to be infected with oak wilt fungus through the city from April 1 to October 1 of any year. 
(3) ?Except to allow the disposal of the wood by burning, burying, chipping or debarking before April 1 of the year following the death of the trees, wood from trees known to be infected with oak wilt fungus may not be removed off any property in the city. Property owners must provide proof to the city forester of proper disposal of any oak wilt infected wood removed from their property or be subject to penalties. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-12; Ord. No. 2000-07, §§ 5, 6, 2-12-2001) 
Sec. 86-113. - Appeal from determinations or orders. 
    Any person who receives a determination or order under this article from the city forester or public works committee and objects to all or any part thereof shall have the right to appeal such determination or order, subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 68 to the common council within seven days of receipt of the order and the common council shall hear such appeal within 30 days of receipt of written notice of the appeal. After such hearing the common council may reverse, affirm or modify the order or determination appealed from and the grounds for its decision shall be stated in writing. The common council shall by letter notify the party appealing the order or determination of its decision within ten days after the hearing has been concluded and file its written decision with the administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-13) 
Sec. 86-114. - Planting of certain species. 
(a) ?Cottonwood and Box Elder trees. No person shall plant within the city any female tree of the species Populus Deltoides, commonly called the "Cottonwood," or any tree commonly called the seed-bearing Box Elder or Acer Negundo, which may now or hereafter become infested with Box Elder bugs, and such trees are declared a nuisance. If any owner planting any such tree shall fail to remove any such tree within 30 days after receiving written notice from the city forester, the city forester shall cause the removal of such tree and report the full cost thereof to the administrator who shall place such charge upon the next tax roll as a special charge against the premises. 
(b) ?Planting of certain trees. No person shall hereafter plant any Catalpa, Chinese Elm, White Poplar, Lombardy Poplar, or any fruit or nut tree in or upon any public street, parkway, boulevard, terrace or other public place within the city unless they shall first secure written permission from the city forester, who shall not approve any such planting if in his opinion such tree will constitute a nuisance to the public or adjoining property owners or interfere with the safety of the public or the operation of any sewer or water system. The city forester shall cause the removal of any tree planted in violation of this subsection. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-15) 
Sec. 86-115. - Permit. 
(a) ?Required. No person, except upon order of the city forester, shall plant or remove, or do major alterations as determined by the forester on a tree or shrub in the public right-of-way terrace area or any public area or cause such act to be done by others without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the administrator. 
(b) ?Exemptions. No permit shall be required to cultivate, fertilize or water trees or shrubs. No permit is necessary to plant trees inside the property line. 
(c) ?Requirements and conditions. If the city forester determines that the proposed work or planting described in an application for a permit is necessary and in accord with the purposes of this article taking into account the safety, health and welfare of the public, location of utilities, public sidewalks, driveways and streetlights, general character of the area in which the tree or shrub is located or proposed to be located, type of soil, characteristics and physiological need of the genus, species and variety of tree or shrub, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(d) ?Form; expiration; inspection. Every permit shall be issued by the city forester on a standard form and shall include a description of the work to be done and shall specify the genus, species and variety, size, nursery grade and location of trees or shrubs to be planted, if any. Any work under such permit must be performed in strict accordance with the terms thereof and the provisions of this article. Permits issued under this section shall expire six months after the date of issuance. There will be no charge for this permit. 
(e) ?Public utilities. 
(1) ?Whenever a permit is issued under this section to a public utility to remove, trim, prune, cut, disturb, alter or do surgery on any public tree or shrub, the city forester shall limit the work to be done to the actual necessities of the utility and may assign an inspector to supervise the work done under the provisions of the permit. The expense of such inspection or supervision shall be charged to the utility at the usual city rate. 
(2) ?A public utility may secure an annual working agreement with the city forester's office which gives the city forester the authorization to supervise and direct work done associated with trees and shrubs. 
(f) ?Oak tree removal permit. 
(1) ?The city forester or appointed officials are authorized to issue permits for cutting, pruning and trimming of living oaks and transport of oak with infected wood or bark, between the period April 1 to October 1. 
(2) ?If required by the city forester after inspection, the permit application shall be signed by an International Society of Arboriculture certified arborist stating that the oak tree(s) proposed to be trimmed, cut or pruned are not infected with oak wilt fungus or in the proximity of any oak trees which are infected with oak wilt fungus which would promote the spread of the disease. 
(3) ?Permits for trimming or pruning of oaks shall not be given except in emergency situations. 
(4) ?The person doing the cutting, pruning, trimming or transporting shall have a copy of the permit in his/her possession at all times while doing the activity. 
(5) ?The permit shall restrict trimming, cutting or pruning to only within 20 days of issuance of permit. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-7; Ord. No. 2000-07, § 7, 2-12-2001) 
Sec. 86-116. - Planting of trees and shrubs. 
(a) ?Planting. 
(1) ?The size and genus, species and variety of trees and shrubs to be planted in public areas and terraces and the manner of planting shall be submitted to the city forester for approval before commencement of such work. The permit application process is required in section 86-115. 
(2) ?There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet and a recommended distance of 40 to 50 feet between terrace area trees depending upon the size of tree and other factors. Terrace trees shall be planted equal distance between the sidewalk or proposed sidewalk and back of the curb or proposed back of curb. In terrace areas less than three feet wide planting will not be permitted. 
(3) ?Pine or fir trees shall not be planted in a terrace area. 
(4) ?It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain shrubbery, ground cover or other plants within terrace areas whose growth is in excess of eight inches in height above the top of the nearest curb. 
(b) ?Unlawfully planted trees. Trees, plants or shrubs planted within any terrace or planting easement without the authorization and approval of the forester may be removed. The forester shall notify the abutting owner in writing, listing the unlawfully planted trees, plants or shrubs, ordering their removal, and establishing a reasonable time within which such removal shall be accomplished. If removal is not accomplished within the time specified, the city may remove such trees, plants or shrubs and assess the costs thereof to the owner. 
(c) ?Frames. Any person, adjacent to whose land any shade or ornamental tree or shrub is growing in any street, may, for the purpose of protecting such tree or shrub, surround the tree or shrub with a suitable box or frame for protection, but all such work shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the city forester. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-8; Ord. No. 2000-07, § 8, 2-12-2001) 
Sec. 86-117. - Trimming. 
(a) ?Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any boulevard, public areas, or upon any private premises adjacent to any public right-of-way or public areas, shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest branches projecting over the public street or alley provide a clearance of not less than 14 feet. The city forester may waive the provisions of this section for newly planted trees if he determines that they do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any street light or endanger public safety. 
(b) ?The necessity of the pruning may be determined by the city forester. 
(c) ?Clearance from a sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than ten feet. All trees standing upon private property in the city, the branches of which extend over the line of the sidewalk, shall be trimmed so that no branch shall grow or hang over the line of the sidewalk lower than ten feet above the level of the sidewalk. No tree shall be permitted to grow in such a manner as to obstruct the proper diffusion of light from any public lamp. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-9) 
Sec. 86-118. - Trees and shrubbery obstructing view at intersection or view of traffic signs. 
(a) ?Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no person shall maintain, plant or permit to remain on any private or public premises situated at the intersection of two or more streets or alleys in the city, any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth which may obstruct the view of the operator of any motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching such intersection. 
(b) ?It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow, allow to grow, or maintain any trees, bushes, shrubbery or vegetation of any kind which is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign in the city. It shall be the duty of every owner of such tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation to remove such obstruction. 
(c) ?Any shrub, tree or other plant which obstructs the view at an intersection or the view of a traffic sign, shall be deemed to be dangerous to public travel and the forester shall notify the property owner in writing, describing the conditions, stating the steps necessary to correct the conditions, and establishing a reasonable time within which the corrective steps shall be taken. If effective steps are not taken within the time specified, it shall be lawful for the city to abate these conditions to the extent necessary to ensure compliance with the foregoing requirements, and the costs thereof shall be assessed to the owner. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-10) 
Cross reference— Traffic visibility regulations, § 42-710; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 86-119. - Removal of trees and stumps. 
(a) ?Dangerous, obstructive and infected trees. Any tree or part thereof, whether alive or dead, which the city forester shall find to be infected, hazardous or a nuisance so as to endanger the public or other trees, plants or shrubs growing within the city, or to be injurious to sewers, sidewalks or other public improvements whether growing upon public or private premises, shall be removed, trimmed or treated by the owner of the property upon or adjacent to which such tree or part thereof is located. The city forester subject to section 86-114 shall give written notice to the owner to remedy the situation which shall be served personally or posted upon the affected tree. Such notice shall specifically state the period of time within which the action must be taken, which shall be within not less than 24 hours, nor more than 14 days, as determined by the city forester on the basis of the seriousness of the condition of the tree or danger to the public. If the owner shall fail to remove, treat or trim such tree within the time limited, the city forester shall cause the tree to be removed, treated or trimmed and shall report the full cost thereof to the administrator, who shall thereupon enter such cost as a special charge against the property. 
(b) ?Removal procedure. In cutting down trees located in public and terrace areas, the tree must be removed with the root stump grubbed out, or ground out to a depth of at least nine inches below grade, measured in a straight line from the normal grade of the sidewalk. All wood and debris must be removed from the street prior to the end of each working day and all holes shall be filled to normal grade level with topsoil as soon as practicable. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4-11) 
Chapter 90 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Land use regulations, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 58; planning, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1—90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOATING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of boating generally, Wis. Stats. § 30.50 et seq. 

Sec. 90-31. - Intent of article. 
    The intent of this article is to provide safe and healthful conditions for the enjoyment of aquatic recreation consistent with public rights and interests and the capability of the water resources of the Wisconsin River, pursuant to authority granted to the city by Wis. Stats. § 30.77(3)(a). 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-4(a)) 
Sec. 90-32. - Applicability and enforcement of article provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the waters of the Wisconsin River within the jurisdiction of the city. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the officers of the police department, county sheriff's department and other authorized officers. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-4(b)) 
Sec. 90-33. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Slow no wake means the slowest possible speed so as to maintain steerage. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-4(e)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-34. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, forfeit not more than $50.00 for the first offense and shall forfeit not more than $100.00 upon conviction of the same offense a second or subsequent time within one year, plus the costs of prosecution. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-4(g)) 
Sec. 90-35. - State boating and water laws adopted. 
    The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to water traffic, boats, boating and related water activities and safety in the following enumerated sections of the state statutes, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are adopted and by reference made a part of this article: 
Wis. Stats. § 30.50 Definitions Wis. Stats. § 30.51 Certificate of number and registration Wis. Stats. § 30.53 Certificate of origin Wis. Stats. § 30.60 Classification of motorboats Wis. Stats. § 30.61 Lighting equipment Wis. Stats. § 30.62 Other equipment Wis. Stats. § 30.625 Rental of personal watercraft Wis. Stats. § 30.635 Motorboat prohibition Wis. Stats. § 30.64 Patrol boats exempt from certain traffic regulations Wis. Stats. § 30.65 Traffic rules Wis. Stats. § 30.66 Speed restrictions Wis. Stats. § 30.67 Accidents and accident reporting Wis. Stats. § 30.675 Distress signal flag Wis. Stats. § 30.68 Prohibited operation Wis. Stats. § 30.681 Intoxicated boating Wis. Stats. § 30.684 Chemical tests Wis. Stats. § 30.69 Water skiing Wis. Stats. § 30.70 Skindiving Wis. Stats. § 30.71 Boats equipped with toilets  
(Code 1986, § 4-5-4(d)) 
Sec. 90-36. - Addition; traffic rules. 
    In addition to the traffic rules in Wis. Stats. § 30.65, the city adopts the following rules which shall apply to boats using or persons operating boats on waters covered by this article: 
(1) ?No person shall operate any boat contrary to any legally placed regulatory marker, buoy or beacon. 
(2) ?No person shall without authority remove, damage, destroy, moor or attach any watercraft to any buoy, beacon or marker placed in the waters of the Wisconsin River by the authority of the United States, the state, the county or the city, having jurisdiction with regard thereto, or by any private person pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(3) ?No boat shall proceed beyond or downstream or southwesterly of the first series of regulatory markers located above the Mosinee Hydroelectric Plant that are identifying the restricted area and which are maintained by Wausau Paper Specialty Products, LLC (or "Wausau Paper") and no boat shall proceed beyond or upstream or north of the two regulatory marker buoys located below the Mosinee Hydroelectric Plant that are identifying the restricted area and which are maintained by Wausau Paper Specialty Products, LLC except those boats and boaters engaged in enforcement of this article and rescue operation and those boats and boaters which are necessary for the installation, removal and maintenance of said regulatory markers and the maintenance of all wood, metal or concrete structures within the restricted area. 
(4) ?All boats and boating other than that allowed by subsection (3) of this section, are prohibited on the Wisconsin River in the restricted area beyond or downstream of the first regulatory markers located above the Mosinee Hydroelectric Plant that are maintained by the Wausau Paper Specialty Products, LLC. All boats and boating other than that allowed by subsection (3) of this section, are also prohibited on the Wisconsin River in the restricted area beyond or upstream of the two regulatory marker buoys located below the Mosinee Hydroelectric Plant that are maintained by the Wausau Paper Specialty Products, LLC. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5-4(f); Ord. No. 2009-06, §§ 1, 2, 5-20-2009) 
Sec. 90-37. - Restricted areas. 
(a) ?Wausau Paper Specialty Products, LLC operates a hydroelectric plant on, over and across the Wisconsin River within the jurisdiction of the city. As part of a program to protect boaters and boats from the dangers associated with a hydroelectric plant, Wausau Paper Specialty Products, LLC will, during each boating season, install various regulatory markers, buoys, beacons and other such devices in compliance with regulations of the state department of natural resources, the United States Coast Guard, United States Corps of Engineers and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission in substantially the locations set forth and described on Mosinee Paper Corporation Drawing 2628, on file in the administrator's office and made a part hereof by reference. A first series of regulatory markers is attached to a concrete shore anchor located on the east shore of the Wisconsin River approximately 282 feet upstream of a reference point which is a chisel cross on the top of the fifth pier from the west end of the guard lock structure associated with the hydroelectric project. A second series of regulatory markers is downstream or southwest of the first series of regulatory markers, between the guard lock and hydro plant in the flume leading to the hydro plant. This second series of regulatory markers is attached to a concrete shore anchor located on the east shore of the Wisconsin River approximately 524 feet upstream of a reference point which is the northeast corner of the easterly most building at the hydroelectric plant, then approximately 327 feet northwest to a concrete anchor located on the west shore of the Wisconsin River approximately 531 feet upstream of a reference point which is the beveled corner of the concrete wing wall on the west edge of the Wisconsin River. 
(b) ?Wausau Paper Specialty Products, LLC operates a hydroelectric plant on, over and across the Wisconsin River within the jurisdiction of the city. As part of a program to protect boaters and boats from the dangers associated with a hydroelectric plant, Wausau Paper Specialty Products, LLC will, during each boating season, install various regulatory markers, buoys, beacons and other such devices in compliance with regulations of the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, the United States Coast Guard, the United States Corps of Engineers and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission in substantially the locations set forth and described on the map entitled "Safety Signage & Device Improvements, Mosinee Hydroelectric Project Tailrace" dated May 20, 2009, on file in the city clerk's office and made a part hereof by reference. The western regulatory marker buoy will be located within the Wisconsin River approximately 588 feet from the face of the Mosinee Hydroelectric Plant and the eastern regulatory marker buoy will be located within the Wisconsin River approximately 477 feet from the face of the Mosinee Hydroelectric Plant. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 3, 5-20-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-06, § 3, adopted May 20, 2009, repealed former § 90-37 and replaced it with a new § 90-37, as set forth herein. Formerly, § 90-37 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from § 4-5-4(c) of the 1986 Code. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1986 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1986 Code, as updated, which are included herein. Sections of the 1986 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1986 Code 
Section Section? 
this Code 1-1-1, 1-1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-1-3 1-10 1-1-4 1-26 1-1-5 1-11 1-1-6 1-9 1-1-7 1-13 1-1-8 1-25 1-2-1—1-2-7 1-14—1-20 tit. 2, ch. 11, § 1(h) 22-3 2-1-1, 2-1-2 2-1, 2-2 2-1-3 26-2 2-1-4 26-3 
26-5 2-1-5 26-4 26-6 2-2-1 2-36 2-2-2(a), 2-2-2(b) 2-38, 2-39 2-2-3(a)—2-2-3(c) 2-141—2-143 2-2-4 2-40 2-2-5(a), 2-2-5(b) 2-71, 2-72 2-2-5(b)(1) 2-144 2-2-5(c) 2-73 2-2-6(a)—(c) 2-41 2-2-6(d) 2-622 2-2-6(e) 2-41 2-2-7—2-2-9 2-42—2-44 2-2-10—2-2-19 2-96—2-105 2-2-20 2-3 2-2-21, 2-2-22 2-106, 2-107 2-3-1 2-176 2-3-2(b), 2-3-2(c) 2-204, 2-205 2-3-3 2-206 2-3-4(a)—2-3-4(c) 2-231—2-233 2-3-7 2-256 2-3-8 42-1361 2-3-9(a), 2-3-9(b) 2-281, 2-282 2-3-10 70-1 2-3-11 82-3 2-3-12(a), 2-3-12(b) 58-81, 58-82 2-3-13 86-1 2-3-14 2-37 2-3-15—2-3-17 2-45—2-47 2-4-1(a)—2-4-1(d) 2-411—2-414 2-4-2(a)—2-4-2(c) 2-436—2-438 2-4-3(a)—2-4-3(e) 62-31—62-35 2-4-4(a)—2-4-4(d) 58-56—58-59 2-4-4(f) 58-61 2-4-6(a)—2-4-6(c) 2-461—2-463 2-4-7 2-391 2-5-1 2-651 2-5-2 2-209 2-5-3(a), (b) 2-623 2-5-3(c), (d) 2-624 2-5-3(e) 2-625 2-5-4, 2-5-5 2-626, 2-627 2-5-6 2-621 2-5-7 2-628 2-5-8(a)—2-5-8(d) 2-706—2-709 2-5-9, 2-5-10 2-629, 2-630 2-5-11, 2-5-12 2-207, 2-208 2-5-13 2-631 2-6-1—2-6-13 2-671—2-683 2-7-1—2-7-8 2-351—2-358 2-8-1—2-8-3 2-498—2-500 2-8-4, 2-8-5 2-496, 2-497 2-8-6—2-8-13 2-501—2-508 2-9-1—2-9-8 2-311—2-318 3-1-1—3-1-3 46-31—46-33 3-1-5—3-1-8 46-34—46-37 3-2-1 34-41 3-2-2 34-5 3-2-3 34-42 3-2-4 34-3 3-2-5 34-43 3-2-7 34-4 3-2-8 34-6 3-2-9 34-45 3-2-10—3-2-12 34-7—34-9 3-2-13 34-2 3-4-1 34-1 3-5-1(a)—3-5-1(e) 2-586—2-590 3-5-2 2-562 3-5-2(a) 2-561 3-6-2, 3-6-3 14-161, 14-162 3-6-4—3-6-9 14-165—14-170 3-6-9(c)—(e) 14-163 3-6-10, 3-6-11 14-171, 14-172 3-6-12(a)—3-6-12(e) 14-196—14-200 3-6-13 14-201 3-6-14 14-164 4-1-1, 4-1-2 70-36, 70-37 4-2-1 70-71 4-2-2 70-73 4-2-3, 4-2-4 70-107, 70-108 4-2-4(k) 70-106 4-2-5 70-141 4-2-6 70-148 4-2-7(a)—4-2-7(d) 70-181—70-184 4-2-8, 4-2-9 70-2, 70-3 4-2-10 70-72 4-2-11, 4-2-12 70-4, 70-5 4-3-1(a)—4-3-1(c) 70-216—70-218 4-3-2 70-219 4-4-1(a), 4-4-1(b) 86-61, 86-62 4-4-2—4-4-4 86-63—86-65 4-4-5(a) 86-87 4-4-5(b) 86-86 4-4-5(c)—(e) 86-87 4-4-6 86-88 4-4-7—4-4-11 86-115—86-119 4-4-12, 4-4-13 86-112, 86-113 4-4-14 86-111 4-4-15 86-114 4-5-1(a) 58-116, 58-117 4-5-1(b) 58-119 4-5-2 58-120 4-5-3 58-1 4-5-4(a), 4-5-4(b) 90-31, 90-32 4-5-4(c) 90-37 4-5-4(d) 90-35 4-5-4(e) 90-33 4-5-4(f) 90-36 4-5-4(g) 90-34 4-5-5(a), 4-5-5(b) 58-151, 58-152 4-5-6 58-2 5-2-1 82-134 5-2-2 82-131 5-2-2(c), 5-2-2(d) 82-129, 82-130 5-2-3, 5-2-4 82-132, 82-133 5-2-5, 5-2-6 82-135, 82-136 5-2-22 82-39 5-2-23—5-2-25 82-43—82-45 5-2-26 82-2 5-2-27 82-127 5-2-28 82-51 5-2-29 82-76 5-2-30 82-41 5-2-31 82-80 5-2-32 82-77 5-2-33 82-52 5-2-34 82-47 5-2-35, 5-2-36 82-78, 82-79 5-2-37 82-53 5-2-38 82-128 5-2-39 82-42 5-2-40 82-126 5-2-41(a)—5-2-41(d) 82-101—82-104 5-2-42 82-105 5-2-43 82-54 5-2-44 82-48 5-2-45 82-40 5-2-46 82-49 5-2-46(b) 82-211 5-2-47 82-50 5-2-48 82-46 5-2-49(a) 82-38 5-2-49(g), 5-2-49(h) 82-36, 82-37 5-3-1 82-203 5-3-2 82-249 5-3-3, 5-3-4 82-206, 82-207 5-3-5 82-241 5-3-10 82-212 5-3-11 82-242 5-3-12 82-218 5-3-13, 5-3-14 82-243, 82-244 5-3-15 82-338 5-3-16 82-245 5-3-17 82-253 5-3-18 82-251 5-3-19 82-250 5-3-20 82-254 5-3-21 82-252 5-3-22 82-205 5-3-23—5-3-25 82-246—82-248 5-3-26, 5-3-27 82-255, 82-256 5-3-28 82-348 5-3-30—5-3-32 82-282—82-284 5-3-33 82-204 5-3-40(a), 5-3-40(b) 82-336, 82-337 5-3-41 82-339 5-3-42 82-344 5-3-42(d) 82-340 5-3-50(b) 82-257 5-3-52—5-3-61 82-306—82-315 5-3-70, 5-3-71 82-341, 82-342 5-3-72 82-208 5-3-73 82-343 5-3-74, 5-3-75 82-209, 82-210 5-3-76, 5-3-77 82-345, 82-346 5-3-80, 5-3-81 82-213, 82-214 5-3-82 82-281 5-3-83—5-3-85 82-215—82-217 5-3-86 82-202 5-3-90 82-201 6-1-1—6-1-4 38-1—38-4 6-1-5 86-31, 86-32 6-1-9 82-1 6-2-1, 6-2-2 38-5, 38-6 6-3-5(a)—6-3-5(d) 66-66—66-69 6-3-6 66-32 6-3-7(a)—(c) 66-40 6-3-7(d) 66-41 6-3-7(e) 66-31 6-3-7(f) 66-33 6-3-7(g), 6-3-7(h) 66-37, 66-38 6-3-7(i)—6-3-7(k) 66-34—66-36 6-3-7(l) 66-39 6-3-7(m)—(o) 66-40 6-3-8, 6-3-9 66-42, 66-43 7-1-1 10-2 7-1-1(a) 10-76 7-1-2 10-101 7-1-3, 7-1-4 10-77, 10-78 7-1-5 10-102 7-1-6 10-3 7-1-7(a)—7-1-7(c) 10-136—10-138 7-1-8—7-1-11 10-4—10-7 7-1-12 10-51 7-1-13—7-1-17 10-9—10-13 7-1-18(a)—7-1-18(f) 10-14—10-19 7-1-19 10-52 7-1-20 10-8 7-2-1, 7-2-2 6-1, 6-2 7-2-3—7-2-13 6-41—6-51 7-2-14 6-76 7-2-15 6-7 7-2-16, 7-2-17 6-77, 6-78 7-2-18 6-52 7-2-20—7-2-26 6-101—6-107 7-2-30 6-3 7-3-1 6-181 7-3-2(a)—7-3-2(c) 14-371—14-373 7-5-1, 7-5-2 14-231, 14-232 7-5-3(a)—7-5-3(c) 14-256—14-258 7-5-4 14-233 7-6-1 50-31 7-7-1 14-566 7-7-2 14-569 7-7-3 14-567 7-7-4—7-7-6 14-592—14-594 7-7-7, 7-7-8 14-570, 14-571 7-7-9 14-591 7-7-10 14-595 7-7-11 14-568 7-8-1(a) 34-76 7-8-1(b)—7-8-1(e) 34-78—34-81 7-9-1(a)—7-9-1(g) 70-251—70-257 7-10-1(a)—7-10-1(c) 14-401—14-403 7-10-2(a)—7-10-2(c) 14-426—14-428 7-10-3 14-404 7-11-1(a) 14-646 7-11-1(b)(1)— 
7-11-1(b)(3) 14-647—14-649 7-11-1(c) 14-650 7-12-1(b), (c) 78-291 7-12-2—7-12-4 78-311—78-313 7-12-6—7-12-9 78-314—78-317 7-12-10 78-292 7-13-1(a) 14-291 7-13-1(b) 14-293 7-13-1(c)(1)— 
7-13-1(c)(4) 14-316—14-319 7-13-1(d) 14-320 7-13-1(e) 14-294 7-13-1(f) 14-321 7-13-1(g), (h) 14-292 7-14-2—7-14-4 14-681—14-683 7-14-5(a) 14-701 7-14-5(b), 7-14-5(c) 14-703, 14-704 7-14-5(d) 14-702 7-14-5(e) 14-705 7-14-5(f)—7-14-5(h) 14-684—14-686 7-14-6 14-706 8-1-1 78-1 8-1-2 78-41 8-1-3 78-66 8-1-4 78-45 8-1-5 78-44 8-1-6, 8-1-7 78-2, 78-3 8-1-8 78-46 8-1-10 78-69 8-1-11 78-191 8-1-12 78-167 8-1-13 78-216 8-1-13(a)—8-1-13(e) 78-211—78-215 8-1-14 78-236 8-1-15 78-261 8-1-16 78-166 8-1-20(a)—(c) 78-101 8-1-20(d) 78-146 8-1-21 78-147 8-1-22 78-108 8-1-23 78-103 8-1-24, 8-1-25 78-4, 78-5 8-1-26 78-104 8-1-27, 8-1-28 78-131, 78-132 8-1-29 78-109 8-1-30(a) 78-102 8-1-30(b), (c) 78-192 8-1-31 78-106 8-1-32 78-7 8-1-33 78-107 8-1-40 78-9 8-1-41 78-11 8-1-42 78-10 8-1-43 78-6 8-1-45 34-44 8-1-46 78-8 8-1-51 78-42 8-2-1—8-2-6 78-352—78-357 8-3-2 78-492 8-3-3—8-3-7 78-496—78-500 8-3-8 78-495 8-3-8(d) 78-493 8-3-9 78-501 8-3-10 78-494 8-3-11(c) 78-43 8-4-1 78-416 8-4-1(a) 78-419 8-4-1(c), 8-4-1(d) 78-417, 78-418 8-4-2—8-4-7 78-420—78-425 8-4-8(a) 54-238 8-4-8(b) 54-236 8-4-8(c), 8-4-8(d) 54-239, 54-240 8-4-8(e) 54-237 9-1-1 10-1 54-1 9-2-1—9-2-4 54-36—54-39 9-2-5 34-77 9-2-6, 9-2-7 54-40, 54-41 9-2-8 54-193 9-2-9(a) 54-42 9-2-9(b) 54-194 9-2-9(c) 54-3 9-2-10 54-2 9-2-11, 9-2-12 54-4, 54-5 9-3-1 54-76 9-3-2(a)—9-3-2(d) 66-141—66-144 9-3-3, 9-3-4 54-195, 54-196 9-3-5 54-78 9-3-6 54-197 9-3-8, 9-3-9 54-79, 54-80 9-3-10 54-77 9-3-11, 9-3-12 54-81, 54-82 9-4-2(a), 9-4-2(b) 54-116, 54-117 9-5-1, 9-5-2 6-4, 6-5 9-5-3, 9-5-4 6-141, 6-142 9-5-5(a), 9-5-5(b) 6-143, 6-144 9-5-6—9-5-8 6-145—6-147 9-5-9 6-6 9-6-1—9-6-5 54-151—54-155 9-7-1 54-192 9-7-2 54-191 9-7-3—9-7-5 54-198—54-200 9-7-5(c) 78-67 9-7-6 54-201 9-7-6(3)(c) 54-202 9-7-7 54-202 10-1-27(a) 42-216 10-1-28(a) 42-241 10-1-29(a) 42-266 10-1-113 42-958 10-1-142(b)(1) 42-788 10-1-142(c)(1) 42-788  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1986 Code, as updated, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1986 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since 1986, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number ?Date Section ?Section 
this Code 90-3 ?2-12-1990 1 78-261 90-4 ?4-23-1990 42-1366 90-7 ?5-29-1990 1 78-1 90-8 ?5-29-1990 1 46-33 90-9 ?5-29-1990 42-1377 90-12 ?9-10-1990 1 42-958 90-13 ?9-10-1990 1 78-215, 78-216 90-17 12-10-1990 1 66-44 91-1 ?1-28-1991 2(a)—2(c) 82-161—82-163 2(d)—2(g) 82-165—82-168 2(h) 82-164 91-3 ?1-28-1991 10-1-182(e) 42-93 91-4 ?1-28-1991 1 70-182 91-5 ?3-25-1991 1(8-2-7(a))—1(8-2-7(e)) 78-381—78-385 1(8-2-7(f)) 78-351 91-6 ?3-25-1991 42-617 91-7 ?5-29-1991 1 58-118 91-8 ?5-29-1991 1 34-107 91-11 ?7-15-1991 1, 2 42-788 91-12 ?7-18-1991 42-1359 91-14 ?3-25-1991 1 70-220 91-16 ?8-26-1991 1, 2 26-1, 26-2 91-18 10-28-1991 1 78-1 92-1 ?2-24-1992 1 66-44 1(c) 66-107 92-2 ?3-?9-1992 2 42-216 3 42-241 4 42-266 92-6 ?3-23-1992 1 2-71 92-7 ?3-23-1992 1 34-106 92-8 ?5-27-1992 1 10-1 92-9 ?7-13-1992 2 78-42 92-10 ?7-27-1992 10-7-17 42-1053 92-11 ?7-27-1992 1(8-1-44(a)) 78-456 1(8-1-44(b)), 
1(8-1-44(c)) 78-458, 78-459 1(8-1-44(d)) 78-457 92-12 ?7-13-1992 1(8-3-1) 78-491 92-16 11-23-1992 2 78-261 93-4 ?1-25-1993 78-131 93-5 ?3-31-1993 1(a)—1(c) 30-31—30-33 93-7 ?6-28-1993 78-131 93-8 ?8-?9-1993 2 54-157 93-14 12-13-1993 1(7-15-1) 74-31 1(7-15-2) 74-33 1(7-15-4)—1(7-15-11) 74-35—74-42 1(7-15-12) 
2 74-32 
74-34 94-3 ?5-?9-1994 1(7-4-1) 14-766 1(7-4-2) 14-741 1(7-4-3) 14-743 1(7-4-4)—1(7-4-6) 14-767—14-769 1(7-4-7(a)), 1(7-4-7(b)) 14-744, 14-745 1(7-4-8) 14-746 1(7-4-9) 14-770 1(7-4-10) 14-742 94-4 ?4-27-1994 1, 2 74-33, 74-34 94-6 ?9-12-1994 1(e) 78-105 94-7 10-24-1994 1 66-105 1(a) 66-102 1(b) 66-101 1(c), 1(d) 66-103, 66-104 1(f) 66-106 1(g) 66-44 94-8 10-24-1994 1 26-4 94-11 11-14-1994 1(a), 1(b) 18-1, 18-2 94-12 11-14-1994 1 82-2 95-4 ?8-14-1995 1(8-4-1), 1(8-4-2) 78-358, 78-359 95-6 ?8-28-1995 1 22-3 22-37 1(a) 22-1 1(b) 22-36 1(d)—1(f) 22-38—22-40 1(g) 22-2 1(i) 22-4 95-8 ?9-11-1995 1 66-102 95-12 10-?9-1995 1(5-3-12(b)) 82-347 96-1 ?1-22-1996 1 78-502 96-3 ?2-26-1996 1 78-41 96-7 ?9-?9-1996 1 54-76 96-8 ?9-?9-1996 1 54-152 96-9 ?9-?9-1996 1 54-155 96-12 10-28-1996 1 42-1376 96-14 7-7-1 14-566 7-7-2 14-569 7-7-3 14-567 7-7-4—7-7-6 14-592—14-594 7-7-7, 7-7-8 14-570, 14-571 7-7-9 14-591 7-7-10 14-595 7-7-11 14-568 97-1 10-28-1996 1 42-952 97-2 ?3-10-1997 1 2-38 97-3 ?4-28-1997 1 70-141 70-147 1(A)—1(E) 70-142—70-146 1(F) 70-149 2 70-148 97-4 ?4-28-1997 1—3 1-21 97-5 ?7-28-1997 78-131 97-7 ?8-11-1997 1 54-193 78-109 97-8 ?9-?8-1997 tit. 2 2-203 97-10 ?9-?8-1997 10-8-1 42-1378 42-1383 10-8-2—10-8-5 42-1379—42-1382 97-11 12-?8-1997 1 22-3 ?1-20-1998(Ord.) 42-1406—42-1411 98-1 ?4-27-1998 1, 2       Added 78-217, 78-218 98-2 ?5-11-1998 1       Added 78-236(89)—(93) 98-3 ?5-11-1998 1       Added 78-131(13)—(15) 98-4 ?6-?8-1998       Added 58-119(r) 98-5 ?4-27-1998 1, 2 78-217, 78-218 98-6 ?7-13-1998 1       Added 42-472 98-7 ?8-24-1998 1 70-141 98-8 10-26-1998 1—6 Adopting Ord., p. xi 98-9 11-24-1998 1       Added 78-236(b)(88) 99-1 ?4-12-1999 1 2-201, 2-202 99-3 ?9-27-1999 1 78-131(13) 99-4 ?9-27-1999 1 54-151(a) 99-5 10-11-1999 1 58-118 2000-01 ?1-31-2000 1 74-33(a) 2 74-34(b) 2000-02 ?3-28-2000 1 78-132 2000-06 ?7-10-2000 1 42-788(c)(1) 2       Added 42-788(c)(5) 2000-08 11-13-2000 1 54-37(f) 2000-09 11-13-2000 1 10-3(a)(3) 2 10-3(c)(1) 3 10-6 2000-07 ?2-12-2001 1 86-63 2       Added 86-86(6) 3 86-87(b)(2) 4       Added 86-87(e) 5 86-112(b) 6       Added 86-112(e) 7       Added 86-115(f) 8 86-116(a)(2) 2001-01 ?4-?9-2001 1       Added 2-360 2001-02 ?4-?9-2001 1       Added 42-1359(j) 2001-03 ?4-?9-2001 1 42-39 2 42-786(b)(3) 3 42-786(b)(4) 2001-04 ?5-14-2001 1       Added 42-422(9) 2001-05 ?7-?9-2001 1—3 78-101(b)(5)—7) 2001-06 ?7-23-2001 1 26-1 2 26-2 2001-08 10-22-2001 1       Added 2-480—2-483 2001-09 11-12-2001 1, 2 54-1 2002-01 ?2-25-2002 1 82-165 2 82-166(2) 2002-02 ?3-11-2002 1       Added 42-422(10)—(13) 2002-04 ?4-22-2002 1       Added 82-43(b)(4) 2       Added 82-243(d) 2002-05 ?6-10-2002 1       Added 42-469(6) 2002-07 ?6-24-2002 1       Added 42-788(c)(6) 2 42-712(4) 3       Added 42-713(6) 2002-09 ?9-?9-2002 1       Added 42-524 2002-10 ?9-?9-2002 1       Added 78-191(c)(1)h.—l. 2       Added (c)(2)o.—r. 2002-11 11-25-2002 1       Added 58-119(s) 2002-12 12-16-2002 1       Added 42-553(d)(6) 2003-01 ?1-13-2003 1 42-707(2) 2 42-786(f) 2003-02 ?1-27-2003 1       Added 78-101(b)(5)b. 2003-03 ?5-12-2003 1, 2 2-413(a), (c) 2003-04 ?8-25-2003 1, 2 14-681 3 14-682 4, 5 14-683(5), (6) 6       Added 14-683(7)—(10) 7 14-701 8 14-702 9 14-704 10 14-705 11       Rnbd 14-706       as 14-711 12—16       Added 14-706—14-710 17—22       Added 14-712—14-717 2003-05 12-22-2003 1       Added 42-1018(e) 2       Added 42-1043(k) 2004-01 ?3-23-2004 42-1043(k) 2004-04 ?7-12-2004 1       Added 42-145(f) 2005-01 ?1-24-2005 1       Added 82-349 2005-02 ?2-14-2005 1, 2 42-143 2005-03 ?5-?9-2005 1 78-216(9) 2005-04 ?6-27-2005 1 42-143 2005-05 ?7-25-2005 1 42-467(1) 2       Added (5) 3 42-496(7) 2005-06 ?9-26-2005 1—11       Added 78-131(16)—(26) 2005-07 ?9-12-2005 1 42-143 2005-08 ?9-12-2005 1       Added 42-242(9) 2006-02 ?5-?8-2006 1       Rpld 42-523(8) 2       Added 42-524(6) 2006-04 ?6-12-2006 1 42-143 2006-05 ?6-12-2006 1 78-236(b)(56) 2       Added (94)—(102) 2006-06 ?7-10-2006 1       Added 78-133 2006-07 ?9-11-2006 1 26-6(b) 2006-09 11-27-2006 1 10-77 caption 2       Added 10-77(c) 3 10-101 2006-10 12-11-2006 1 42-143 2007-01 ?1-?8-2007 78-101(b) 2007-02 ?1-?8-2007 78-191(b)(3)b. 2007-03 ?5-14-2007 1       Added 26-7 2007-04 ?9-10-2007 1 42-143 2007-05 10-?8-2007 1       Added 58-119(t) 2007-06 10-?8-2007 1 42-143 2008-01 ?3-25-2008 1 78-236(b) 2008-02 ?3-25-2008 1 42-788(c)(5) 2008-03 ?6-?9-2008 1 10-2 2 10-3 3       Added 10-139 2009-01 ?2-23-2009 1 78-132(1) 2 78-146(b) 2009-02 ?3-30-2009 1 78-101(b)(6)a 2009-03 ?3-30-2009 1       Added ch. 68 2       Added ch. 68, art. II 3       Added ch. 68, art. II, div. 1 4—9       Added §§ 68-31—68-36 10       Added ch. 68, art. II, div. 2 11       Added 68-41 12       Added ch. 68, art. II, div. 3 13—18       Added 68-51—68-56 19       Added ch. 68, art. II, div. 4 20—28       Added 68-71—68-79 2009-04 ?3-30-2009 1       Added ch. 68, art. III 2       Added ch. 68, art. III, div. 1 3—6       Added 68-151—68-154 7       Added ch. 68, art. III, div. 2 8—11       Added 68-181—68-184 12       Added ch. 68, art. III, div. 3 13, 14       Added 68-211, 68-212 15       Added ch. 68, art. III, div. 4 16—23       Added 68-311—68-318 24       Added ch. 68, art. III, div. 5 25—27       Added 68-351—68-353 28       Added ch. 68, art. III, div. 6 29—33       Added 68-381—68-385 2009-05 ?3-30-2009 1       Added ch. 68, art. IV 2       Added ch. 68, art. IV, div. 1 3—8       Added 68-50—68-506 9       Added ch. 68, art. IV, div. 2 10, 11       Added 68-701, 68-702 12       Added ch. 68, art. IV, div. 3 13       Added 68-901 14       Added ch. 68, art. IV, div. 4 15—17       Added 68-1011—68-1013 18       Added ch. 68, art. IV, div. 5 19—22       Added 68-1101—68-1104 2009-06 ?5-20-2009 1, 2 90-36(3), (4) 3       Rpld 90-37       Added 90-37 2009-07 ?5-20-2009 1       Added 78-131(27) 2009-08 11-23-2009 1       Added 42-444(6) 2009-09 10-26-2009 1 42-143 2009-10 11-?9-2009 1 42-143 2009-11 12-14-2009 1 74-34(b) 2010-01 ?7-12-2010 1, 2       Added 42-1153(8), (9) 3, 4 42-1154 5 42-1156(a) 6       Rpld 42-1162       Added 42-1162 7—12       Added 42-1163—42-1168 13       Rpld 42-1181       Added 42-1181 14 42-1182(a) 15 42-1183(b) 16       Added 42-1183(c) 17 42-1184(c) 18 42-1184(e) 19       Added 42-1184(g) 20       Added 42-1187(6) 21       Added 42-1190 22       Added 42-1234(b)(5) 23 42-1234(g) 24 42-1234(h) 25, 26       Added 42-1234(j), (k) 27       Rpld 42-1259       Added 42-1259 28       Added 42-1284 29 42-1301(4) 30       Added 42-1301(5) 31       Added 42-1301(6) 32 42-1302(a)(3) 33, 34 42-1302(b), (c) 35       Rpld 42-1303       Added 42-1303 2010-02 10-11-2010 1       Rpld 54-156       Added 54-156 2010-03 12-13-2010 1, 2 42-143 2011-01 ?1-10-2011 1       Added 78-132(4) 2011-02 ?2-14-2011 1       Rpld 42-443(12) 2       Added 42-444(8) 2011-03 ?2-28-2011 1—6       Added 82-151—82-155 2011-04 ?3-14-2011 1 82-166 2011-05 ?6-13-2011 1       Added 78-261(a)(5), (6) 2011-06 ?7-11-2011 1       Added 78-261(a)(7) 2011-07 ?7-11-2011 1       Added 78-191(c)(3) 2011-08 ?9-12-2011 1 26-1 2 26-2 2011-09 ?8-15-2011 1 78-191(b)(3)b. 2012-01 ?1-?9-2012 1 6-7(c), 6-7(f) 2012-02 ?2-13-2012 1 54-193(d)(5) 2012-03 12-10-2012 1       Added 42-715(c) 2       Rpld 78-109(c)       Added 78-109(c) 2012-04 12-10-2012 1       Added 58-119(u) 2013-01 ?6-10-2013 1—7 42-143 2013-02 ?9-?9-2013 1 58-118 2013-03 10-14-2013 1, 2       Added 78-261(b)(3) 2013-04 12-?9-2013 1       Rpld 22-3       Added 22-3 2014-01 ?8-11-2014 1       Added 42-267(18) 2 42-268(b) 3 42-269(b) 4 42-270(b) 2015-01 ?3-?9-2015 1       Rpld 14-681—14-717 2015-02 ?5-11-2015 1       Added 78-236(b)(105) 2015-03 10-12-2015 1 54-36(f) 2 54-38 2015-04 10-12-2015 1       Rpld 58-119(c)       Added 58-119(c) 2015-05 11-?9-2015 1       Rpld 10-3(e)       Added 10-3(e) 2015-06 12-14-2015 1       Added 42-812(e) 2       Rpld 42-814       Added 42-814 3       Added 42-819(7) 2016-01 ?3-14-2016 1       Added 2-490—2-493 2016-03 ?4-11-2016 1 68-181 2 68-184 3 68-211 4 68-212 5       Added 68-213 6       Added 68-313(a)(5) 7 68-351 2016-04 ?5-?9-2016 1       Rpld 78-236(b)(50)       Added 78-236(b)(50) 2       Rpld 78-236(b)(106)       Added 78-236(b)(106) 2016-05 ?6-13-2016 1       Added 78-12 2016-06 ?6-13-2016 1 68-505(a)(1)a. 2 68-506 3       Rpld 68-701(4) 4       Rpld 68-702       Added 68-702 5 68-901(d)(3) 2016-07 ?7-11-2016 1       Added 78-131(28) 2016-08 ?7-11-2016 1       Added 78-131(29) 2016-09 10-10-2016 1 74-31 2       Rpld 74-32       Added 74-32 3       Rpld 74-33(a)       Added 74-33(a) 4       Rpld 74-34(b)       Added 74-34(b) 2017-02 ?4-10-2017 1       Added 42-1384 2017-03 ?4-10-2017 1       Rpld 78-191(c)(3) 2017-04 ?6-12-2017 1       Added 78-261(a)(8)—(10) 2017-05 ?8-14-2017 1       Added 78-261(a)(11) 2017-06 ?9-11-2017 1       Rpld 54-194       Added 54-194 2       Rpld 78-9 2017-07 11-13-2017 1       Rpld 78-236(b)(104) 2       Added 78-261(a)(12) 2017-08 12-11-2017 1       Rpld 42-1379       Added 42-1379 2018-01 ?2-12-2018 1       Added 42-444(9) 2018-02 ?4-?9-2018 1 42-1379(4) 2018-03 ?6-?6-2018 1 78-131(2) 2018-04 ?8-13-2018 1 42-143 2018-05 ?8-13-2018 1 42-1156(a) 2018-06 ?1-?9-2019 1       Added 78-236(b)(107)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Wisconsin Statutes. 
Wis. Stats. 
Section Section? 
this Code chs. 5—12 26-3 26-5 5.02(22) 22-36 5.58(1c) 22-37 5.60(1)(b) 22-37 5.60(2) 22-37 ch. 6 26-6 7.01 et seq. 26-3 7.10(1)(a) 22-37 7.23 2-357 7.30 26-3 26-5 7.60(4)(a) 22-37 8.10 22-36 8.10(6)(a) 22-37 8.11(1)(a) 22-36 9.28(13) 14-78 9.28(18) 14-78 13.48(13) 42-1090 42-1167 15.01(7) 14-743 16.61(3)(e) 2-357 16.61(7)(a), (b) 2-358 17.12(1)(a) 2-45 17.12(1)(c) 2-45 17.16 2-45 19.01 2-256 78-42 19.01(4)(c) 22-38, 22-39 19.21 2-46 19.21(4)(a) 2-357 19.31(1)(a) 2-356 19.32 2-351 19.33 2-359 19.34 2-354 19.35(1) 2-354 2-356 19.35(1)(a) 2-359 19.35(1)(am) 2-356 19.36 2-356 19.36(5) 2-356 19.37 2-355 19.37(1) 2-355 19.42 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 19.42(7w) 2-4 19.81—19.89 2-391 19.85(1)(a) 2-356 19.85(1)(b), (c) 2-356 19.85(1)(d)—19.85(1)(h) 2-356 23.10 10-2 23.33 78-1 ch. 27 86-64 chs. 27, 28 6-141 27.08 Ch. 58, Art. II 27.09 86-64 86-88 86-111 29.288 54-1 ch. 30 42-1095 42-1234 68-701 chs. 30, 31 42-1095 42-1165 30.01(1R) 42-1121 30.11 42-1154 30.12(4)(a) 42-1090 30.121 42-1097 30.20 42-1095 30.50 90-35 30.50 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. II 30.51 90-35 30.53 90-35 30.60—30.62 90-35 30.625 90-35 30.635 90-35 30.64 90-35 30.65 90-35, 90-36 30.66, 30.67 90-35 30.675 90-35 30.68 90-35 30.681 90-35 30.684 90-35 30.69—30.71 90-35 30.77(3)(a) 90-31 ch. 32 2-41 43.30 2-356 46.03(22) 42-39 46.215 6-142 6-145 46.22 6-142 6-145 ch. 48 54-151 48.02(6) 42-39 48.17(2) 54-155 14-31 48.344 6-1 6-142 6-145, 6-146 48.344(3) 6-142 6-145 48.60 42-39 48.62 42-39 48.65 Ch. 14, Art. VII, Div. 1 50.01 42-39 50.01 et seq. 14-31 58.07 10-2 59.69(15) 42-39 59.692(1v) 68-701 59.693 68-184 59.79(12) 10-77(c) 59.97 Ch. 42, Art. V, Div. 2 59.97(10) 42-1301 59.971 Ch. 42, Art. V, Div. 2 60.627 68-184 61.35 2-41 42-1151 61.351 42-1097 61.354 68-184 61.51 Ch. 2, Art. X, Div. 4 ch. 62 2-1 2-176 chs. 62, 66 2-1 62.09(1)(c) 2-256 62.09(2) 2-37 62.09(3)(b) 2-256 62.09(4)(a), (b) 2-47 62.09(6) 2-44 62.09(7) 2-41 62.09(7)(a)—(d) 2-176 62.09(7)(e) Ch. 2, Art. IV 62.09(8) Ch. 2, Art. III 2-143 62.09(8)(e) 2-40 62.09(12) Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3 62.11 Ch. 2, Art. II 2-41 2-97 2-103 62.11(1), (3)(b) 2-99 62.11(2), (3) Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 3 62.11(3)(c) 2-98 62.11(4) 2-3 62.12 Ch. 2, Art. X 62.12(1) 2-621 62.12(7) 2-628 62.13 2-480—2-483 Ch. 34, Art. II Ch. 46, Art. II 62.14(7) 2-282 62.115 Ch. 2, Art. IV 62.16 Ch. 70, Art. II 62.23 2-41 42-1086 42-1091 42-1151 42-1154 42-1188 68-151 68-501 Ch. 62 62.23(1) 42-1121 62.23(7) Ch. 42, Art. V, Div. 2 42-31 42-1184 62.23(7)(d)2 42-1130 62.23(7)(e) Ch. 2, Art. VII, Div. 3 42-1129 42-1184 68-383 68-2030 62.23(7)(h) 42-1097 42-1301 62.23(7)(i) 42-39 62.23(7a) 42-39 62.231 42-1086 42-1097 42-1121 62.231(5) 42-1097 62.231(6) 42-1130 62.234 68-152 68-184 68-502 68-506 62.25 2-500 62.32 42-1018 63.23(7)(e)3 42-1129 ch. 66 68-383 66.0119(1)-(3) 68-382 ch. 66, subch. VII 68-901 68-1012 66.035 1-1 1-24 66.04(2) 2-629 66.045 70-142 70-144 66.05(5) 42-1365 66.058 42-902 Ch. 50, Art. II 66.058(3) 50-31 66.058(3)(c) 50-31 66.0585 Ch. 50, Art. II 66.06 et seq. Ch. 82 66.0615 74-33, 74-34 66.0615(1) 74-31 66.0615(1m)(dm) 74-34 66.0615(2)(e) 74-32 66.068(7) 82-3 66.069 82-104 82-203 66.076(7) 82-342 66.083 Ch. 14, Art. XII 66.113 2-207 66.114 78-43 66.117 1-21 66.119(3) 1-19 66.12 78-43 66.12(1)(b) 78-42, 78-43 66.122 14-685 82-153 66.28 2-562 66.30 2-42 66.40 2-463 66.60 Ch. 2, Art. X, Div. 3 70-73 66.60(1)(a), (b) 2-671 66.60(3) 2-672 66.60(12) 2-676 66.60(12)(f) 2-680 66.60(15) 2-681 66.60(16) 42-1383 66-103 Ch. 70, Art. VI 66.60(16a) 86-32 86-88 66.615 Ch. 70, Art. III 70-73 66.615(3)(c) 70-73 66.615(3)(f), (5) Ch. 70, Art. VI 66.616 Ch. 70, Art. III 66.75 Ch. 74, Art. II 74-31 74-33 66.75(2)(e) 74-32 66.955 Ch. 86, Art. II 66.96 Ch. 86, Art. II 86-32 66.96(2) 86-32 66.97 86-1 86-32 66.98 86-1 86-32 ch. 68 14-130 82-154 82-155 86-113 68.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII 68.02 2-499 68.07—68.16 14-769 68.08 14-130 68.10 14-130 68.11 14-55 14-77 14-102 14-130 68.12 14-55 68.13 14-130 70.46, 70.47 2-412 70.47 2-414 70.49 2-256 70.65 Ch. 2, Art. X, Div. 2 70.65(2) 2-651 70.67(1), 70.67(2) 2-209 74.03 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. X, Div. 2 77.51 et seq. 54-116 77.51(4)(a)—(c) 74-31 77.51(15b) 74-31 77.52(2)(a)1 74-33 77.54(9a) 74-33 80.08 42-1018 84.30 42-958 85.13 78-42 86.03 86-111 86.26 42-1041 87.30 42-31 42-1086 42-1091 42-1151 42-1189 87.30(2) 42-1131 95.21 Ch. 10, Art. II, Div. 3 95.21(1), (2) 10-101 95.21(3)—(6) 10-102 98.26 82-105 100.30(2)(e) 10-10 101.123 38-41 101.13 42-712 101.14(2) 34-42 101.91(2) 54-36 103.70 54-156 103.72 54-156 106.04 Ch. 42, Art. VII 110.075 78-41 110.075(5) 78-41 111.321 14-78 14-103 111.322 14-78 14-103 111.335 14-78 14-103 14-512 14-532 114.002(7) 42-39 ch. 115 14-131 118.105 78-102 118.15 54-156 118.16(1)(c) 54-156 118.153(1)(b) 54-156 118.163(b) 54-156 ch. 125 2-500 6-1, 6-2 6-78 54-155 chs. 125, 139 6-52 125.01 et seq. Ch. 6 125.02(1) 6-6 125.02(6) 78-456 125.02(8) 78-456 125.04(6) 6-45 125.04(12) 6-49 125.07(1)(a)3, 4 6-147 125.07(1)(b)3 6-5 125.07(1)—(5) 6-3 125.08 6-145 125.09(2) 6-3 125.12 6-45 6-52 125.17 Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 3 125.17(5) 6-104 125.26 6-41 125.26(6) 6-42 6-141 125.27, 125.28 6-41 125.32(4)(b)1 6-141 125.51(3)(am) 6-7 125.51(5)(b)1.d 6-141 125.51—125.65 6-41 125.57 6-181 130.01(1d) 42-1121 134.65 Ch. 14, Art. VI 134.66 54-1 134.90(1)(c) 2-356 144.01 et seq. Ch. 82 144.06 82-242 144.26 42-1086 42-1130 144.26(2)(d) 42-1121 144.43 et seq. Ch. 66 144.794 Ch. 66, Art. III 146.14 38-2 146.20(3)(a) 82-201 146.70 30-31 147.01 et seq. Ch. 82, Art. IV 157.70 2-356 157.70(1)(b) 2-356 159.07 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. III 159.81 Ch. 66, Art. IV 161.14 10-16 165.60 38-42 165.83(1)(b) 2-359 165.87 22-4 78-43 167.10 Ch. 34, Art. III 54-1 167.10(1) 34-76 172.01 et seq. Ch. 10 174.001 et seq. Ch. 10 174.02 10-3 174.046 Ch. 10, Art. III 174.05 Ch. 10, Art. II, Div. 2 10-77 174.05 et seq. 10-77 174.05(5) 10-78 174.053 10-77 174.07 1-21 175.25 54-1 182.0175 70-147 ch. 185 70-145 196.01 et seq. Ch. 82 219.05 2-629 227.01 68-183 227.01(1) 68-505 ch. 236 42-39 42-1018, 42-1019 42-1041 42-1182 Ch. 62 62-35 236.01 42-1016 236.02(12) 42-1018 42-1154 236.10 42-1018 236.12(2) 42-1019 236.30—236.32 42-1052 236.34 42-1017—42-1019 236.45 42-1016 236.45(2), (3) 68-505 254.76 54-1 254.92 54-1 281.01(10) 68-184 68-506 281.01(18) 68-184 68-506 281.01(20) 68-184 281.16 68-152 68-504 68-506 281.16(1) 68-184 68-502 281.33 68-152 281.33(2) 68-183 68-505 ch. 283 68-32 283.01(13) 68-184 68-506 283.33 68-502 285.19(1)(a)—(d)       14-716 285.19(3) 14-717 301.01(6) 38-44 301.046(1) 38-44 302.46 22-4 ch. 340 42-39 chs. 340—348 78-1 340.01 78-109 340.01(3)(a) 78-3 340.01(29), (30) 78-456 340.01(35) 54-236 340.01(40) 54-156 ch. 341 78-458 chs. 341—348 78-43 341.265, 341.266 54-239 342.40 Ch. 78, Art. VII 342.40(e) 78-423 ch. 343 6-145 343.30(6)(b)2, 343.30(6)(b)3 6-142 343.30(6)(bm) 6-145 343.50 6-145 345.11 78-42 345.26 78-42 345.26(1)(a) 78-42 345.26(3)(b) 78-42 345.26—345.28 78-42 345.261(1)(b) 78-42 345.27 78-42 345.27(2) 78-42 345.28 78-42 345.28(4)(c)(3) 78-42 345.28(4)(d) 78-42 ch. 346 78-101 78-357 346.03 78-3 346.03(3) 78-3 346.04 78-492 346.06 78-492 346.11 78-492 346.14(1) 78-492 346.18 78-492 346.18(6) 78-69 346.19—346.21 78-492 346.26, 346.27 78-492 346.33 78-492 346.35 78-492 346.37 78-492 346.39, 346.40 78-492 346.41 78-66 346.44 78-492 346.46 78-69 346.46—346.48 78-492 346.48(2)(b)2 78-2 346.485(5)(b) 78-45 346.50(1)(b) 78-492 346.503 42-712 346.503 et seq. 78-103 346.505 78-43 346.51 78-492 346.51(1) 78-43 346.52 78-108 346.52—346.55 78-492 346.52(1), 346.52(2) 78-43 346.53, 346.54 78-43 346.55(1)— 
346.55(3) 78-43 346.56 42-712 346.57—346.59 78-191 346.655 78-43 346.70 78-44 346.70(4)(f) 78-44 346.71—346.73 78-42 346.73 78-44 346.77 et seq. Ch. 78, Art. VI 346.87—346.91 78-492 346.92(1) 78-492 346.94(1), (6), (6m), (9) 78-492 346.94(14) 78-3 346.95(3) 78-3 ch. 347 78-41 347.04 78-41 347.25(1), (1m)(a), (b), (4) 78-3 347.489 78-353 349.07 78-167 349.07(7)(a) 78-261 349.09 78-66 349.11(3)(c) 78-191 349.13 78-101 349.17 Ch. 78, Art. IV, Div. 3 350.01 78-456 78-491 350.02 78-491 
78-501 350.03 78-491 350.04 78-491 
78-501 350.045 78-491 
78-501 350.047 78-491 350.05 78-491 
78-500 350.055 78-491 350.07—350.10 78-491 350.10(6), (11)—(13) 78-499 350.101 78-499 350.11(1)(a) 78-502 350.12 78-491 350.125 78-491 350.13 78-491 350.15 78-491 
78-495 350.17 78-491 350.18 78-491 
78-502 350.19 78-491 350.99 78-491 350.101, 350.102 78-491 350.1025 78-491 350.103, 350.104 78-491 350.106, 350.107 78-491 350.11 78-491 350.135 78-491 350.137—350.139 78-491 423.203 14-745 423.203(1)(a)—(c), (2), (3) 14-745 440.41 14-743 ch. 442 2-357 ch. 703 42-676 ch. 755 22-1 755.01 et seq. Ch. 22 755.03 22-39 755.03(2) 22-38 755.045 22-40 755.05 22-40 757.02(1) 22-38 778.25 6-1 785.01(1) 22-4 785.03 22-4 ch. 800 42-1383 800.01 et seq. Ch. 22 800.09 22-3 800.095(4) 14-32 800.12(1), 800.12(2) 22-4 14-464 801.07(4) 82-1 814.63(1)—(3) 78-43 814.65(1) 22-3 814.65(1), (3)—(5) 78-43 ch. 823 54-201 823.01 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. VI 887.01 6-44 895.035 54-76 895.20 1-2 895.35 Ch. 2, Art. IV 895.42 Ch. 2, Art. IV 905.03 2-356 ch. 938 54-1 54-155 938.17 54-151 938.34(5g) 54-156 938.34(7d) 54-156 939.05 54-1 939.22 54-1 940.19(1) 54-1 940.291 54-1 941.01 78-1 941.03 78-1 941.10 54-1 941.12(2), (3) 54-1 941.13 54-1 941.20(1) 54-1 941.23 54-1 941.235 54-1 941.237 54-1 941.24 54-1 941.2965 54-1 941.297 54-1 941.35, 941.36 54-1 943.01(1) 54-1 943.017(1) 54-1 943.06 54-1 943.11 54-1 943.125 54-1 943.13—943.15 54-1 943.20 54-1 
82-105 943.21 54-1 943.215 54-1 943.22 54-1 943.225 54-1 943.23(4m) 54-1 943.24 54-1 943.34 54-1 943.37 54-1 943.38(3) 54-1 943.41(2), (3)(a)—(d), (4)(b) 54-1 943.45 54-1 943.455(2)(a)—(f) 54-1 943.46(2)(a)—(f) 54-1 943.47(2) 54-1 943.50 54-1 54-78 943.55 54-1 943.61 54-1 54-79 944.01 et seq. 14-512 14-532 944.17 54-1 944.20 54-1 944.21 14-76 944.23 54-1 944.30, 944.31 54-1 944.33(1) 54-1 944.36 54-1 945.01, 945.02 54-1 945.04 54-1 946.13 2-316 946.40 54-1 946.41(1) 54-1 946.42(2) 54-1 946.425(1m)(a) 54-1 946.46 54-1 946.49(1)(a) 54-1 946.67 54-1 946.69 54-1 946.70(1) 54-1 946.72(2) 54-1 947.01 54-1 947.012, 947.013 54-1 947.02 54-1 947.045 78-1 947.06 54-1 ch. 948 54-1 948.01 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. V 948.63 54-1 951.01 10-1 951.015 10-1 951.02 10-1 
10-14 951.03 10-1 10-52 951.04 10-1 10-15 951.05 10-1 951.06 10-1 
10-16 951.07 10-1 10-17 951.08 10-1 10-18 951.09 10-1 10-19 951.095 10-1 951.10 10-1 10-10 951.11 10-1 951.13 10-1 10-11 951.14 10-1 10-12 951.15 10-1 951.15—951.17 10-13 ch. 961 54-2 54-152 961.571 78-456 967.02(5) 10-2 973.055(1) 22-4 ch. 985 42-93 42-816 42-1129 42-1154 42-1184 78-3 985.06 2-2 990.001 1-2  
