CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF MUKWONAGO, WISCONSIN 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the Town Board 
____________ 
  
TOWN OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Peter Topczewski 
Chairman 
____________ 
Lyle Boucher 
Peter Bratz 
Richard Wrasman 
Gail Yerke 
Town Board 
____________ 
Kathy Karalewitz 
Town Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer 
____________ 
John Macy 
Town Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2006 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Town Board. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative table appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2006 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Kathy Karalewitz, Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Town's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin. 
©  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin. 2017.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Municipal Code of the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Authority to codify ordinances, Wis. Stats. § 66.0103.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Code. Further, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" is used without further qualification, it means the "Municipal Code of the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done or proceeding had or taken shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; and when any such time is expressed in hours the whole of Sunday and of any town recognized holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. If the last day within which an act is to be done or proceeding had or taken falls on Sunday or legal holiday the act maybe done or the proceeding had or taken on the next secular day. When the last day within which a proceeding is to be had or taken or an act done, which consists of any payment to or the service upon or filing with any officer, agent, agency, department or division of the state or of the county, or a city, village, town, school district or other division of the state, of any money, return, statement, report, notice or other document, falls on a Saturday and the duly established official office hours of such officer, agent, agency, department or division to which such payment is to be made or upon which such service is to be made or with which such return, statement, report notice or other document is required to be filed, do not include any office hours thereof on such Saturday, such proceeding may be had or taken or such act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or legal holiday. Regardless of whether the time limited in any ordinance for the taking of any proceeding or the doing of any act is measured from an event or from the date or day on which such event occurs, the day on which such event took place shall be excluded in the computation of such time. The expression "legal holiday" as used in this section means any statewide legal holiday provided in Wis. Stats. § 895.20. When an act is permitted to be done by the use of the postal service, and the last day within the time prescribed by law for performing such act falls on a legal public holiday under federal law, or other holiday designated by the president such that the postal service does not receive registered mail or make regular deliveries on that day, the day shall be considered a legal holiday for purposes of this definition. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(4). 
County. The term "county" means Waukesha County, Wisconsin. 
Gender: singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance importing the masculine gender may extend and be applied to the females as well as males, and every word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; provided these rules of construction shall not be applied to any provisions which shall contain any express language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context of such provisions may be repugnant thereto. 
Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Oath. The term "oath' shall include an affirmation in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. If any oath or affirmation is required to be taken, such oath or affirmation shall be taken before and administered by some officer authorized by law to administer oaths, at the place where the oath is required to be taken or administered, unless otherwise expressly directed, and, when necessary, duly certified by such officer. If an oath is administered, it shall end with the words "so help me God." In actions and proceedings in the courts, a person may take an oath or affirmation in communication with the administering officer by telephone or audiovisual means. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(24). 
Officers and employees. Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title, such as "town clerk" or "clerk" such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin." 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land shall mean the owner, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and applies to natural persons, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic and all entities of any kind capable of being sued unless plainly inapplicable. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, means land and structures. 
Property. The term "property" means real property, personal property and mixed property. 
Real property, real estate, land, lands. The terms "real property," "real estate," "land" and "lands" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Signature. If the signature of any person is required by law it shall always be the handwriting of such person or, if the person is unable to write, the person's mark or the person's name written by some other person at the person's request and in the person's presence. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Wis. Stats. § 990.01(38). 
State. The term "state" means the State of Wisconsin. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to a building or land, include: 
(1)  Any person holding either alone or with others a written or oral lease of such building or land. 
(2)  Any person who either alone or with others occupies such building or land. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Town. The term "town" means the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin. 
Town board, board. The terms "town board" or "board" means the board of supervisors of the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin. 
Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
Wis. Stats. or statutes. The term "Wis. Stats." or "statutes," wherever used in this Code, means the Wisconsin Statutes and shall include all amendments thereto. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes, references, editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parenthesis after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(d)  Editor's notes and other references appearing after sections thorough this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code.  
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the town relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(7)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(8)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(9)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(10)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(11)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(12)  Annexing property into the town. 
(13)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the town. 
(14)  Regarding subdivisions. 
(15)  Holding tank agreements. 
(16)  Concerning building forms. 
(17)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(18)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(19)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any action or forfeiture incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal.  
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any town ordinance on the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code or any provision adopted herein by reference, shall, upon conviction be subject to: 
(1)  General penalty. 
a.  Any person over the age of 17 years violating the provisions of this Code shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator over the age of 17 years to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
b.  Any person between the ages of 12 and 17 years shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense, or referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 48.17(2). 
c.  Any person under the age of 12 years shall be referred to the proper authorities, as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(2)  Nonexclusivity. 
a.  Other ordinances. Adoption of this section does not preclude the town board from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matter. 
b.  Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the town board or any authorized office from proceedings under any other ordinance of law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order. 
(3)  State traffic laws. 
a.  State traffic laws and all other violations as set forth in chapter 70. Any forfeiture for violation of the state statutes adopted by reference in chapter 70 shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be impose for violation of such statutes as set forth in the Uniform Deposit and Misdemeanor Bail Schedule of the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses, which schedule is adopted by reference. 
b.  Local ordinance violations as set forth in chapter 70. 
1.  First violation. Any person over the age of 17 years violating the provisions of chapter 70 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator over the age of 17 years to be sentenced to the county jail until such forfeiture is paid but not to exceed 90 days. 
2.  Second and subsequent violations. Any person found guilty of violating any section of chapter 70 who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same section within one year shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not to exceed six months. 
(4)  Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(5)  Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any ordinance, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
(6)  Enforcement procedure. The statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0109, 66.0113, 66.0114, 345.20—345.53, and ch. 199, are adopted and by reference made a part of this Code as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any current or future statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Code. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this Code in order to secure uniform statewide regulation and enforcement of traffic and municipal ordinance violations. Further the town specifically elects to use the citation method of enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 85-7, § 1(25.04), 8-12-1985; Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.10), 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 9-12-1994)  
Sec. 1-9. - Deposit schedule. 
(a)  Generally. All deposits for municipal ordinance violations authorized under this Code shall be set and adopted by separate resolution of the town board from time to time without the necessity of a formal hearing. If a deposit schedule has not been established for a specific violation, the arresting officer shall require the alleged offender to deposit not less than the maximum forfeiture permitted under this section. 
(b)  Deposit procedure. 
(1)  Any person arrested for a violation of chapter 70 may make a deposit of money as directed by the arresting officer at the town offices or at the office of the clerk of court or by mailing the deposit to such places. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall comply with Wis. Stats. § 343.26, or, if the deposit is mailed, the signed statement required under Wis. Stats. § 343.27 shall be mailed with the deposit. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall notify the arrested person, orally or in writing, that: 
a.  If the person makes a deposit for a violation of a traffic regulation, the person need not appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, and the person will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and a penalty assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 757.05, a jail assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 302.46(1), a truck driver education assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 349.04, a railroad assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 346.177, 346.495 or 346.65(4r), and a crime laboratories and drug law enforcement assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 165.755, plus any applicable fees prescribed in Wis. Stats. ch. 814, not to exceed the amount of the deposit that the court may accept as provided Wis. Stats. § 345.37; and 
b.  If the person fails to make a deposit for a violation of a traffic regulation or appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, the court may enter a default judgment finding the person guilty of the offense or issue a warrant for his arrest. 
(2)  Basic amount for deposit. 
a.  The basic amount of the deposit for the alleged violation of a traffic regulation shall be determined in accordance with a deposit schedule which the judicial conference shall establish. Annually, the judicial conference shall review and may revise the schedule. 
b.  In addition to the amount in subsection (b)(2)a of this section, the deposit shall include court costs, including any applicable Wis. Stats. ch. 814, any applicable penalty assessment, any applicable jail assessment, any applicable truck driver education assessment, any applicable railroad crossing improvement assessment, and any applicable crime laboratories and drug law enforcement assessment. 
(3)  Deposit procedure. 
a.  The arresting officer or the person accepting the deposit may allow the alleged violator to submit a check for the amount of the deposit or make the deposit by use of a credit card, and the check or credit charge receipt shall be considered a receipt in lieu of subsection (b)(2)b of this section. 
b.  The person receiving the deposit shall furnish a receipt on a serially numbered form, and shall deliver the original receipt to the alleged violator if requested, and shall state to the alleged violator that inquiry may be made at the office of the clerk of court or municipal judge regarding the disposition of the deposit. 
(4)  An alleged violator in custody shall be released after making the deposit specified in this section. 
(5)  Any person, other than the clerk of court or the municipal judge before whom the defendant is directed to appear, who accepts the deposit shall, before the time fixed for the appearance of the defendant, deliver the deposit and a copy of the receipt and of the citation issued to the defendant to the clerk of the court or the municipal judge. The clerk or municipal judge shall give a receipt therefor, specifying the serial number of the receipt accompanying the deposit. 
(c)  Deposit schedule. 
2.02 	Applicable sections of Uniform Wisconsin Deposit and Bail Schedule for Conservation, Boating, Snowmobile, and ATV Violations. 
2.04(A) 	$30.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.04(B)(1) 	$30.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.04(B)(2) 	$30.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.04(B)(3) 	$30.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.04(C) 	$30.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.04(D) 	$50.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment (except metal and glass). 
2.04(D) 	$100.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment (metal and glass only). 
2.04(E) 	$50.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.04(F) 	$40.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.05(C) 	$30.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.06(C) 	$30.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.07(A) 	$40.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.07(B) 	$30.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.08(A) 	$40.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.08(B) 	$40.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
2.08(C) 	$40.00 plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
 
(d)  Depository. Deposits should be made in cash, money order, or certified check to the clerk of circuit court of the county, who shall issue a receipt therefor as required by statute. If the deposit is mailed, the signed statement required by statute shall be mailed with the deposit. 
(e)  Deposit for repeat offenses. Any person found guilty of violating this Code or any part thereof who was previously convicted of the same section within the last year shall forfeit twice the deposit plus court costs and penalty assessment. 
(f)  Nonscheduled deposit. If a deposit schedule has not been established for a specific violation, the arresting officer shall require the alleged offender to deposit not less than the maximum forfeiture permitted under this section. 
(Ord. No. 85-7, § 1(25.04), 8-12-1985; Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.09), 7-13-1992)  
Sec. 1-10. - Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference. 
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein and the clerk shall file, deposit and keep in the clerk's office a copy of the Code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person during the clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations which the clerk may prescribe for their preservation. The clerk may establish fees for the sale of this Code or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 85-7, § 1(25.03), 8-12-1985)  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code, effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Municipal Code of the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Municipal Code of the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin, is hereby created to read as follows:…." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specially by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance.  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code.  
Sec. 1-13. - Severability. 
The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable so that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code is for any reason declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgement shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code. The town board declares that they would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 85-7, § 1(25.02(2)), 8-12-1985) 
State Law reference— Severability generally, Wis. Stats. § 990.001(11).  
Sec. 1-14. - Conflict. 
If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter. 
(Ord. No. 85-7, § 1(25.02(1)), 8-12-1985)  
Sec. 1-15. - Responsibility for acts; aiding and abetting. 
Every person concerned in the commission of any act prohibited by this Code, whether any person directly commits the act or prosecutes, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and, upon conviction, is punishable as if such person had directly committed such act. 
State Law reference— Collection of forfeitures generally, Wis. Stats. § 778.10.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(2); administration and enforcement of buildings and building regulations, § 14-31 et seq.; court, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 38; administration and enforcement of recycling, § 58-51 et seq.; taxation, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Smoking prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. Smoking, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.123(1)(h) is prohibited in all enclosed areas of the town hall facility. 
(b)  Notice to be posted. The town clerk shall purchase and post appropriate signs to give notice of the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, to be placed on all entrances to the town hall facility; provided, that failure to post such notice shall not constitute a defense to a charge of violating subsection (a) of this section if the person charged had actual notice of the requirement. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who willfully violates the requirements of subsection (a) of this section after being advised of the requirements of subsection (a) of this section either by posted notice or by an employee of the town shall be subject to the penalties described in Wis. Stats. § 101.123(8)(a), for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, §§ 1—3, 2-13-2002)  
Sec. 2-2. - Fees of town professionals charged back. 
Whenever either the town board, clerk or other town official has authorized a property owner in the town to contact the town attorney, engineer or any other of the town's professional staff or the town board, clerk or other town official contacts the town attorney, engineer or any of the town's professional staff or a property owner contacts the town attorney, engineer or any other of the town's professional staff, if such contact results in a charge to the town for that professional's time and services and such service is not a service supplied to the town as a whole, then and in that event the town clerk shall, pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0627, charge that service to such property owner for the fees incurred by the town. 
(Ord. No. 90-3, § 1, 5-14-1990)  
Sec. 2-3. - Property owner allowed time to pay or appeal. 
(a)  Generally. The town clerk shall give each property owner billed for current services as provided for in this section notice that they shall have a specified period of time not less than 30 days to pay. Such notice shall also state that within 15 days of the date of the notice, the property owner may request a hearing before the town board regarding the charges against the property. Such notice shall also include an itemized statement of the professional service fees to be charged. Thereafter, if the property owner requests a hearing within the proper time period, the matter shall proceed as described in subsection (b) of this section. If a hearing is not requested within the required time period, if that charge remains unpaid, the town clerk shall automatically charge the amount as a delinquent tax against the property as provided by law. In the event the statement rendered to the property owner or the time given for the property owner to pay or following a hearing if the town board approves all or part of the charge, it is too late in the current year for the charge, when it becomes delinquent, to be extended on that year's tax roll, then the delinquent charge shall be extended to the following year's tax roll. 
(b)  Appeal to town board. Upon receipt of a timely request for hearing, the town board shall hold a hearing regarding the property charges at its next scheduled meeting or as soon as feasible. Such hearing shall be preceded by posted public notice and reasonable notice, via first class mail, to the property owner. In the event a hearing is requested, no charges shall be placed on the tax roll unless and until such hearing has been held and a decision has been rendered by the town board to approve the charges against the tax roll in whole or in part. If approved only in part, only that part of the charges that are approved may be charged against the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 2000-7, §§ 1, 2, 7-26-2000)  
Sec. 2-4. - Creation of department of public recreation. 
There is created a department of public recreation in the town. The department of public recreation shall be maintained and operated by the recreation committee. The recreation director shall be responsible for the day-to-day administration, maintenance and operation of the department of public recreation and the park system, under the direction of the recreation committee and subject to the budget limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 5, 12-11-2002)  
Secs. 2-5—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(5); building-HVAC-electrical-plumbing inspector, § 14-39; weed commissioner; appointment, § 54-35; tax assessor, § 66-31 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-31—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HUMANE OFFICER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - State laws incorporated. 
The lawful authority of humane officers as described in Wis. Stats. ch. 173 and Wis. Stats. § 58.07, and the statutes and regulations referred to therein (including Wis. Stats. chs. 174 and 951, and Wis. Stats. § 95.21) are hereby incorporated herein, including all subsequent amendments and renumbering that may be made thereto from time to time, in order to ensure uniform regulation of humane officers throughout the state. 
(Ord. No. 2000-9, § 1, 12-21-2000)  
Sec. 2-52. - Humane officer position created. 
The position of humane officer for the town is created, as follows: 
(1)  Appointment. The humane officer shall be appointed by the town board. 
(2)  Term. The humane officer shall serve until the appointment is terminated by the town board in the exercise the town board's discretion. 
(3)  Qualifications. The humane officer shall be certified as a humane officer in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 173.05. 
(4)  Compensation. The humane officer shall receive such compensation and benefits, if any, as was formerly paid to the position of animal control officer, except as may be modified from time to time by the town board by separate resolution. 
(5)  Duties. The humane officer shall perform all duties, and shall have such responsibility, as is described in section 2-51. 
(Ord. No. 2000-9, § 2, 12-21-2000)  
Sec. 2-53. - Withdrawal or modification of abatement orders. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 173.03(2), the town board designates the town chair and town supervisors as the officials within the town who may modify or withdraw abatement orders issued by the humane officer under Wis. Stats. § 173.11. 
(Ord. No. 2000-9, § 3, 12-21-2000)  
Sec. 2-54. - Report to state. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 173.03(1), the town board directs the clerk to report all appointments and terminations of appointments of humane officers to the state department of agriculture, trade and consumer protection. 
(Ord. No. 2000-9, § 4, 12-21-2000)  
Secs. 2-55—2-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TREASURER 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Investment of surplus funds. 
(a)  The town treasurer is authorized and directed to invest the public funds of the town as allowed by law and according to the guidelines established by the Wisconsin Towns Association. 
(b)  With regard to such deposit or investment of such funds, the town treasurer shall take into consideration the following factors: 
(1)  The safety and security of the investment or deposit shall be paramount; 
(2)  The interest rate and other terms offered; 
(3)  The capacity of the depository to handle the size of the deposit or investment; and 
(4)  The amount of existing town funds which are already in such depository. 
(Res. of 12-13-1982)  
Secs. 2-72—2-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Board of police commissioners created, § 38-2; board of police commissioners; duties and powers, § 38-3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-101—2-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF REVIEW 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Established; appointment of alternate members. 
(a)  The town board of review shall be constituted as described in. Wis. Stats. § 70.46, including any amendments that may be made thereto. 
(b)  Alternate members of the board of review may be appointed and may serve as follows. Alternate members shall be town residents, and may include public officers and public employees. One alternate member shall be appointed annually by the town chair, subject to the confirmation of the town board, for a term of three years, provided that initially three alternate members shall be appointed for terms of one, two and three years respectively. At the time of their appointment, each alternate member shall be designated as either first, second or third alternate, to establish the priority of all alternate members, and this priority may be revised annually by the town chair subject to the confirmation of the town board. The first alternate member shall act with full power when four members are absent, refuse, or are otherwise unavailable to hear an objection. The second alternate member shall act with full power when five members (or four members and the first alternate member) are absent, refuse, or are otherwise unavailable to hear an objection. The third alternate member shall act with full power when six members (or five members and the first or second alternate member; or four members and the first and second alternate members) are absent, refuse, or are otherwise unavailable to hear an objection. 
(Ord. No. 2000-4, § 1, 5-15-2000)  
Sec. 2-122. - Change in meeting hours. 
Each year, the first meeting of the board of review shall be held on the third Monday of May at the town offices, W320 S8315 Beulah Road, Mukwonago, Wisconsin. The board of review shall only be in session, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(3)(b), for two hours on that day, commencing at 6:00 p.m., and will either finally adjourn at 8:00 p.m., that same day, or will adjourn to another day, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(4). 
(Ord. No. 2000-2, § 1, 4-12-2000)  
Sec. 2-123. - Notice of time of first meeting. 
Each year the notices of the reduced hours for the board of review shall be published in the official newspaper and posted in three public places in the town at least ten days prior to the first meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2000-2, § 2, 4-12-2000)  
Secs. 2-124—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLAN COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Reestablishment and confirmation of town plan commission. 
The town board reestablishes and confirms in the town a plan commission to operate in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1980, § 1)  
Sec. 2-142. - Membership. 
(a)  The plan commission shall consist of the town chair who shall be its presiding officer, the town engineer, the president of the park commission, one town supervisor, and three citizens. In the absence of an office of town engineer or president of the park commission, an additional citizen member shall be appointed to serve in lieu thereof for each as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  The town supervisor member shall be elected in April by a two-thirds vote of the town board. 
(c)  The three citizen members of the plan commission shall be appointed by the town chair in April subject to confirmation by the town board, to hold office for a term of three years. All appointments shall be for a full term of three years. 
(d)  The fourth and/or fifth citizen member (filling the statutory position of the town engineer or president of the park commission) of the plan commission shall be appointed by the town chair subject to confirmation by the town board in April for a one-year term. 
(e)  All vacancies on the plan commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as appointment for the full term. 
(f)  Citizen members of the plan commission shall take the official oath required by Wis. Stats. § 19.01, which shall be filed with the town clerk. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1980, § 2)  
Sec. 2-143. - Powers and duties. 
The plan commission shall have the powers and duties prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 62.23, and such other powers and duties as shall be vested in it from time to time by the board. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1980, § 3)  
Secs. 2-144—2-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RECREATION COMMITTEE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 46. 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Created; composition; membership; compensation. 
There is created a recreation committee of the town board. The recreation committee shall consist of three members who must be town board members and shall be appointed by the town chair, subject to confirmation by the town board. Terms of the recreation committee members shall be one year starting on May 1. The recreation committee shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 2, 12-11-2002)  
Sec. 2-162. - Duties. 
The recreation committee is authorized to conduct the activities of public recreation, to expend funds, to authorize the purchase of equipment and supplies, recommend to the town board as who to hire as a recreation director, and to generally supervise the administration, maintenance, and operation of the department of public recreation and the town park system. All activities of the recreation committee shall be bound by the town budget. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 3, 12-11-2002)  
Sec. 2-163. - Reports and audit. 
(a)  Reports. The recreation committee shall annually submit to the town board a report of its activities and disclosure of all receipts and expenditures. The report shall be filed on or before the annual meeting each year. 
(b)  Audit. The recreation committee shall submit to audit as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, § 4, 12-11-2002)  
Secs. 2-164—2-181. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(1); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(4); taxation, ch. 66. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-182. - Authorized signatures for town checks. 
(a)  Pursuant to sections 60.24, 60.44, 60.45, and 66.0607 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the town board designates the following persons to be authorized to sign the town checks: 
(1)  The town chairman or, in his absence, the duly appointed chair of the finance committee. 
(2)  The town clerk-treasurer or, in his absence, the deputy clerk. 
(b)  The town chairman and town clerk-treasurer are deemed absent if they are not available to sign the checks within 48 hours of approval of the checks by the town board or issuance of the checks by the town clerk-treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 2010-5, § 1, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 2011-2, § 2, 5-16-2011)  
Secs. 2-183—2-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CLAIMS PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Purpose. 
It is the declared intent of this division that the town board delegate to the town clerk to authorize routine payments of certain claims, without prior town board approval under the limited circumstances described in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § 1, 6-12-2002)  
Sec. 2-202. - Authority. 
This division is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to town boards under Wis. Stats. § 60.44(2), to adopt an alternative claim procedure for approving financial claims against the town which are in the nature of bills and vouchers. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § 2, 6-12-2002)  
Sec. 2-203. - Limited claims. 
This division applies to payment of only the following types of claims: 
(1)  Payment of payroll for employees; 
(2)  Payment of utility bills for electric, gas, and telephone if the due date or discount rate will expire prior to the next scheduled town board meeting that can have bills presented on the agenda; 
(3)  Purchase of building department seals; 
(4)  Payment of monies received for municipal citations; 
(5)  Payment of firearms training, seminars and conferences as budgeted; 
(6)  Payment of ambulance/fire truck loans; 
(7)  Payment of recycling mailing; 
(8)  Payment of recreation department refunds; 
(9)  Payment of Walmart charges; 
(10)  Payment of refund for tax overpayments per town policy; 
(11)  Payment of Sam's Club charges. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § 3, 6-12-2002)  
Sec. 2-204. - Procedure. 
(a)  Payment of the types of claims described in section 2-203 may be made from the town treasury in the manner described in Wis. Stats. § 66.0607, without prior town board approval, upon the town clerk's review of each such bill or voucher, and the town clerk's approval in writing that each is a proper charge against the treasury. The town clerk's approval shall not be granted unless the town clerk first determines that: 
(1)  Funds are available under the town budget to pay the bill or voucher. 
(2)  The item or service covered by the bill or voucher has been duly authorized. 
(3)  The item or service covered by the bill or voucher has been supplied or rendered in conformity with the authorization. 
(4)  The claim appears to be a valid claim against the town. 
(b)  The town clerk may choose to require the claimant to submit proof, to aid the clerk in determining whether the claimant has complied with these conditions, prior to payment of the claim. 
(c)  The town clerk shall file with the town board at least monthly a list of the claims approved, showing the date the claim was paid; the name of the claimant; the purpose of the claim; and the amount of the claim. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § 4, 6-12-2002)  
Secs. 2-205—2-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC RECORDS 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The applicable definitions in Wis. Stats. § 19.32, as amended, shall also apply to this article. 
Custodian means that officer, department head, division head, committee chair, or employee of the town designated in this article or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any town records or file, deposit or keep such records in his office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is required by this article to respond to requests for access to such records or files. 
(Ord. No. 82-5, § 1, 12-23-1982) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-232. - Duty to maintain records. 
(a)  Except as provided under section 2-237, each officer and employee of the town shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or employee or his deputies, or to the possession or control of which he or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his successor all records then in his custody and the successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file such receipt with the town clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt. 
(Ord. No. 82-5, § 2, 12-23-1982)  
Sec. 2-233. - Legal custodians. 
(a)  Each elected official is the legal custodian of his records and the records of his office, but the official may designate an employee of his staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(b)  Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the town clerk or the clerk's designee shall act as legal custodian for the town board and for any committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the town board. 
(c)  For every authority not specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the authority's chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate an employee of his staff to act as the legal custodian. 
(d)  Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his absence or the absence of his designee. 
(e)  As an alternative, the town clerk, or in his absence or disability or in case of vacancy, the deputy clerk, is hereby designated the legal custodian of all town records. 
(f)  The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry out the duties of an authority under subch. 11 of ch. 19 (Wis. Stats. § 19.21 et seq.), and this article. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an authority under this article. 
(g)  The following public officials are deemed to be the official custodian of their records: (This is in addition to the other provisions of this section and is not intended to be inclusive of all town records.) 
(1)  Town clerk. The town clerk is the custodian of all records of the town and all records required by the clerk to be kept. (See subsection (b) of this section.) 
(2)  Treasurer. All records of the treasurer shall be kept by the town treasurer. 
(3)  Building inspector. All records of the building inspector shall be kept by the building inspector. 
(4)  Assessor. All records of the assessor shall be kept by the assessor. 
(5)  Plan commission. All records of the plan commission shall be kept by the clerk. 
(6)  Board of appeals. All records of the board of appeals shall be kept by the secretary of the board of appeals, records at town hall. 
(7)  Police department All records of the police department shall be kept by the chief. 
(8)  Fire department. All records of the fire department shall be kept by the fire chief. 
(9)  Weed commissioner. All records of the weed commissioner shall be kept by the weed commissioner and clerk. 
(10)  Park board and recreation director. All records of the park board and recreation director shall be kept by the recreation director and/or clerk. 
(Ord. No. 82-5, § 3, 12-23-1982)  
Sec. 2-234. - Public access records. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 2-236, any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(b)  Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours. 
(c)  If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, (the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.) 
(d)  A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to town employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record. All copies requested shall be provided by the town clerk. 
(e)  The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. 
(f)  A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying records as follows: 
(1)  The cost of photocopying shall be as set by town board resolution from time to time. Such cost has been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost of reproduction. 
(2)  If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing shall be charged. 
(3)  The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audiotapes or videotapes, shall be charged. 
(4)  If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual costs thereof shall also be charged. 
(5)  There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefor exceeds $50.00, in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester. 
(6)  The legal custodian shall estimate the costs of all applicable fees and may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such estimate exceeds $5.00. 
(7)  Elected and appointed officials of the town shall not be required to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of their official duties. 
(8)  The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge where he determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest. 
(g)  Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.34, and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. Each authority shall also prominently display at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a copy of (Wis. Stats. § 19.31—19.39 (sections 2-234 through 2-236)). This subsection does not apply to members of the town board. 
(Ord. No. 82-5, § 4, 12-23-1982)  
Sec. 2-235. - Access procedures. 
(a)  A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under Wis. Stats. § 19.37. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no request may be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under section 2-234(f)(6). A requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so require. 
(b)  Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring with the town attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance. 
(c)  A request for a record may be denied as provided in section 2-236. If a request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under Wis. Stats. § 19.37(1), or upon application to the attorney general or a district attorney. 
(Ord. No. 82-5, § 5, 12-23-1982)  
Sec. 2-236. - Limitations upon access and withholding. 
(a)  Application of other laws. Any record which is specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law is exempt from disclosure under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1), except that any portion of that record which contains public information is open to public inspection as provided in subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)  Law enforcement records. Except as otherwise provided by law, whenever federal law or regulations require or as a condition to receipt of aids by this state require that any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes be withheld from public access, then that information is exempt from disclosure under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(c)  Contractors' records. Each authority shall make available for inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1) any record produced or collected under a contract entered into by the authority with a person other than an authority to the same extent as if the record were maintained by the authority. This subsection does not apply to the inspection or copying of a record under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1)(am). 
(d)  Computer programs and data. A computer program, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 22.03(4)(c), is not subject to examination or copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1), but the material used as input for a computer program or the material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to the right of examination and copying, except as otherwise provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.35 or this section. 
(e)  Trade secrets. An authority may withhold access to any record or portion of a record containing information qualifying as a trade secret as defined in Wis. Stats. § 134.90(1)(c). 
(f)  Separation of information. If a record contains information that is subject to disclosure under Wis. Stats. §§ 19.35 (1)(a) or 19.35(1)(am) and information that is not subject to such disclosure, the authority having custody of the record shall provide the information that is subject to disclosure and delete the information that is not subject to disclosure from the record before release. 
(g)  Identities of applicants for public positions. 
(1)  In this section, the term "final candidate" means each applicant for a position who is seriously considered for appointment or whose name is certified for appointment and whose name is submitted for final consideration to an authority for appointment to any state position, except a position in the classified service, or to any local public office, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 19.42(7w). The term "final candidate" includes, whenever there are at least five candidates for an office or position, each of the five candidates who are considered most qualified for the office or position by an authority, and whenever there are less than five candidates for an office or position, each such candidate. Whenever an appointment is to be made from a group of more than five candidates, the term "final candidate" also includes each candidate in the group. 
(2)  Every applicant for a position with any authority may indicate in writing to the authority that the applicant does not wish the authority to reveal his identity. Except with respect to an applicant whose name is certified for appointment to a position in the state classified service or a final candidate, if an applicant makes such an indication in writing, the authority shall not provide access to any record related to the application that may reveal the identity of the applicant. 
(h)  Identities of law enforcement informants. 
(1)  In this subsection: 
a.  The term "informant" means an individual who requests confidentiality from a law enforcement agency in conjunction with providing information to that agency or, pursuant to an express promise of confidentiality by a law enforcement agency or under circumstances in which a promise of confidentiality would reasonably be implied, provides information to a law enforcement agency or, is working with a law enforcement agency to obtain information, related in any case to any of the following: 
1.  Another person who the individual or the law enforcement agency suspects has violated, is violating or will violate a federal law, a law of any state or an ordinance of any local government. 
2.  Past, present or future activities that the individual or law enforcement agency believes may violate a federal law, a law of any state or an ordinance of any local government. 
b.  The term "law enforcement agency" has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 165.83(1)(b), and includes the department of corrections. 
(2)  If an authority that is a law enforcement agency receives a request to inspect or copy a record or portion of a record under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1)(a) that contains specific information, including, but not limited to, a name, address, telephone number, voice recording or handwriting sample which, if disclosed, would identify an informant, the authority shall delete the portion of the record in which the information is contained or, if no portion of the record can be inspected or copied without identifying the informant, shall withhold the record unless the legal custodian of the record, designated under Wis. Stats. § 19.33, makes a determination, at the time that the request is made, that the public interest in allowing a person to inspect, copy or receive a copy of such identifying information outweighs the harm done to the public interest by providing such access. 
(i)  Records of plans or specifications for state buildings. Records containing plans or specifications for any state-owned or state-leased building, structure or facility or any proposed state-owned or state-leased building, structure or facility are not subject to the right of inspection or copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1) except as the department of administration otherwise provides by rule. 
(j)  Releasing of exempt and nonexempt materials. If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the information that may not be made public from the record before release. The custodian shall confer with the town attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the town attorney when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of the custodian and the town attorney there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 82-5, § 6, 12-23-1982)  
Sec. 2-237. - Destruction of records. 
(a)  Town officers may destroy the following nonutility financial records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442, but not less than seven years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular transaction, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such shorter period: 
(1)  Bank statements; 
(2)  Canceled checks; 
(3)  Receipt forms; 
(4)  Vouchers. 
(b)  Town officers may destroy the following utility records of which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after completion of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. ch. 442, subject to state public service commission regulations, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current billings and customers' ledgers may be destroyed after two years. 
(1)  Contracts; 
(2)  Excavation permits; 
(3)  Inspection records. 
(c)  Town officers may destroy the following records of which they are the legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than seven years after the record was effective unless another period has been set by statute, and then after such a period, or unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 16.61(3)(e), and then after such a shorter period. 
(1)  Old insurance policies; 
(2)  Election notices; 
(3)  Cancelled registration cards. 
(d)  Unless notice is waived by the state historical society, at least 60 days' notice shall be given the state historical society prior to the destruction of any record as provided by Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a). 
(e)  Any tape recordings of a governmental meeting of the town may be destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than 90 days after the minutes of the meeting have been approved and published, if the purpose of the recording was to make minutes of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 82-5, § 7, 12-23-1982)  
Sec. 2-238. - Preservation through microfilm. 
Any town officer, or the director of any department or division of town government may, (subject to the approval of the town board) keep and preserve public records in his possession by means of microfilm or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth in Wis. Stats. § 16.61(7)(a) and (b), and shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the provisions of law and of sections 2-234 through 2-236. 
(Ord. No. 82-5, § 8, 12-23-1982)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOL BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Penalties. 
Any adult, firm, corporation or the employee or agent of any licensee under this chapter, adjudged to have violated any provisions set forth, shall be subject to a forfeiture not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject such violator to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(12), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-2. - Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages state statutes adopted. 
The current and future provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 125, defining and regulating the types, sale, procurement, dispensing, and transfer of alcohol beverages, including provisions relating to the penalty to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are adopted and made part of this section by reference. A violation of any such provision shall constitute a violation of this section. Any future amendments, revisions, modifications or additions of the statutes incorporated in this section, are intended to be made a part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulations of alcohol beverages in this state. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(1), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-3. - Basic requirements. 
(a)  Occupancy permit required. No person on any licensed premises, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 125.02, shall conduct any transactions regulated by this chapter unless a licensee holds a valid occupancy permit, as may be required, issued by the town. The occupancy permit shall be specific in detail as to what area of the premises shall be licensed for the sale of alcohol beverages. Any violation is grounds for suspension or revocation of any license or permit issued under this chapter. 
(b)  Seller's permit required. No person on any licensed premises shall conduct any transactions regulated under this chapter unless a licensee holds and maintains a valid seller's permit as required under statute, issued to the premises and licensee described in the license during the period of licensing. Any violation is grounds for suspension or revocation of any license or permit issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(2), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-4. - Applications. 
A written application for any license or permit by the provisions of this chapter shall be on the form provided by the clerk. 
(1)  Content. All applications other than operator's licenses shall contain all the information required under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(3), and any other information required by the clerk. Operator's license applications shall be on a form prescribed by the clerk containing all information deemed necessary, including, but not limited to, name, residence, age, plus a written request of the holder of the alcohol beverage license. 
(2)  Filing. All applications for licenses and permits to sell alcohol beverages shall be filed with the clerk in which the premises are located as required by law. Operator's licenses and licenses issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6), for a picnic or other gathering lasting less than four days must be filed with the clerk at least 24 hours prior to the granting of the license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(3), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-5. - Fees. 
(a)  Licenses and permits may be issued by the clerk under the authority of the town board after payment of the appropriate fees, which when so issued shall permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 125. 
(b)  Fees for such licenses and permits shall be in such amount as may be established by the town board from time to time by separate resolution. 
(c)  Any applicable publication fee and/or application fee and/or investigation fee shall be submitted with the license or permit application as may be established by the town board from time to time by separate resolution. 
(d)  The fees for licenses or permits which are not granted shall be refunded after deducting the application fee and all actual publication fees and investigation fees. 
(e)  Fees for partial licensing years may be prorated. In all cases when an alcohol beverage license is issued for a partial year, a minimum fee, as specified in the fee schedule in the clerk's office, and all actual publication fees and investigation fees must be paid. 
(f)  Once any license or permit is issued, no return of any payment shall be made regardless of whether the license or permit is used for the entire year. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(4), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-6. - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of a license application under the provisions of this chapter, the clerk shall forward a copy of the application to the appropriate persons to conduct an investigation of the applicant as set forth in this section. 
(1)  All alcohol beverage licenses. The police department, fire department, health department, and building inspector and other persons authorized, may conduct an investigation and inspection of the premises mentioned in the applications, to determine if the premises comply with all applicable regulations, ordinances and laws. The police department shall investigate all persons included in the application, both new and renewal, to determine the suitability and character of the applicants. 
(2)  Operator's licenses. The police department shall conduct an investigation of all applicants, both new and renewal, which will include fingerprinting at the sheriff's department, to determine the suitability and character of the applicant. 
(3)  Report. Upon completion of all investigations, written reports shall be submitted to the clerk. In the case of renewals of operator's licenses only, the clerk may, if the written report is favorable, proceed to issue the license. If the report is in any way unfavorable, or in the case of new operator's licenses and all other licenses, new or renewal, the clerk shall forward the written report and application to the town board for action. 
(4)  Review. The town board may refer any and all licenses to the appropriate committee for review and recommendation prior to action by the town board. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(5), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-7. - Provisional retail license. 
(a)  The town clerk may issue a provisional retail license to any person who has applied for a Class "A" retail fermented malt beverage license, a Class "B" retail fermented malt beverage license, a "Class A" retail liquor license, or a "Class B" retail liquor license and whose license application has been approved by the town board except for the failure of the applicant to have completed a responsible beverage server course as required under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5)(a)5. The provisional retail license shall authorize only those activities authorized by the type of retail license applied for and shall only be issued to an applicant who is in the course of completing a responsible beverage server course as required under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5)(a)5. 
(b)  A provisional retail license shall expire 60 days after the issuance of the provisional retail license or upon the issuance of the Class "A" retail fermented malt beverage license, a Class "B" retail fermented malt beverage license, a "Class A" retail liquor license, or a "Class B" retail liquor license to the holder, whichever is sooner. 
(c)  The town clerk may revoke the provisional retail license if he discovers that the holder of the license made a false statement on the application. 
(d)  The fee for a provisional retail license shall be in such amount as may be established by the town board from time to time by separate resolution. 
(e)  No person may hold more than one provisional retail license for each type of license applied for by the holder per year. 
(f)  No person shall apply for or obtain a provisional retail license for purposes of circumventing the license requirements of this chapter. A provisional retail license shall only be issued to a person who has satisfied all provisions of this chapter and whose application for a regular retail malt beverage or liquor license has been approved by the town board, but who cannot obtain such license because of failure to complete the responsible beverage server course as required under Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5)(a)5. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(6), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-8. - Operator's license. 
(a)  Kinds of licenses and permits. 
(1)  Regular operator's license. Regular operator's licenses may be granted to individuals by the town board for the purposes of complying with Wis. Stats. §§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2) and this chapter. The fee for such license shall be set by resolution. 
(2)  Provisional operator's license. 
a.  The clerk, upon authorization by the chief presiding officer, may issue a provisional operator's license to an applicant in case of a bona fide emergency. An emergency shall be caused by such things as death, disability, absence of the regular operator on the premises and the like. The chief presiding officer before authorizing such issuance, shall determine that the applicant has a satisfactory record, and probably would be issued a regular operator's license. The license shall be valid for a period of not to exceed 60 days unless sooner revoked by the town board. The fee for such license shall be set by resolution. 
b.  The clerk, as the authorized representative of the town board, may issue a provisional license to a person who is enrolled in a training course under Wis. Stats. § 125.17(6)(a). The fee for such license shall be set by resolution. 
(3)  Temporary operator's licenses. Temporary operator's licenses may be granted to individuals pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.17(4), by the town board for the purpose or allowing such individuals to dispense and serve alcohol beverages under a license issued under Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6) or 125.51(10), to a nonprofit organization. No person may hold more than one license of this kind per year. Any temporary operator's license issued under this section shall be valid for any period from one day to 14 days, and the period for which it is valid shall be on the license. The fee for such license shall be set by resolution. 
(b)  Granting of operator's license. The town board shall grant operator's licenses pursuant to this section as it deems fit. 
(c)  Expiration date. All operator's licenses issued under this section shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(7), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-9. - Restrictions on granting licenses. 
(a)  Statutory requirements. Licenses and permits shall be issued only to those persons eligible under Wis. Stats. ch. 125. Licenses and permits granted in error shall be void. 
(b)  Health and sanitation requirements. No retail Class A or Class B alcohol beverage license shall be issued for any premises which has not been approved by the county health department. 
(c)  Delinquent taxes, assessments, claims, et al. 
(1)  No initial or renewal alcohol beverage license shall be issued for any premises or property for which taxes, assessments, forfeitures or claims for the town are delinquent and unpaid. 
(2)  No initial or renewal license or permit shall be issued under this chapter to any person who is: 
a.  Delinquent in the payment of any taxes, assessment, or other claims owed the town. 
b.  Delinquent in the payment of a forfeiture resulting from the violation of any ordinance of the town. 
c.  Delinquent in the payment of any taxes to the state or county. 
d.  Who has any outstanding warrant or capias from any other municipal, state or federal court. 
(d)  License quota. 
(1)  Class "A" fermented malt beverage License. Class "A" fermented malt beverage licenses shall be issued on the basis of the most recent estimated population received by the town as determined by the state department of administration population estimates forwarded annually to the town. Licenses shall be available for issuance based on one license per 2,500 population or fraction thereof over 2,500 within any license year, except no person licensed under a Class "A" retail fermented malt beverage license shall be deprived of a renewal license merely because of the quota. 
(2)  "Class A" retail liquor licenses. "Class A" retail liquor licenses shall be issued on the basis of the most recent estimated population received by the town as determined by the state department of administration population estimates forwarded annually to the town. Licenses shall be available for issuance based on one license per 2,500 population or fraction thereof over 2,500 within any license year, except no person licensed under a "Class A" retail liquor license shall be deprived of a renewal license merely because of the quota. 
(3)  "Class B" retail fermented malt beverage licenses. The number of licenses issued under law plus whichever the following is the largest: 
a.  The number of "Class B" licenses lawfully issued and in effect on August 27, 1939, when the quota law went into effect plus annexations or less detachments. 
b.  One per 500 population as reported by the state department of administration population estimates forwarded annually to the town. 
c.  The number of "Class B" licenses in effect in the previous year. 
(4)  "Class B" retail liquor licenses. The number of "Class B" retail liquor licenses issued within any license year shall be determined as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4). 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(8), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-10. - Conditions of license. 
(a)  Consent to inspection. Every applicant obtaining a license thereby consents to the entry of the police or other, authorized representatives of the town or the state at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the removal from such premises all things found in violation of ordinances or law and consents to the introduction of such things as evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses. 
(b)  Safety and sanitation requirements. Each licensed premises shall be maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and proper place for the purpose being used. 
(c)  Sales on credit prohibited. No retail licensee shall sell or offer to sell any alcohol beverage to any person on credit except by a hotel to a resident guest, by a restaurant to a patron, a club to a bona fide member, and by grocers and pharmacists who maintain a credit system in connection with other purchases. No licensee shall sell alcohol beverages on a passbook or store order, or receive goods, wares or merchandise in exchange for alcohol beverages. 
(d)  Orderly conduct required. Every licensed premises shall be conducted in an orderly manner and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed. 
(e)  Gambling prohibited. Gambling shall not be permitted on a licensed premises, unless authorized by law. Slot machines or other devices of chance are prohibited and shall not be kept on the premises, unless authorized by law. 
(f)  Lewd, obscene, performances, etc., prohibited. No licensee shall advertise, produce, perform or allow any lewd, obscene or indecent performance of any kind on the premises. 
(g)  Sale to intoxicated persons prohibited. No licensee, agent, operator or server shall sell, give, procure or otherwise furnish any alcohol beverages to an intoxicated person. 
(h)  Underage persons. No licensee shall employ any underage person to serve, sell, dispense, or give away an alcohol beverage unless authorized by law or ordinance. The current and future provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 125.10(2) and 125.07(4)(a), (b) or (bm), 125.085(3)(b) are adopted by reference. A violation of any such provision shall constitute a violation of this section. Any future amendments, revisions, modifications or additions of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulations of alcohol beverages in this state. 
(i)  Controlled substance use prohibited. Any licensee, partner, agent, authorized representative or employee who is convicted of the use, possession, delivery or intent to deliver, any controlled substance defined and regulated under Wis. Stats. ch. 961, may be considered grounds for the revocation or suspension of any license provided for in this chapter. 
(j)  Regulation of entertainment and entertainers. No "Class B" or Class "B" licensee shall employ or permit to perform on the premises any entertainer, except a member of a band, a vocalist, a piano or organ player or a comedian. All such entertainers shall be fully clothed in such a manner as is acceptable in all public places. No licensee shall allow any entertainment which makes an appeal to prurient interests. Dancing among patrons, but not between patron and employee, is permitted upon permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(9), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 6-11. - Miscellaneous general provisions. 
(a)  Transfer of licenses. 
(1)  The transfer of every alcohol beverage license shall be governed by Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12). 
(2)  No transfer of operator's license is permitted. 
(3)  If the transfer is approved by the town board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12)(b)4, all conditions set forth under this chapter shall be complied with. 
(4)  Failure to conform with the terms of license transfer shall be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of license. 
(b)  Nonrenewal of licenses. Before renewal of any license or permit issued under this chapter is refused, the licensee or permittee shall be given written notice of any charges or violations or reasons proposed for nonrenewal, and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the town board. 
(c)  Violations by agents and employees. A violation of this chapter by an authorized agent or employee of the licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee. 
(d)  Closing hours. Closing hours shall be as set by statute with the following applicable local options: 
(1)  If a wholesale license, between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on Saturday when the closing hour shall be 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  If a retail class "A" fermented malt beverage license, between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(3)  If a retail "Class A" intoxicating liquor license, between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(e)  Local option. The holder of a retail "Class B" liquor license shall be permitted to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on the premises and in the original packages or containers in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time and to be consumed off the licensed premises. Off-premises sales shall cease at midnight of each day. It is intended by this section that the packaged sales from Class "B" licensed premises will not be permitted after midnight under the option granted in this section. 
(f)  Nonuse of license. If a license or permit issued under this chapter is not used within 60 days after its issuance, or its usage is discontinued for a period of 60 days or more, such nonuse shall be grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the license or permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state. 
(g)  Revocation for failure to pay fee. If the town board or authorized person or entity approves the issuance of a license or permit under this chapter and the required fee is not paid within 60 days after the date of approval, such failure to pay shall be grounds for denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of the approval of the license or permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(10), 10-9-1996; Ord. No. 2005-1, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2005)  
Sec. 6-12. - Revocation and suspension of licenses. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever the holder of any alcohol beverage license under this chapter violates any portion of this chapter, proceedings for the revocation or suspension of the license may be instituted in the manner and under the provisions established under Wis. Stats. § 125.12. In addition, the town board, by its own motion by adoption of a resolution may begin proceedings for the revocation or suspension of such license. 
(b)  Incompatibility with surrounding environment. Whenever the town board or the clerk, as agent thereof, is made aware of an incompatibility in the operation of a licensed premises in relation to its surrounding or nearby environment, or a licensed premises is in violation of any condition established, or required at the issuance of the license or of this chapter, proceedings for the purpose of revoking, establishing new conditions, or continuing the license under previous conditions will be initiated under the same procedures as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Operator's licenses. Suspension or revocation of operator's licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall be governed as follows: 
(1)  Any committee as established by the town board may revoke or suspend an operator's license following hearing held by the committee. Notice shall be mailed to the licensee not less than eight days prior to the hearing or upon personal service of notice not less than two days prior to the hearing. 
(2)  Appeal from the decision of the committee may be made by the licensee upon filing a petition for review by the full town board by presenting the petition and paying a fee, as specified in the fee schedule in the clerk's office, to the clerk. The town board shall schedule a hearing not more than 30 days from the date the appeal is filed. 
(d)  Automatic revocation. Any license or permit issued under this chapter may be revoked without further proceedings upon the conviction of the licensee, agent, employee or representative thereof, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.11. 
(e)  Additional regulations regarding restrictions, nonrenewal, cancellation, revocation and suspension of licenses. In addition to requirements of all other rules, laws and regulations of the state and this municipality, licenses are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Any license granted or issued pursuant to ordinance shall be subject to further regulation or restriction as may be imposed by the town board, by amendment to this chapter or by the enactment of a new ordinance. 
(2)  Further, the town board or any committee, if authorized by the governing body, is specifically authorized to impose reasonable conditions upon any alcohol beverage license granted or issued. 
(3)  If any licensee shall fail or neglect to meet the requirements imposed by such restrictions and regulations or the conditions imposed by the municipality, or any committee, if authorized by the town board, his license may be revoked, not renewed, suspended or cancelled in accordance with this chapter. 
(4)  In the case of revocation, nonrenewal, suspension or cancellation of any license for any violation of any provision of this chapter or violation of any condition imposed by the town board or any committee, if authorized by the town board, or by the court or for any reasonable cause, no refund shall be made of any part of the license fee. 
(5)  The following situations may be grounds for cancellation, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of licenses in accordance with the provisions of this section and law: 
a.  A license is not used within six months of the original issuance to an applicant; 
b.  When, at the request of the owner of the licensed premises, any licensee's usage of such premises is discontinued for 60 days or the remainder of a license period, whichever is less; or 
c.  Any licensed premises, for a period of 120 days, is being used for a purpose other than for the purpose of serving alcohol beverages. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 2(11), 10-9-1996)  
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Humane officer, § 2-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to section 1-8. In addition to the penalty provided for in this section, the town treasurer may collect the delinquent license taxes pursuant to the procedure contained in Wis. Stats. § 74.11, for the collection of personal property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 84-4, § 8, 11-12-1984)  
Sec. 10-2. - License requirements. 
(a)  Every owner or keeper of a dog more than six months of age on January 1 of any year shall annually at the time provided for payment of personal property tax pay the dog license tax for a neutered male and spayed female as set by town board resolution from time to time for all other dogs. A dog without license attached to its collar shall be presumptive evidence that it is unlicensed. 
(b)  No more than three dogs required to be licensed under this chapter shall be kept on any premises within the town unless a kennel license is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, § 1, 9-13-1993)  
Sec. 10-3. - Dogs for the blind and deaf exempt. 
Every dog specially trained to lead blind or deaf persons is exempt from the dog license tax set out in section 10-2. The owner of such dog may apply for and receive each year a free license for such dog upon application therefor. 
(Ord. No. 84-4, § 2, 11-12-1984)  
Sec. 10-4. - Number of dogs limited. 
The number of dogs required to be licensed under this chapter on any premises within the town shall be as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the town. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 12-14-1994)  
Sec. 10-5. - Dogs running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to permit the dog to run at large at any place within the town unless accompanied by and under the control of the owner or keeper of such dog. This section shall not prevent any dog running at large upon the premises owned or occupied by the owner or keeper of such dog. 
(Ord. No. 84-4, § 4, 11-12-1984)  
Sec. 10-6. - Harboring stray dog. 
Any person harboring a stray dog for ten days or more shall be considered its owner and shall be subject to the terms and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 84-4, § 5, 11-12-1984)  
Sec. 10-7. - Harboring certain dogs prohibited. 
No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog which: 
(1)  Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway. 
(2)  Assaults or attacks any person. 
(3)  Is vicious. A showing that a dog has bitten, attacked or injured any person shall constitute a prima facie showing that such dog is vicious. 
(4)  Frequently or habitually barks, yelps, or howls to the annoyance of any two or more other persons. 
(5)  Is required to be licensed, but is not. 
(Ord. No. 84-4, § 6, 11-12-1984)  
Sec. 10-8. - Dog pound. 
(a)  Confinement of dogs. The town animal humane officer or any other officer appointed by the town board shall apprehend any dog running at large within the town or which does any of the things prohibited under section 10-7 and confine the dog in a suitable dog pound. 
(b)  Enforcement. The animal humane officer or his qualified assistants shall be responsible for the apprehension and confinement of dogs in a pound as provided in this section and such officer shall apprehend and confine dogs as provided in this section and may enforce this section, including the right to commence actions for the collection of any forfeiture imposed by this chapter. Such action shall be brought in the name of the town. The town constable shall receive no compensation. 
(c)  Disposition of unclaimed dogs. The keeper of the pound shall keep all dogs apprehended for five days at the dog pound (unless sooner claimed by the owner or keeper) and if any dog is not reclaimed by the rightful owner or keeper within such time, the dog may be sold for the amount incurred in apprehending, keeping and caring of the dog or it may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner. 
(d)  Owner or keeper to pay costs. The owner or keeper of any dog so confined may reclaim such dog at any time before the dog is disposed of, upon payment of all costs and charges incurred in apprehending, keeping and caring of the dog. Such costs and charges may include expenses for inoculations or other medical treatment of the dog. The owner or keeper's payment of costs and charges incurred in apprehending, keeping and caring of the dog shall be made directly to the town or pound. 
(Ord. No. 84-4, § 7, 11-12-1984)  
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance concerning building forms saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(17); fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; land division and development, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, highway and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 78. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Liability. 
This chapter shall not be construed as assuming any liability on the part of the town, the building inspector or any other officers or employees of the town for damages or injuries to anyone or for any property harmed or destroyed by reason of any defect in any building or structure directed under town permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(3.02), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-2. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted under the statutory authority granted pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 101.65, 101.651, 101.76, and 101.761, and by its adoption of village powers under Wis. Stats. §§ 60.10(2)(c), 60.22(3), and 61.34(1). 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(1.01), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-3. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by establishing performance minimums and minimum standards for the design, construction, alteration, use and occupancy of buildings and structural alterations as defined in this chapter and parts thereof and of all systems, including plumbing, heating and ventilating, air conditioning, electrical and fire protection installation within buildings. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(1.02), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-4. - Scope. 
This chapter applies to all dwellings, commercial buildings/structures, swimming pools, garages, structures, buildings, residential accessory buildings and agricultural buildings. Not included are children's play structures. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(1.03), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-5. - Certain ordinances adopted. 
The provisions of the ordinances which are set forth in this section are adopted by reference and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein with respect to building location and construction. All future amendments, revisions or modifications to any of the following which may hereafter be adopted from time to time, shall upon adoption be part of this section: 
(1)  The town zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The Waukesha County Shoreland and Floodland Protection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(1.04), 10-9-1996)  
Secs. 14-6—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Penalty. 
(a)  General penalty. Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(2)  Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter who had previously been convicted of a violation of the same provision within one year, shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding six months. 
(b)  Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(3.03), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-32. - Stop work order. 
The inspector may issue a stop work order for a project to prevent further noncomplying work. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(3.04), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-33. - Adoption of codes. 
The following provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code are adopted by reference and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. All future amendments, revisions or modifications to the following provisions which may hereafter be adopted from time to time, shall, upon adoption, be part of this section so as to secure uniform statewide regulation of buildings: 
Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 16 	Electrical Code 
Wis. Admin. Code Chs. Comm. 20—25 	Uniform Dwelling Code 
Wis. Admin. Code Chs. Comm. 50—64 	Building and Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code 
Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 66 	Multi-Family Code 
Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 69 	Barrier Free Design 
Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 70 	Historic Building Code 
Wis. Admin. Code Chs. Comm. 81—86 	Uniform Plumbing Code 
Wis. Admin. Code Chs. Comm. 75—79 	Existing Building Code 
 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(1.07), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-34. - Scope of Uniform Dwelling Code expanded. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code are the standards for construction of the following: 
(1)  Additions, alterations and major equipment replacements for one and two-family dwellings built prior to June 1, 1980. 
(2)  Detached garages greater than 200 square feet serving one and two-family dwellings. Grade beam slabs are required for private, residential garages with a continuous floating slab of reinforced concrete and shall not be less than four inches in thickness. Reinforcement shall be a minimum of six inches by six inches, number ten wire mesh. The slab shall be provided with a thickened edge all around, eight inches wide and eight inches below the top of the slab. (Exempted are "frost free footings" for detached residential accessory buildings) Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm. 22 shall not apply. 
(3)  Other detached accessory buildings. Concrete slabs, frost free footings, etc., are not required, but if they are installed they shall follow subsection (2) of this section and/or Wis. Admin. Code ch. Comm. 21. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(1.08), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-35. - Variance. 
(a)  The town board shall hear requests for variances from the building code where they have authority. The town board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the variance. 
(b)  In the event a variance is requested as to the maximum driveway grade, the town board shall only have limited authority to grant any such variance. No variance shall be granted which would allow a grade in excess of 13 percent. In the event the town board would grant a variance to allow a driveway grade to exceed the applicable requirement of this chapter, but not greater than 13 percent, the variance shall be expressly conditioned as follows, along with any other conditions that the town board may impose: 
(1)  Police chief approval. Any such variance shall be conditioned upon the applicant providing proof to the town board that the police chief has considered the driveway grade and the driveway plans and has concluded that adequate police protection can be provided to the building by way of the proposed driveway. 
(2)  Fire chief approval. Any such variance shall be conditioned upon the applicant providing proof to the town board that the fire chief has considered the driveway grade and the driveway plans and has concluded that adequate fire protection and emergency equipment can be provided to the building by way of the proposed driveway during all weather conditions. 
(3)  Hold harmless. The applicant shall submit to and receive approval of from the town board a hold harmless agreement, whereby the applicant and the applicant's successors and assigns agree to maintain the driveway to a standard that allows access to emergency vehicles in all weather conditions; and hold the town, its officers, boards, commissions and representatives harmless as to any risks that may be caused by the steep slope of the driveway which may result in property damage and/or personal injuries or death, including risks associated with the inability of emergency vehicles to gain access to the buildings on the property due to the steep slope. The hold harmless agreement shall be subject to the approval of the town attorney as to form, and upon its approval and execution by the parties it shall be recorded as a deed restriction against the applicant's property and shall bind all future owners of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 2(3.05), 2-22-2002)  
Sec. 14-36. - Permit required. 
(a)  Prior to commencing any of the following work, the owner of the property upon which the work is performed, or the agent thereof, shall obtain from the town building inspector the appropriate permit or permits as required by this chapter. 
(1)  New buildings. 
(2)  Additions including decks that increase the physical dimensions of a building. 
(3)  Alterations to the building structure, cost shall include market labor value or alterations of the building's heating, electrical or plumbing systems. 
(4)  Replacement of major building equipment including furnaces, central air conditioners, water heaters and any other major pieces of equipment. 
(5)  Alterations to plumbing, venting, electrical or gas supply systems. 
(6)  Any electrical wiring for new construction or remodeling. 
(7)  Any HVAC for new construction or remodeling. 
(8)  Any plumbing for new construction or remodeling. 
(9)  Agricultural buildings. 
(b)  Exempted are re-siding, reroofing and finishing of interior surfaces, installation of cabinetry, and minor repair as deemed by the building inspector. However, unless structural calculations are provided, no more than two layers of roofing shall be installed on a roof. Exempt are normal repairs performed in subsections (a)(6), (7) and (8) of this section. 
(c)  At the time of building permit application issuance, the applicant shall pay fees as established periodically by the town board. If work commences prior to permit issuances, double fees may be charged by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(1.05), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-37. - Building and occupancy permits; deposit required. 
(a)  Deposit required. No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector for construction of a building or construction of an addition to or remodeling of an existing building on any land until a deposit in the amount of $1,000.00.00 has been paid by the applicant for such building permit unless that amount is reduced pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. The deposit shall be paid to the building inspector at the time an application is made for issuance of the building permit. The building inspector shall promptly turn the deposit over to the town treasurer. 
(b)  Deposit reduction. The building inspector may, at the building inspector's sole discretion, reduce the bond if the building inspector is satisfied that it is unlikely that there will be damage done to the town roads or to the road ditch adjacent to the property as a result of construction activities, and that the grading and landscaping of the premises will be completed, construction debris removed, all applicable ordinances complied with, and occupancy granted, as well as it is unlikely that the building will be occupied prior to the occupancy permit being granted. 
(c)  Deposit returned. 
(1)  The sums deposited shall be retained by the town treasurer until written notice is received from the building inspector, who shall not authorize a refund of monies deposited until after grading and landscaping of the premises has been established and stabilized (which must be done within one growing season after final occupancy has been granted), the construction site is cleaned of all building materials and debris, all applicable ordinances have been complied with and occupancy has been granted. Occupying the house before occupancy has been granted, or failure to complete the final grading or to establish and stabilize landscaping within one growing season of final occupancy being granted will result in forfeiture of all the sums deposited, in addition to any other penalties or other remedies that may apply. 
(2)  In the event damage is done to town roads or to the road ditch adjacent to the property as a result of construction activities, the deposit shall be used to pay any costs incurred by the town to repair such damage. In the event the deposit is insufficient to cover all costs incurred by the town, the property owner shall be liable to the town for payment of any excess costs and no occupancy permit shall be issued for the property until such costs are paid. The balance of the deposit, after deducting such expenses incurred by the town to repair the damage, or alternatively, the entire deposit in the event no such damage has occurred, shall be returned to the property owner by the treasurer after receipt of written notice from the building inspector as noted in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(d)  Time to pay excess costs. The building inspector shall give each property owner billed for payment of any excess costs a period of time not to exceed 30 days to pay and, thereafter, if that charge remains unpaid, the clerk shall automatically charge that delinquent bill against the current or next tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property as provided by law. In the event the statement rendered to the property owner or the time given for the property owner to pay is too late in the current year for the charge, when it becomes delinquent, to be extended on that year's tax roll, then the delinquent charge shall be extended to the following year's tax roll. 
(e)  Appeal. Any person who wishes to dispute the amount of refund may contact the clerk and request to appear before the town board at an upcoming regular town board meeting and may, at that time, present the matter to the town board for resolution. Appeal from the decision of the town board shall be by writ of certiorari to the county circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 98-5, § 2, 11-11-1998)  
Sec. 14-38. - Building permit expiration. 
Non-UDC building permits shall be valid for a period of 12 months. UDC building permits shall be valid for a period of 24 months. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(1.06), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-39. - Building-HVAC-electrical-plumbing inspector. 
(a)  Creation and appointment. There is created the office of building inspector. The building inspector shall be appointed by the municipality. The building inspector shall be certified for inspection purposes by the department in the required categories specified under the Wisconsin Admin. Code. 
(b)  Subordinates. The building inspector may appoint, as necessary, subordinate, mechanical inspectors. Any subordinate hired to inspect buildings shall be certified as defined in the Wisconsin Admin. Code. 
(c)  Duties. The inspector's duties shall include, but not be limited to, administration and enforcement of this chapter, conducting requested inspections and issuance of building permits. 
(d)  Powers. The inspector or an authorized certified agent may at all reasonable hours enter upon any public or private premises for inspection purposes and may require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating work. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to the inspector or his agent while in the performance of his duties. 
(e)  Inspections. The following inspections shall be requested 48 hours in advance by the applicant/contractor or property owner as applicable. 
(1)  Footing/foundation. 
(2)  Rough carpentry, HVAC, electric and plumbing. 
(3)  Draintile/basement floor. 
(4)  Underfloor plumbing/electric service/electric trench for buried cables. 
(5)  Insulation. 
(6)  Final carpentry, HVAC, electric and plumbing. 
(7)  Erosion control. 
Failure to request any inspection will be the responsibility of the contractor and/or property owner. 
(f)  Records. The inspector shall perform all administrative tasks required by the state department of commerce under all codes covered in Wis. Admin. Code Comm. § 20.09. In addition, the inspector shall keep a record of all applications for building permits and shall number each building permit in the order of its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(1.09), 10-9-1996) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-31 et seq.  
Sec. 14-40. - Submission of plans. 
Two sets of building plans shall be submitted to the inspector for any work which expands the size of a building, any new building or as required by the inspector. If a new building or building addition is proposed, then a plot plan or certified survey map showing such proposed work and existing buildings and property lines shall be submitted. A third set of building plans may be requested at the discretion of the building inspector for the assessor. Additionally, two sets of driveway plans shall be submitted for all new buildings, which shall include: the location of the driveway and an accurate depiction of the slope that the driveway will have upon its completion, which shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor, architect, or other qualified professional and shall be verified by measurements taken on the site; a description of the methods to be employed for stabilization of any cut or filled areas; a description of the location and methods to be employed for relocation of any fill material; the time table for completion and stabilization; and a description of the construction materials to be used in constructing the driveway, including whether it will have a gravel, asphalt or concrete surface. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1(2.01), 2-22-2002)  
Sec. 14-41. - Issuance of permit. 
The inspector shall issue the requested permit after all state, county and local submission requirements are satisfied and additional information as required by the building inspector is submitted. If a permit card is issued, it shall be posted at the job site in a location visible from the street. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.02), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-42. - Occupancy bond required. 
(a)  Deposit required. No building or razing permit shall be issued by the building inspector for construction or demolition of a building or construction of an addition to or remodeling of an existing building on any land until a deposit in the amount set by resolution of the town board from time to time has been paid by the applicant for such building permit. The deposit shall be paid to the building inspector at the time an application is made for issuance of the building permit. The building inspector shall promptly turn the deposit over to the town treasurer. 
(b)  Deposit waived. The building inspector may, at his sole discretion, reduce the bond if the building inspector is satisfied that it is unlikely that there will be damage done to the town roads or to the road ditch adjacent to the property as a result of construction activities, and that the grading and landscaping of the premises will be completed, construction debris removed, all applicable ordinances complied with, and occupancy granted, as well as it is unlikely that the building will be occupied prior to the occupancy permit being granted. 
(c)  Deposit returned. 
(1)  The sums deposited shall be retained by the town treasurer until such time as the town treasurer receives written notice from the building inspector to refund some or all of the money deposited. The building inspector shall not authorize any refund of the money deposited until after grading and landscaping of the premises has been completed, construction debris removed, all applicable ordinances have been complied with and occupancy has been granted. Landscaping shall include vegetation of the front yard, perimeter of home and ditch. Front yard vegetation is only required if the topography is such that erosion is a concern as determined by the building inspection department. 
(2)  In the event damage is done to town roads or to the road ditch adjacent to the property as a result of construction activities, the deposit shall be used to pay any costs incurred by the town to repair such damage. In the event the deposit is insufficient to cover all costs incurred by the town, the property owner shall be liable to the town for payment of any excess costs and no occupancy permit shall be issued for the property until such costs are paid. The balance of the deposit, after deducting such expenses incurred by the town to repair the damage, or alternatively, the entire deposit in the event no such damage has occurred, shall be returned to the property owner by the treasurer after receipt of written notice from the building inspector as noted in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(d)  Time to pay. The building inspector shall give each property owner billed for payment of any excess costs a period of time not to exceed 30 days to pay and, thereafter, if that charge remains unpaid, the clerk shall automatically charge that delinquent bill against the current or next tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property as provided by law. In the event the statement rendered to the property owner or the time given for the property owner to pay is too late in the current year for the charge, when it becomes delinquent, to be extended on that year's tax roll, then the delinquent charge shall be extended to the following year's tax roll. 
(e)  Appeal. Any person who wishes to dispute the amount of refund may contact the clerk and request to appear before the town board at the upcoming regular town board meeting and may, at that time, present the matter to the town board for resolution. Appeal from the decision of the town board shall be by writ of certiorari to the county circuit court. 
(f)  Occupancy permit fee. 
(1)  The town board may establish a fee, by separate resolution from time to time, to recover the costs incurred by the town in administering the collection and disbursement and retention of the occupancy bond and deposit and in the processing and issuance of the occupancy permit. 
(2)  The fee provided for in subsection (f)(1) of this section shall be collected by the building inspector at the time of issuance of any building or raze permit in addition to any other required permit fee and occupancy bond and shall be transmitted to the town treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.03), 10-9-1996; Ord. No. 2006-7, § 1, 6-21-2006)  
Sec. 14-43. - Occupancy permit. 
If no noncompliances are found by the building inspector, then the inspector shall issue an occupancy permit. If minor noncompliances, other than health or safety items are in existence, the inspector may issue a temporary occupancy permit for 90 days. Occupancy may not be taken until an occupancy permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.10), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-44. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private swimming pool means a receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water, having a depth at any point of more than 18 inches, whether above or below the ground, used or intended to be used by the owner thereof, and his family and invited guests, for bathing or swimming, and includes all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances, and other facilities appurtenant thereto and intended for the operation and maintenance of a private swimming pool. Temporary pools less than 200 cubic feet in area and less than 18 inches in water depth which are dismantled and removed for the winter are not included in this definition. 
(b)  Construction and installation standards. 
(1)  Private swimming pools. No person shall construct, install, enlarge, reconstruct or maintain a residential swimming pool not enclosed in a permanent building in the town except in accordance with the regulations of this chapter. Those swimming pools that are completely enclosed with a permanent building, shall comply with all ordinances, building codes, regulations and statutes applicable but where a conflict occurs, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(2)  Permit. No person shall construct, install, enlarge, or alter any private swimming pool unless permits have first been obtained from the building, electrical and plumbing inspectors. The pool building permit fees shall be paid in an amount established by separate resolution from time to time by the town board. Applications shall be on forms provided by the building inspector, and shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale showing pool dimensions and volume of water in gallons; locations and type of water waste disposal system; location of pool on lot and distance from lot lines, and fencing. The building inspector shall refer the application for any pool which he considers to be undesirable in appearance to the plan commission. The plan commission shall have the authority to approve, deny or impose appropriate changes or safeguards. Its decision shall be based upon the avoidance of a substantial adverse effect upon property values in the neighborhood. 
(3)  Construction of pool. A private swimming pool shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Distance required. All private swimming pools shall be constructed at the minimum setback and offset requirement for buildings located within the district where such swimming pool is located. 
b.  Area. The area of the pool shall not exceed three percent of the area of the lot. 
(4)  Fences. Every private swimming pool, unless completely enclosed in a structure, shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height, but not to exceed six feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps which would allow access by unauthorized persons, except for doors or gates. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. All gates or doors opening through such enclosures shall be equipped with an inside self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. 
a.  A temporary fence (snow fence, et cetera) can be used while such pool is under construction. 
b.  Aboveground pools with self-providing fencing to prevent unguarded entry will be allowed without separate additional fencing provided the self-provided fence is of the minimum required height and design as heretofore specified. Permanent access from grade to aboveground pools having stationary ladders, stairs, or ramps shall not have less than equal safeguard fencing and gates as are provided the pool proper. 
c.  No direct connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer or septic system. 
d.  Provisions shall be made for the disinfection of all pool water. No gaseous chlorination shall be permitted. 
e.  Except for a properly installed diving board, access ladders or safety railings, there shall be an unobstructed concrete areaway around the entire pool of at least three feet on in-ground pools. 
f.  Heating units, pumps and filter equipment shall in no case be less than 20 feet from any property line. Requirements for heating units shall be equal to those required for residential installation. 
g.  Any exterior bibs to be used in conjunction with the filling of any swimming pool shall have an anti-siphoning type valve. 
(5)  Electrical regulations. 
a.  All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a private swimming pool shall be in conformance with the national, state, and local code regulating electric installations. 
b.  All electrical installations must be inspected by the town electrical inspector and any electrical work to be covered by concrete, or otherwise, must be inspected prior to being so covered. 
(c)  Final inspection. The building inspector shall make a final inspection of all newly constructed, installed, enlarged or reconstructed pools and shall issue a certificate of occupancy if no violation of this or any other ordinance, law, or lawful order is found. No owner shall use, or permit to be used, any such pool until final inspection has been made and occupancy permit issued. 
(d)  Lights. If overhead flood or other artificial lights are used to illuminate a pool at night, such light shall be shielded to direct light only on the pool. 
(e)  Nuisances. No pool shall be operated or maintained to create a nuisance, an eyesore or otherwise to result in a substantial adverse effect on neighboring properties or to be in any other way detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(f)  Sanitation. A swimming pool and its appurtenant facilities shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.07), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-45. - Fees. 
At the time of building permit application issuance, the applicant shall pay fees as established periodically by the town board. If work commences prior to permit issuances, double fees may be charged by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(3.01), 10-9-1996)  
Secs. 14-46—14-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNIFORM ADDRESSES 
 
Sec. 14-71. - County uniform address system adopted. 
The uniform address system of the town shall be based on and become a part of the uniform address system for the county and shall conform to the uniform system of numbering recommended in the report of the special committee of the county board appointed to study developing a uniform address system. All provisions relating to the establishment of a uniform address system for the county are hereby adopted and approved and such provisions are applicable to the town. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.14(1)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-72. - Uniform system of numbering parcels established. 
There is established a uniform system of numbering parcels in the town, and all existing parcels and all parcels which are hereafter created shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of the uniform address system of the town. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.14(2)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-73. - Assignment of addresses. 
After the final approval of any new subdivision or other division of land, the town's agent shall assign an address to each parcel. Records shall be kept of the assignments and a copy shall be provided to the clerk, town treasurer, town building inspector, town assessor, fire department and owner. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.14(3)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-74. - Plat book. 
The town's agent shall maintain a plat book and/or map showing the proper addresses of all parcels in the town. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.14(4)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-75. - Numbers to be procured. 
The parcel owner shall receive the numbers assigned to that address, a mounting post and installation brackets from the town's agent. A fee shall be charged to the parcel owner in an amount to be approved by the town board. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.14(5)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-76. - Numbers must be placed conspicuously. 
All parcel owners shall install or cause to be installed in a conspicuous place upon the parcel the numbers assigned under the uniform address system provided for by this article. Address numbers shall be conspicuously placed within 50 feet of the centerline of the road, at least four feet above the grade on which the address number is located, and within six feet of the driveway. Address numbers must be visible from the traveled portion of the road and must be plainly seen from the road by vehicles traveling from both directions. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.14(6)), 10-9-1996)  
Secs. 14-77—14-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CULVERTS AND DRIVEWAYS 
 
Sec. 14-111. - Definition of culverts. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Culverts means those structures which function to convey surface water through an embankment or under a roadway or a driveway. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.09(1)(a)), 10-9-1996) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-112. - Standard design specifications. 
(a)  Generally. The location of culverts shall be determined by the building inspector or town inspection service. All culverts shall be a minimum of five feet from the lot line as extended into the right-of-way unless the building inspector finds there are exceptional circumstances allowing the location of the culvert to be closer than five feet from the lot line as extended into the right-of-way. 
(b)  Culvert size. The size of culverts shall be determined by the town engineer. 
(c)  Special design criteria. 
(1)  Apron ends shall be provided on cross-road culverts and driveway culverts. 
(2)  All driveway culverts shall be at least 15 inches in diameter and no driveway culvert shall be less than 18 feet or more than 22 feet in length at the outer street edge unless special permission is obtained from the town board. 
(d)  Standard material and construction specifications. The applicable portions of the most current edition of state department of transportation, division of highways, standard specifications for road and bridge construction shall govern, except as amended in this article. 
(e)  Special material specifications. All culverts must be made of reinforced concrete and corrugated metal pipe. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.09(1)(b)—(e)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-113. - Culvert installation. 
No person shall install or have installed any culvert in the town without first obtaining a culvert sizing permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.09(2)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-114. - Cost of culvert sizing permit. 
The owner of the property serviced by the culvert or any applicant for installation of a culvert shall pay a permit fee as established from time to time by the town board. Such fees shall be paid to the clerk or his designee before any culvert sizing permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.09(3)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-115. - Permit process. 
(a)  Form of application; description of property. Applications for a culvert sizing permit shall be made in writing to the building inspector or inspection service on forms prescribed by the town board. The property shall be described by address and a tax key number. The culvert location shall be described and the owner or applicant must stake the culvert location at the property using the stakes provided by the town. 
(b)  Copies to town engineer and clerk. Upon receipt of the application, the building inspector or inspection service shall immediately forward a copy of the application to the town engineer and the clerk. 
(c)  Review procedures. Upon receipt of a copy of the application, the town engineer shall review the application, determine the appropriate size and report the determination to the building inspector or inspection service. A minimum of one week from the town engineer's receipt of the application shall be allowed for the town engineer's determination. 
(d)  Issuance. Upon approval of the location, payment of all fees and a determination of size by the town engineer, the building inspector or inspection service shall issue a town culvert sizing permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.09(4)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-116. - Prohibited installation. 
Any culvert installed in violation hereof shall be removed by the owner of the property serviced by the prohibited culvert. If the culvert is not removed after ten days' written notice from the building inspector or inspection service, the town shall remove such culvert and bill the property owner for the expenses incurred by the town in such removal. If the property owner fails to pay the expenses of the town for removal of the culvert, the charges may be placed upon the tax roll and collected as a special tax under Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.09(5)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-117. - Continuing responsibility for culvert. 
Every property owner will have a continuing obligation to maintain the repair of the culvert servicing their property. Should any culvert become in such a condition of disrepair or have damage to such extent that the ditch drainage is affected thereby, the property owner shall take whatever steps are necessary to repair or replace such defective culvert. In the event a property owner shall fail to maintain their culvert as required, then in that event the town shall have the right to proceed to repair or replace the defective culvert. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.09(6)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-118. - New driveways. 
(a)  Location of new driveways regulated. Upon the issuance of a building permit, the town building inspector is empowered to designate the location of a property owner's driveway if, in his opinion, the parcel of real estate upon which such property owner is constructing a home or building is of such nature that the location of such driveway would bear heavily upon the feasibility of access by emergency vehicles to the home or building being constructed. Further, the building inspector shall have the right to designate on such parcel of real estate the location and method of construction of such driveway so that the driveway is capable of being used under normal weather conditions to gain access to the home or building being served. 
(b)  Construction standards. 
(1)  All driveways shall provide a minimum unobstructed width of 12 feet (3.7 meters) and minimum unobstructed vertical clearance of 15 feet (4.6 meters). 
(2)  Turnouts shall be designed and constructed every 400 feet (122 meters) along the driveway's length. 
(3)  A turnaround shall be provided at all building or construction sites on driveways over 300 feet (91 meters) in length and shall be within 50 feet (15.2 meters) of the building or structure. 
(4)  Driveways not to exceed ten percent grade. 
(5)  Driveway location shall not be closer than five feet to side or rear lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.13), 10-9-1996)  
Secs. 14-119—14-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 14-151. - Application of article. 
This article applies to all structures located in a residential zoned area and to all structures and sites used for residential purposes but zoned for other uses. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-152. - Minimum standards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use or let or hold out to another for occupancy for use any building, structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(a)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-153. - Foundations, exterior walls and roofs. 
The foundation shall be substantially watertight and protected against rodents and shall be kept in good condition and repair. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points. Every exterior wall shall be substantially watertight, weathertight, protected against rodents, kept in good condition and repair and shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timber, and any other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the interior spaces of the dwelling. All exterior wood surfaces shall be protected by paint, stain or other water and weather resistant treatment. Every roof shall be watertight, weathertight, kept in good condition and repair and have no dangerous defects. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls. All cornices, copings, parapets, moldings, belt courses, lintel, sills and similar projections shall be kept in good repair, free from cracks or defects which make them hazardous or dangerous. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(b)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-154. - Windows, doors and hatchways. 
Every window shall be fully supplied with transparent or translucent window panes which are substantially without cracks or holes, shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in good condition and repair. Windows, other than fixed windows, shall be easily opened and shall be held in position by window hardware. Every exterior door shall fit substantially tight within its frame and shall be kept in good condition. Window and door frames shall be kept in good condition and shall exclude rain and substantially exclude wind from entering the building or structure. Every basement hatchway shall prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water into the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(c)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-155. - Stairways and porches. 
Every exterior stairway and every porch and its supports shall be kept in good and safe condition and repair and shall be free of deterioration with every rail and balustrade firmly fastened and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(d)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-156. - Chimneys. 
Every chimney and chimney flue shall be in good and safe condition and repair. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(e)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-157. - Grading and drainage of lots. 
Every yard, court driveway or other portion of the lot shall be graded or drained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water on any such surface. Driveways shall be maintained in good condition and repair. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(f)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-158. - Yards. 
Yards shall be kept substantially clear of debris and shall be provided with adequate lawn or ground cover or vegetation, hedges or bushes. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(g)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-159. - Infestation. 
Every building, structure and all exterior appurtenances on the premises shall be adequately protected against rats, mice, termites, and other vermin. Occupants and operators shall be responsible for the extermination of rodents and vermin from that part of the premises under their exclusive control except where more than one unit is infested at the same time and in this instance the owner shall also be responsible for extermination of the infestation. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(h)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-160. - Refuse, garbage and rubbish storage requirements. 
Every building or structure shall have adequate refuse, garbage or rubbish storage facilities. Garbage containers shall all have tight covers and shall be kept in place at all times. No occupant shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, metal or other materials which may provide harborage for rodents or vermin. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(i)), 10-9-1996) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 58.  
Sec. 14-161. - Accessory structures. 
Every accessory structure shall be kept in good condition and repair, shall not obstruct access of light or air to doors or windows, shall not obstruct a safe means of access to any building or structure, shall not create fire or safety hazards and shall not provide rat or vermin harborage. All accessory structures which are in deteriorated condition and which are not repairable shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(j)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-162. - Maintenance of property; complaints. 
Complaints alleging a violation of this article shall be commenced by service of written notice of noncompliance upon the property owner, the form is provided by the town. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.12(1)(k)), 10-9-1996)  
Secs. 14-163—14-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Razing buildings generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.0413. 
 
Sec. 14-191. - Unsafe buildings. 
Whenever the building inspector determines that any building or structure is so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for habitation, occupancy or use and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the building or structure, he shall order the owner to raze and remove all or part thereof specified by the building inspector with town board approval. If such unfit structure can be made safe by repairs, it may be so put at the owner's option, whether to repair and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.04), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-192. - Condemnation (razing) of and removal of unsafe structures; demolition permit required. 
All persons who demolish or cause to be demolished any structure or part of a structure larger than 400 square feet within the town shall apply for and obtain a demolition permit from the building inspector prior to undertaking any steps to demolish the structure. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.05(1)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-193. - Application. 
An application for a permit to demolish all or part of a building shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the building on the date of the application and, if different, on the date of demolition. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the contractor(s) performing the demolition work. 
(3)  The date upon which demolition is to commence. 
(4)  The date by which demolition shall be complete. 
(5)  A list of all hazardous waste and hazardous and toxic substances as defined by the Wis. Admin. Code NR § 158.03(4) as amended from time to time, contained in the building, a statement as to whether the building contains asbestos as defined by the Wis. Admin. Code NR § 445.02(2), and a detailed description of the method to be used in removing, transporting and disposing of any hazardous waste, hazardous and toxic substances, and asbestos. 
(6)  A detailed description of how and where the waste materials resulting from the demolition will be transported and disposed of (including the description of the route to be used by trucks in hauling the waste). 
(7)  A description of the method of demolition to be used. 
(8)  A description in detail of all methods to be used to prevent water runoff and soil erosion from the site to neighboring properties and to prevent releasing unreasonable amounts of dust from the site. 
(9)  Along with the application for permit for demolition, the applicant shall present a release from all utilities serving the property, stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant equipment such as meters and regulators have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.05(2)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-194. - Demolition. 
The demolition shall be conducted in a manner that is safe and that does not adversely affect the environment. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.05(3)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-195. - Clearing and leveling the site. 
(a)  The site of any demolition shall be properly cleared of debris, rubbish and pavement and shall be properly graded and leveled to conform with the adjoining grade of the neighboring property; and when so graded and leveled, the site shall be seeded, sodded or treated in some other manner acceptable to the building inspector to prevent blowing dust, dirt or sand. Excavations remaining after demolition shall be filled, graded and leveled off, not later than 30 consecutive days after demolition is completed. 
(b)  Excavations from demolished buildings or structures shall not be filled with any materials subject to deterioration. The building inspector, upon notification by the permit holder, the owner or his agent, in writing and upon forms provided by the building inspector for that purpose, shall within 72 hours inspect each excavation, or part thereof, before any excavation filling commences. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to fill any such excavation without inspection and approval of the building inspector. Voids in filled excavations shall not be permitted. In the event of the unavailability of the building inspector to conduct an inspection within the 72 hours after written notice, the permit holder, owner or his agent may retain the services of a certified, qualified municipal inspection service to obtain an opinion that approves filling of the excavation. Such opinion shall be deemed a sufficient approval by the town provided that a written copy of the opinion is delivered to the clerk at least 48 hours before filling of the excavation commences. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.05(4)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-196. - Removal and disposal. 
No building materials and debris will be disposed of within the town in any manner unless such disposal is approved by the building inspector. Removal, transportation and disposal of all hazardous waste, hazardous and toxic substances, and asbestos shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable state, federal and local statutes, ordinances and regulations. The permit holder shall give the building inspector 72 hours' written notice prior to any removal, transportation or disposal of hazardous waste, hazardous and toxic substances and asbestos. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.05(5)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-197. - Permit fees. 
Permit fees as established by separate resolution from time to time by the town board, must be paid prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.05(6)), 10-9-1996)  
Secs. 14-198—14-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MOVING BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, highways and other public places, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 14-231. - Permit required. 
No person shall move any building or structure upon any public right-of-way within the town unless that person first obtains a building moving permit from the building inspector. Every permit issued by the building inspector for the moving of a building shall designate the route over which the building will be moved, the conditions to be complied with and the time limit within which such moving operations shall be completed. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.06(1)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-232. - Permit application. 
Any person applying for a building moving permit shall provide the following: 
(1)  Route of travel through the town. 
(2)  Location of any overhead wires or other utilities which will have to be moved or relocated to accommodate the move. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the building and, if different, owner of lot to which building is being moved. 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of the company performing the move together with at least two references from prior moves. 
(5)  Exterior elevations of the building and accurate photographs of all sides and views of the building. 
(6)  In the event that it is proposed to alter the exterior of the building, plans and specifications of such proposed alterations. 
(7)  Accurate photographs and site plan of the site at which the building is to be located. 
(8)  The appropriate application fee. 
(9)  Proof of public liability insurance covering injury to one person in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 and for one accident, aggregate not less than $1,000,000.00, together with property damage insurance in the sum of not less than $500,000.00, naming the town as an additional insured. 
(10)  The requirements of subsections (6) and (7) of this section shall not be required in the event that the building is not to be located within the town. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.06(2)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-233. - Cash deposit. 
Upon receipt of the permit application, the town engineer and or the highway commission shall review the proposed route over which the building will be moved and the conditions of the roads on that route. If the building is to be located upon a site within the town, the building inspector shall also inspect the building at the location from which it is to be moved in order to determine whether the building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of this chapter, the town zoning code and all other applicable codes in all respects. The building inspector shall also review the plans for improvements and remodeling of the building, if any. The building inspector shall then provide his findings in a written report to the town plan commission, including a recommendation from the town engineer as to an appropriate cash deposit amount to cover potential damage to town highways, as well as his findings, in the event the building is to be located within the town, regarding the condition of the building and its conformity or potential conformity to town codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.06(3)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-234. - Plan commission review. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report from the building inspector, the plan commission shall review such report and, if necessary, review the route over which the building will be moved. The plan commission shall then set an appropriate cash deposit, as specified in the fee schedule in the clerk's office. Such cash deposit shall be held to secure payment of any costs arising out of any damage to town highways or other town property. Such cash deposit shall also secure payment of any costs or other expenses incurred by the town in connection with any claims for damages to any persons or properties, and the payment of any judgment, together with the costs or expenses incurred by the town in connection therewith, arising out of the moving of the building for which the permit is issued. The applicant shall also provide the town with an indemnification agreement, indemnifying the town from any claims for damages arising out of the moving of the building in question. 
(b)  If the building in question is to be moved and located on a site within the town, the plan commission shall also review the plans, photographs and other documents regarding the building together with the building inspector's report regarding the building. The plan commission shall then determine whether the exterior architectural character and functional plans of the building to be moved, including alterations of any kind, will be so at variance with either the exterior architectural character and functional plans of the buildings already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate area or in the character of the applicable district established by the zoning ordinance of the town so as to cause a substantial depreciation of the property values of the neighborhood within such applicable district. No permit shall be issued unless the plan commission makes a finding, by at least a majority vote, that the building will not be at variance with the neighborhood as noted in this subsection. 
(c)  If the building is to be located upon a site within the town, the plan commission shall also set a separate cash deposit, as specified in the fee schedule in the clerk's office, and, in addition to the cash deposit noted in subsection (a) of this section, to secure and ensure that the building shall actually be located upon the site and all exterior alterations completed in conformance with the plans, photographs and specifications provided by the applicant. This cash deposit shall be in addition to any applicable laws of the town. 
(d)  Upon the written request of the building inspector, the applicant or any interested party, the plan commission shall conduct a public hearing on the moving permit request. Such hearing may be adjourned for a reasonable length of time. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.06(4)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-235. - Issuance of permit. 
Upon a favorable finding of the plan commission, and upon payment of all cash deposit amounts set by the plan commission, the building inspector shall issue a building moving permit. All subsequent moving of the building shall be done pursuant to the terms of the permit and terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.06(5)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-236. - Continuous movement. 
The movement of a building pursuant to permit shall be a continuous operation during all hours of the day, and day by day, until such movement is fully completed. All operations shall be performed with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No buildings shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to a fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lighted lanterns shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.06(6)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 14-237. - Street repair. 
Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one day after such building reaches its destination, report the fact to the building inspector who shall thereupon, in the company of the town chair of public works and roads, inspect the streets and highways over which such building has been moved and ascertain their condition. If the movement of the building has caused any damage to any town street or highway, the person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith place them in as good a repair as they were before the permit was granted. On the failure of the permittee to do so within ten days after notification from the town, the town shall repair the damage done and deduct the costs of any repair from the cash deposit provided under section 14-234(a). 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.06(7)), 10-9-1996)  
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcohol beverages, ch. 6; CATV, ch. 22; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74; B-1 restricted business district, § 82-180 et seq.; B-2 local business district, § 82-190 et seq.; B-3 general business district, § 82-200 et seq.; M-1 limited industrial district, § 82-230 et seq.; M-2 general industrial district, § 82-240 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The introductory language of Ordinance No. 95-3-A, adopted June 14, 1995, and codified in this article, provided as follows: 
Whereas , it is a lawful purpose of the Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin, to enact regulatory ordinances protecting and promoting the general welfare, health and safety of its citizens; and 
Whereas , the town is empowered to enact such ordinances pursuant to the Constitution and laws of the State of Wisconsin; and 
Whereas , the town board deems it necessary to provide for licensing and regulation of adult-oriented establishments including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult minimotion picture establishments, adult motion picture theaters and adult cabarets; and 
Whereas, many adult-oriented establishments install booths with doors in which patrons can view adult-oriented movies or videotapes or film or view other forms of adult entertainment; and 
Whereas , it is well known and has been found in Milwaukee and Kenosha Counties, Wisconsin; Chattanooga, Tennessee; Newport News, Virginia; and Marion County, Indiana, to name a few locals, that the viewing booths in adult-oriented establishments have been and are being used by patrons of such establishments for engaging in sexual acts, particularly between males, including, but not limited to, intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation and masturbation, resulting in unsafe and unsanitary conditions in such booths; and 
Whereas , the State of Wisconsin Division of Health has reported a continued increase in the number of cases of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome in the state; and 
Whereas , AIDS is a sexually transmitted disease which destroys the body's immune system, is always fatal, and has no known cure; and 
Whereas , the viral agents responsible for AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases have all been isolated at one time or another from semen. 
Now, therefore, the Town Board for the Town of Mukwonago do ordain as follows: 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having as its stock in trade, for sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing books, films, videocassettes, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in this section, and in conjunction therewith have facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment, as defined in this section, including adult oriented films, movies or live performances for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult cabaret means a cabaret which features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme, or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in this section, or the removal of articles of clothing or appearing partially or totally nude. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities," or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult-oriented establishment , shall include, but is not limited to, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture establishments or adult cabarets, and further means any premises to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, whether or not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. 
Operators means any person, partnership, entity or corporation operating, conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breasts below the point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means simulated or actual: 
(1)  Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sado-masochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus; 
(3)  Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(1), 6-14-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-32. - Penalties and prosecution. 
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article or who shall fail to obtain a license or permit as required under this article shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each day that the party is deemed to be in violation of this article together with the cost of prosecution. Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct offense under the terms of this article. Failure to pay any penalty imposed by a court of law under this article shall subject the defendant to commitment to the county jail or other remedy as provided under law. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(13), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-33. - Exclusions. 
All private schools, and public schools, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 115, located within the town are exempt from obtaining a license under this article when instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(12), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-34. - License. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no adult-oriented establishment shall be operated or maintained in the town without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the town. 
(b)  A license may be issued only for an adult-oriented establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership, or corporation which desires to operate more than one adult-oriented establishment must have a license for each. 
(c)  No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person, partnership or corporation. 
(d)  All adult-oriented establishments existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived must submit an application for a license within 90 days of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. If an application is not received within such 90-day period, then such existing adult-oriented establishment shall cease operations. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(2), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-35. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license shall make application to the clerk. The application shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the clerk. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly by the clerk to the police department and to the applicant. 
(b)  The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the clerk. An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information under oath: 
(1)  Name and address. 
(2)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(3)  The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated by the applicant. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agents and the name and address of all shareholders owning more than five percent of the stock in such corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
(c)  Within 21 days of receiving an application for a license the clerk shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted or denied. 
(d)  Whenever an application is denied, the clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within ten days of receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within ten days thereafter before the town board, as provided in this article. 
(e)  Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the application or his refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding such application or his refusal to submit to or cooperate with regard to any information required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(3), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-36. - Standards for issuance of license. 
To receive a license to operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant must meet the following standards: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual: 
a.  The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age. 
b.  The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this article within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation: 
a.  All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under section 18-35 shall be at least 18 years of age. 
b.  No officer, director, or stockholder required to be named under section 18-35 shall have been found to have previously violated this article within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, or any other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest: 
a.  All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of age. 
b.  No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have violated any provision of this article within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(4), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-37. - Fees. 
A license fee set by town board resolution from time to time shall be submitted with the application for a license. If the application under this article is denied, one-half of the fee shall be returned. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(5), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-38. - Display of license. 
The license under this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult-oriented establishment. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(6), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-39. - Renewal of license or permit. 
(a)  Every license issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the clerk. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the clerk to the operator. The application or renewal shall be upon a form provided by the clerk and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license. 
(b)  A license renewal fee set by town board resolution from time to time shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty set by town resolution from time to time shall be assessed against any applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days before the license expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the total fees collected shall be returned. 
(c)  If the police department is aware of any information bearing on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(7), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-40. - Revocation of license or permit. 
(a)  The town board shall revoke a license or permit issued under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material facts were omitted from any application. 
(2)  The operator or any employee of the operator violates any provision of this article or any rule or regulation adopted by the town pursuant to this article; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the town board shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge. 
(3)  The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit. 
(4)  Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid. 
(5)  Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the adult-oriented establishment. 
(b)  The town board, before revoking or suspending any license or permit, shall give the operator at least ten days' written notice of the charges against him, and the opportunity for a public hearing before the town board, as provided in this article. 
(c)  The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license issued under this article. 
(d)  Any operator whose license under this article is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an adult-oriented establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(8), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-41. - Physical layout of adult-oriented establishment. 
Any adult-oriented establishment having available for customers, patrons or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented establishment and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying the booth, room or cubicle. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of a booth, room or cubicle shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(9), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-42. - Responsibilities of the operator. 
(a)  Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article deemed the act of omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(b)  Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(c)  No employees of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult-oriented establishment or to allow any minor to view adult entertainment. 
(d)  The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(e)  The operator shall maintain at least ten footcandles of light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles; provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of illumination in such aisles, as measured from the floor. 
(f)  The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(10), 6-14-1995)  
Sec. 18-43. - Administrative review procedure. 
The town ordinances and state law shall govern the administrative procedure and review regarding the granting, denial, renewal, nonrenewal, revocation or suspension of a license. 
(Ord. No. 95-3-A, § I(11), 6-14-1995)  
Secs. 18-44—18-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The introductory language of Ordinance No. 94-13, adopted Sept. 12, 1994, and codified in this article, provided as follows: 
Whereas, the Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago recognizes that alarm systems serve a public service; and; 
Whereas, The Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago has determined that it is necessary to establish standards and regulations for all alarm systems in the Town of Mukwonago in order to prevent responses by the police or fire departments when an emergency situation does not exist due to carelessness, improper maintenance or any other cause which results in false alarms from privately owned, commercially owned, leased or contracted alarm systems; and; 
Whereas , these false alarms initiate police and fire personnel and vehicle responses which result in unnecessary expense to the town, increases the risk of damage to property or injury to persons and dilutes the police and fire protection available to other areas of the town; and 
Whereas, the chief of police for the Town of Mukwonago has advised the Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago that the number of such false alarms has been increasing, and 
Whereas, the Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago has determined that such false alarms constitute a public nuisance which must be abated and/or penalized. 
Now, therefore, the Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago, Waukesha County, Wisconsin, DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS: 
 
Sec. 18-71. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations, standards and controls relating to the use of alarm devices and to prevent repeated false alarms which intentionally or otherwise create a hazard to the public. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, § 1(A), 9-12-1994)  
Sec. 18-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meaning subscribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means a device which is used at establishments and residences and transmits a signal from the alarm system resulting in a response by the town police department and/or the town fire department, whether directly or indirectly. 
False alarm means a signal from an alarm system resulting in a response by the town police department and/or town fire department when an emergency situation does not exist. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, § 1(B), 9-12-1994) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-73. - Alarm requirements. 
(a)  For various reasons, false alarms from alarm systems frequently occur. Each false alarm requires a response by public safety personnel, involves unnecessary expense to the town, increases the risk of damage to property or injury to persons and dilutes the overall public safety protection to the town. Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance and must be abated. Persons shall pay to the town a charge for such false alarms according to the following schedule for each calendar year for each premises served by an alarm system: 
(1)  First two false alarms: No charge. 
(2)  Third false alarm: $50.00. 
(3)  Fourth false alarm: $75.00. 
(4)  Fifth and subsequent false alarms: $100.00. 
(b)  This section is intended to impose a strict liability on the person whose premises is protected by an alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, § 1(C), 9-12-1994)  
Sec. 18-74. - Intentional false alarms. 
No person shall intentionally cause the activation of an alarm device knowing that no crime or emergency exists. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, § 1(D), 9-12-1994)  
Sec. 18-75. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person over the age of 17 years violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator over the age of 17 years to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(b)  Any person between the ages of 12 and 17 years shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense, or referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 48.17(2). 
(c)  Any person under the age of 12 years shall be referred to the proper authorities, as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, § 2, 9-12-1994)  
Chapter 22 - CATV 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Mukwonago Cable Television Franchise Ordinance," hereinafter "franchise," or "ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 1, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Basic service means any subscriber tier provided by the grantee, which includes the delivery of local broadcast stations, and public, educational and governmental access channels. The basic service does not include optional program and satellite service tiers, a la carte services, per channel, per program, or auxiliary services for which a separate charge is made. However, the grantee may include other satellite signals on the basic tier. 
Cable system , system and cable television system mean a system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and distributing, audio, video, and other forms of electronic, electrical or optical signals, which includes cable television service and which is located in the town. This definition shall not include any such facility that serves or will serve only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management, and which does not use town rights-of-way. 
Class IV channel means a signaling path provided by a cable communications system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the cable communications system. 
Control and controlling interest mean actual working control or ownership of a system in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person or entity (except underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the public) of ten percent or more of a cable system or the franchise under which the system is operated. A change in the control or controlling interest of an entity which has control or a controlling interest in a grantee shall constitute a change in the control or controlling interest of the system under the same criteria. Control or controlling interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or entity. 
Converter means an electronic device, which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view more than 12 channels delivered by the system at designated converter dial locations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
Grantee means a person or entity to whom or which a franchise under this chapter is granted by the town, along with the lawful successors or assigns of such person or entity. 
Gross revenues means all revenue collected directly or indirectly by the grantee, from the provision of cable service within the town, including, but not limited to, basic subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees, installation and reconnection fees, franchise fees, leased channel fees, converter rentals, program guides, studio rental, production equipment, personnel fees, late fees, downgrade fees, revenue from the sale, exchange, use or cable cast of any programming developed on the system for community or institutional use, advertising, and any value (at retail price levels) of any nonmonetary remuneration received by the grantee in consideration of the performance of advertising or any other service of the system; provided, however, that this shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, local or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of the governmental unit. Subject to applicable federal law, the term "gross revenues" includes revenues attributed to franchise fees and revenues collected directly or indirectly from other ancillary telecommunications services (such as, but not limited to, point-to-point telecommunications, point-to-point multipoint telecommunications, data transmissions, etc.) but only to the extent that all other providers of such telecommunications services in the town are subject to the same compensation requirements of the town. 
Initial service area means all areas in the town having at least 20 dwelling units per street mile. 
Installation means the connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers' terminals. 
May is permissive. 
Monitoring means observing a communications signal, or the absence of a signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever; provided, the term "monitoring" shall not include system wide, non-individually addressed sweeps of the system for purposes of verifying system integrity, controlling return paths transmissions, or billing for pay services. 
Normal business hours, as applied to the grantee, shall mean those hours during which similar businesses in the town are open to serve customers. In all cases, the term "normal business hours" shall include some evening hours at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours. 
Normal operating conditions means those service conditions, which are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions, which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions, which are ordinarily within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
Service interruption and outages mean the loss of either picture or sound or both for a single or multiple subscribers. 
Shall is mandatory. 
Street means the surface of and all rights-of-way and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now or hereafter held by the town for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the town which shall, within their proper use and meaning entitle the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a telecommunications system. 
Subscriber means any person, firm, grantee, corporation, or association lawfully receiving basic and/or any additional service from grantee. 
Town means the Town of Mukwonago, Wisconsin. 
User means a party utilizing a cable television system channel for purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 2, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-3. - Rights and privileges of grantee. 
Any franchise granted by the town pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0419 shall grant to the grantee the right and privilege to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, and along, across, above, over and under the streets, now in existence and as may be created or established during its terms; any poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a cable system. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 3, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-4. - Agreement and incorporation of application by reference. 
(a)  Upon adoption of any franchise agreement and execution thereof by the grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein. 
(b)  Any grantee also agrees to provide all services specifically set forth in its application, if any, and to provide cable television service within the confines of the town; and by its acceptance of the franchise, the grantee specifically grants and agrees that its application is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise. In the event of a conflict between such proposals and the provisions of this chapter, that provision which provides the greatest benefit to the town, in the opinion of the town, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 4, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-5. - Franchise territory. 
Any franchise is for the present territorial limits of the town and for any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 5, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-6. - Duration and acceptance of franchise. 
The franchise and the rights, privileges and authority granted shall take effect and be in force as set forth in the franchise agreement and shall continue in force and effect for a term of no longer than 17 years; provided, that within 15 days after the date of final passage of the franchise the grantee shall file with the town its unconditional acceptance of the franchise and promise to comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms and conditions. Such acceptance and promise shall be in writing duly executed and sworn to, by, or on behalf of the grantee before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths. Such franchise shall be nonexclusive and revocable. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 6, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-7. - Franchise renewal. 
(a)  Current federal statutory process. 
(1)  The town may, on its own initiative, during the six-month period which begins with the 36 months before the franchise expiration, commence a proceeding which affords the public in the town appropriate notice and participation for the purpose of identifying the future cable-related community needs and interests and reviewing the performance of the grantee under the franchise. If the grantee submits, during such six-month period, a written renewal notice requesting the commencement of such proceeding, the town shall commence such proceeding not later than six months after the date such notice is submitted. 
(2)  Upon completion of the proceeding under subsection (a)(1) of this section, the grantee may, on its own initiative or at the request of the town, submit a proposal for renewal. The town may establish a date by which such proposal shall be submitted. 
(3)  Upon submittal by the grantee of a proposal to the town for the renewal of the franchise, the town shall provide prompt, public notice of such proposal and renew the franchise or issue a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed, and at the request of the grantee or on its own initiative, commence an administrative proceeding, after providing prompt, public notice of such proceeding. 
(4)  The town shall consider in any administrative proceeding whether: 
a.  The grantee has substantially complied with material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law; 
b.  The quality of the grantee's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints and billing practices, but without regard to the mix or quality of cable services or other services provided over the system, has been reasonable in the light of community needs; 
c.  The grantee has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the grantee's proposal; and 
d.  The grantee's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the costs of meeting such needs and interests. 
(5)  In any administrative proceeding described in subsection (a)(4) of this section, the grantee shall be afforded adequate notice and the grantee and the town, or its designee, shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence (including evidence related to issues raised in the proceedings under subsection (a)(4) of this section), to require the production of evidence and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding. 
(6)  At the completion of a proceeding under subsection (a)(4) of this section, the town shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the record of such proceeding and transmit a copy of such decision to the grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons therefor. 
(7)  Any denial of a proposal for renewal that has been submitted in compliance with the procedures set forth above, shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in subsections (a)(4)a—d of this section pursuant to the record of the proceeding under such subsection. The town may not base a denial of renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise or on events considered under subsection (a)(4)b of this section unless the town has provided the grantee with notice and the opportunity to cure or in any case in which it is documented that the town has waived its right to object. 
(8)  The grantee may appeal any final decision or failure of the town to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this section. The court shall grant appropriate relief if the court finds that any action of the town is not in compliance with the procedural requirements of this section; or in the event of a final decision of the town denying the renewal proposal, the grantee has demonstrated that the adverse finding of the town with respect to each of the factors described in subsections (a)(4)a—d of this section on which the denial is based is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence, based on the record of the administrative proceeding. 
(b)  Franchise renewal in the event of change in federal law. A franchise may be renewed by the town upon application of the grantee pursuant to the procedure established in this section, and in accordance with the then applicable law. 
(1)  At least 24 months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the grantee shall inform the town in writing of its intent to seek renewal of the franchise. 
(2)  The grantee shall submit a proposal for renewal, which demonstrates: 
a.  It has been and continues to be in substantial compliance with the terms, conditions, and limitations of this chapter and its franchise; 
b.  Its system has been installed, constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry, and this chapter and its franchise; 
c.  It has the legal, technical, financial, and other qualifications to continue to maintain and operate its system, and to extend the same as the state of the art progresses so as to assure its subscribers high quality service; and 
d.  It has made a good faith effort to provide services and facilities, which accommodate the demonstrated needs of the community as may be reasonably ascertained by the town. 
(3)  After giving public notice, the town shall proceed to determine whether the grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the town shall consider technical developments and performance of the system, programming other services offered, cost of services, and any other particular requirements set in this chapter; also, the town shall consider the grantee's reports made to the town and the Federal Communications Commission; may require the grantee to make available specified records, documents, and information for this purpose, and may inquire specifically whether the grantee will supply services sufficient to meet community needs and interests; industry performance on a national basis shall also be considered. Provision shall be made for public comment. 
(4)  The town shall then prepare any amendments to this chapter that it believes necessary. 
(5)  If the town finds the grantee's performance satisfactory, and finds the grantee's technical, legal, and financial abilities acceptable, and finds the grantee's renewal proposal meets the future cable-related needs of the town, a new franchise shall be granted pursuant to this chapter as amended for a period to be determined. 
(6)  If the grantee is determined by the town to have performed unsatisfactorily, new applicants may be sought and evaluated and a franchise award shall be made by the town according to franchising procedures adopted by the town. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 7, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-8. - Police powers. 
(a)  In accepting this franchise, the grantee shall acknowledge that its rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the town to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and shall agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the town pursuant to such power. 
(b)  Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other present or future lawful exercise of the town's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the jurisdiction, or applies exclusively to the grantee or cable television systems which contains provisions inconsistent with this franchise, shall prevail only if upon such exercise the town finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare or such exercise is mandated by law. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 8, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-9. - Cable television franchise required. 
No cable television system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets, i.e., rights-of-way, for system installation and maintenance purposes, of the town or be allowed to operate without a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 9, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-10. - Use of grantee facilities. 
The town shall have the right, during the life of this franchise, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the grantee any wire or pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable television system operations of the grantee. The town shall indemnify and hold harmless the grantee from any claim that might arise due to or as a result of the town's use. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 10, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-11. - Initial franchise costs. 
Costs to be borne by the grantee shall include any requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the initial franchise, but shall not be limited to, all costs of publications of notices prior to any public meeting provided for pursuant to this franchise, and any costs not covered by application fees, incurred by the town in its study, preparation of proposal documents, evaluation of all applications, and examinations of the applicants' qualifications. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 11, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-12. - Notices. 
All notices from the grantee to the town pursuant to this chapter shall be to the town clerk's office. The grantee shall maintain with the town, throughout the term of this franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. The grantee shall maintain a central office to address any issues relating to operating under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 12, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-13. - Letter of credit/security deposit. 
(a)  Within 15 days after the award of the initial franchise, the grantee shall deposit with the town either an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution or a security deposit in the amount of $50,000.00 with the form to be established by the town. The form and content of such letter of credit or security deposit shall be approved by the town attorney. These instruments shall be used to ensure the faithful performance of the grantee of all provisions of this franchise; and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the town having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this franchise, and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens, and taxes due the town which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. 
(b)  The letter of credit or security deposit shall be maintained at the amount established by the town for the entire term of this franchise, even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to this section. 
(c)  If the grantee fails to pay to the town any compensation within the time fixed herein; or fails after 15 days' notice to pay to the town any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay the town within 15 days, any damages, costs or expenses which the town is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with this franchise, or fails, after three days' notice of such failure by the town to comply with any provision of this franchise which the town reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the letter of credit or security deposit, the town may immediately request payment of the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the letter of credit or security deposit. Upon such request for payment, the town shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof. 
(d)  The rights reserved to the town with respect to the letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the town, whether reserved by this franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such letter of credit shall affect any other right the town may have. 
(e)  The letter of credit shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit or security deposit may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the town, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew." 
(f)  Upon receipt of the above-referenced notice, this shall be construed as a default granting the town the right to call on the bank for either the security deposit or letter of credit. 
(g)  The town, at any time during the term of this franchise, may waive the grantee's requirement to maintain a letter of credit or security deposit. The invitation to waive the requirement can be initiated by the town or grantee. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 13, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-14. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the award of this franchise, the initial grantee shall file with the town a performance bond in the amount of not less than 50 percent of the costs to install the system contained in the new application in favor of the town. This bond shall be maintained throughout the construction period and until such time as determined by the town, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement. 
(b)  If the grantee fails to comply with any law, ordinance or resolution governing the franchise, or fails to well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise, as it relates to the conditions relative to the construction of the system, including the franchise agreement which is incorporated herein by reference, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the town as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees, including the town's legal staff, and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. This section shall be an additional remedy for any and all violations outlined in section 22-13. 
(c)  The town may, upon completion of construction of the service area, waive or reduce the requirement of the grantee to maintain the bond. However, the town may require a performance bond to be posted by the grantee for any construction subsequent to the completion of the initial service areas, in a reasonable amount and upon such terms as determined by the town. 
(d)  The bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the town, by registered mail, a written notice of such intent to cancel and not to renew." Upon receipt of a 30-day notice, this shall be construed as default granting the town the right to call in the bond. 
(e)  The town, at any time during the term of this franchise, may waive the grantee's requirement to maintain a performance bond. The invitation to waive the requirement can be initiated by the town or grantee. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 14, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-15. - Liability and insurance. 
(a)  The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, liability insurance insuring the town and the grantee in the minimum amount of: 
(1)  One million dollars for property damage to any one person; 
(2)  One million dollars for property damage to any one accident; 
(3)  One million dollars for personal injury to any one person; and 
(4)  One million dollars for personal injury in any one accident. 
(b)  The certificate of insurance obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section is subject to the approval of the town attorney and such certificate of insurance, along with written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the town during the term of the franchise, and may be changed from time to time to reflect changing liability limits. The grantee shall immediately advise the town attorney of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance. 
(c)  Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the town thereunder, shall be construed to or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages. 
(d)  All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this franchise shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the town, by registered mail, a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew." 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 15, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-16. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Disclaimer of liability. The town shall not at any time be liable for injury or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause whatsoever arising out of the construction, maintenance, repair, use, operation, condition or dismantling of the grantee's telecommunication system and due to the act or omission of any person or entity other than the town or those persons or entities for which the town is legally liable as a matter of law. 
(b)  Indemnification. The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold harmless the town, the commission, all associated, affiliated, allied and subsidiary entitles of the town, now existing or hereinafter created, and their respective officers, boards, commissions, employees, agents, attorneys, and contractors (hereinafter referred to as "indemnities"), from and against: 
(1)  Any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or be asserted against the indemnities by reason of any act or omission of the grantee, its personnel, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, tradename, copyright, patent, service mark or any other right of any person, firm or corporation, which may arise out of or be in any way connected with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the telecommunications system caused by the grantee, its subcontractors or agents or the grantee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation; 
(2)  Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and other consultants), which is imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnities by reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies provided or supplied to the grantee, its contractors or subcontractors, for the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the telecommunications system caused by grantee, its subcontractors or agents and, upon the written request of the commission shall cause such claim or lien to be discharged or bonded within 15 days following such request; and 
(3)  Any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or be asserted against the indemnities by reason of any financing or securities offering by the grantee or its affiliates for violations of the common law or any laws, statutes, or regulations of the state or United States, including those of the Federal Securities and Exchange Commission, whether by the grantee or otherwise; excluding therefrom, however, claims which are solely based upon and shall arise solely out of information supplied by the town to the grantee in writing and included in the offering materials with the express written approval of the town prior to the offering. 
(c)  Assumption of risk. The grantee undertakes and assumes for its officers, agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees, all risk of dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any city owned or controlled property, including public rights-of-way, and the grantee hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the indemnities against and from any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnities for personal injury or property damage to any person arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the telecommunications system or the grantee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation. 
(d)  Defense of indemnities. In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought against the indemnities by reason of any matter for which the indemnities are indemnified hereunder, the grantee shall, upon notice from any of the indemnities, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, resist and defend the same with legal counsel mutually acceptable to the town attorney and grantee; provided further, however, that the grantee shall not admit liability in any such matter on behalf of the indemnities without the written consent of the town attorney or town attorney's designee. 
(e)  Notice cooperation and expenses. The town shall give the grantee prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the town from cooperating with the grantee and participating in the defense of any litigation by the town's own counsel. The grantee shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the town in defending itself with regard to any such actions, suits or proceedings. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney fees and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by or on behalf of the town attorney if such service is determined necessary and appropriate by the town attorney and the actual expenses of the town's agents, employees or expert witnesses, and disbursements and liabilities assumed by the town in connection with such suits, actions or proceedings. No recovery by the town of any sum under the letter of credit shall be any limitation upon the liability of the grantee to the town under the terms of this section, except that any sum so received by the town shall be deducted from any recovery which the town might have against the grantee under the terms of this section. 
(f)  Nonwaiver of statutory limits. Nothing in this agreement is intended to express or imply a waiver of the statutory provisions, of any kind or nature, as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 893.80 et seq., including the limits of liability of the town as exists presently or may be increased from time to time by the legislature. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 16, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-17. - Rights of individuals. 
(a)  The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, income or sex. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference. 
(b)  The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the Federal Communications Commission, state and local regulations, and as amended from time to time. 
(c)  The grantee shall, at all times, comply with the privacy requirements of state and federal law. 
(d)  The grantee is required to make all services available to all residential dwellings throughout the service area. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 17, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-18. - Public notice. 
Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to this franchise shall be by publication at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the meeting, and by posting at the town hall and by announcement on at least one channel of the grantee's system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for five consecutive days prior to the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 18, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-19. - Service availability and record request. 
The grantee shall provide cable communications service throughout the entire franchise area pursuant to the provisions of this franchise and shall keep a record for at least three years of all requests for service received by the grantee. This record shall be available for public inspection at the local office of the grantee during regular office hours. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 19, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-20. - System construction. 
(a)  New construction timetable. 
(1)  Within two years from the date of the award of the initial franchise, the grantee must make cable television service available to every dwelling unit within the initial service area. 
a.  The grantee must make cable television service available to at least 20 percent of the dwelling units within the initial service area within six months from the date of the award of the franchise. 
b.  The grantee must make cable television service available to at least 50 percent of the dwelling units within the initial service area within one year from the date of the award of the franchise. 
(2)  The grantee, in its application, if any, may propose a timetable of construction which will make cable television service available in the initial service area sooner than the above minimum requirements, in which case the said schedule will be made part of the franchise agreement, and will be binding upon the grantee. 
(3)  Any delay beyond the terms of this timetable, unless specifically approved by the town, will be considered a violation of this chapter for which the provisions of either section 22-37 or 22-46 shall apply, as determined by the town. 
(4)  In special circumstances the town can waive 100 percent completion within the two-year time frame; provided, that substantial completion is accomplished within the allotted time frame, substantial completion is construed to be not less than 95 percent and justification for less than 100 percent must be submitted subject to the satisfaction of the town. 
(b)  Line extensions. 
(1)  In areas of the franchise territory not included in the initial service areas, the grantee shall be required to extend its system pursuant to the following requirements: 
a.  No customer shall be refused service arbitrarily. The grantee is hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary within the town. To expedite the process of extending the cable system into a new subdivision, the town will forward to the grantee an approved engineering plan of each project. Subject to the density requirements, the grantee shall commence the design and construction process upon receipt of the final engineering plan. Upon notification from the town that the first home in the project has been approved for a building permit, the grantee shall have a maximum of three months to complete the construction/activation process within the project phase. 
b.  The grantee must extend and make cable television service available to every dwelling unit in all unserved, developing areas having at least 20 dwelling units planned per street mile, as measured from the existing system, and shall extend its system simultaneously with the installation of utility lines. 
c.  The grantee must extend and make cable television service available to any isolated resident outside the initial service area requesting connection at the standard connection charge, if the connection to the isolated resident would require no more than a standard 175-foot drop line. 
(2)  In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of service, the grantee shall provide, upon the request of a potential subscriber desiring service, an estimate of the costs required to extend service to the subscriber. The grantee shall then extend service upon request of the potential subscriber. The grantee may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to the grantee. The amount paid by subscribers for early extensions shall be nonrefundable, and in the event the area subsequently reaches the density required for mandatory extension, such payments shall be treated as consideration for early extension. 
(3)  In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give the grantee reasonable notice of such construction or development, and of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the grantee's expense. The grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if the grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals within five working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the five-day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by the grantee. Except for the notice of the particular date on which trenching will be available to the grantee, any notice provided to the grantee by the town of a preliminary plat request shall satisfy the requirement of reasonable notice if sent to the local general manager or system engineer of the grantee prior to approval of the preliminary plat request. 
(c)  Special agreements. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the grantee from serving areas not covered under this section upon agreement with developers, property owners, or residents provided that five percent of those gross revenues are paid to the town as franchise fees under section 22-27. 
(1)  The grantee, in its application, may propose a line extension policy, which will result in serving more residents of the town than as required above, in which case the grantee's policy will be incorporated into the franchise agreement, and will be binding on the grantee. 
(2)  The violation of this section shall be considered a breach of the terms of this chapter for which the provisions of either section 22-37 or 22-46 shall apply, as determined by the town. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 20, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-21. - Construction and technical standards. 
(a)  Compliance with construction and technical standards. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and FCC technical standards. In addition, the grantee shall provide the town, upon request, with a written report of the results of the grantee's annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to Federal Communications Commission standards and requirements. 
(b)  Additional specifications. 
(1)  Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable television system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. 
(2)  The grantee shall at all times comply with: 
a.  National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); 
b.  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
c.  Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; and 
d.  Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations. 
(3)  In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located. 
(4)  Any antenna structure used in the system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structure, required by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(5)  All working facilities and conditions used during construction, installation and maintenance of the cable television system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(6)  RF leakage shall be checked at reception locations for emergency radio services to prove no interference signal combinations are possible. Stray radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation radio sites to prove no interference to airborne navigational reception in the normal flight patterns. FCC rules and regulations shall govern. 
(7)  The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power for headend and transport system for a minimum of two hours. 
(8)  In all areas of the town where the cables, wires, and other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires, or other like facilities underground. When public utilities relocate their facilities from pole to underground, the cable operator must concurrently do so. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 21, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-22. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Interference with persons and improvements. The grantee's system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or interfere with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets and public ways, or interfere with any improvements the town may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or public property. 
(b)  Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, landscaping, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the town, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before the work was commenced and in accordance with standards for such work set by the town. 
(c)  Erection, removal and common uses of poles. 
(1)  No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the town with regard to location, height, types, and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the town determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(2)  Where poles or other wire-holding structures already existing for use in serving the town are available for use by the grantee, but it does not make arrangements for such use, the town may require the grantee to use such poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just and reasonable. 
(3)  In the absence of any governing federal or state statute, where the town or a public utility serving the town desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the grantee, but agreement thereof with the grantee cannot be reached, the town may require the grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the town shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the town determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations. 
(d)  Altering or changing the grade of any street, etc. If at any time during the period of this franchise the town shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of any street, alley or other public ways, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the town, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense unless the utilities are compensated, in which case the grantee shall be similarly compensated. 
(e)  Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the town, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(f)  Tree trimming. The grantee shall not remove any tree or trim any portion, either above, at or below ground level, of any tree within any public place without the prior consent of the town. The town shall have the right to do the trimming requested by the grantee at the cost of the grantee. Regardless of who performs the work requested by the grantee, the grantee shall be responsible, shall defend and hold the town harmless for any and all damages to any tree as a result of trimming, or to the land surrounding any tree, whether such tree is trimmed or removed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 22, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-23. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The grantee shall put, keep and maintain all parts of the system in good condition throughout the entire franchise period. 
(b)  Upon the reasonable request for service by any person located within the franchise territory, the grantee shall, within 30 days, furnish the requested service to such person within the terms of the line extension policy. A request for service shall be unreasonable for the purpose of this subsection if no trunk line installation capable of servicing that person's block has as yet been installed. 
(c)  The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum system use. 
(d)  The grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of subscribers or persons not served by the grantee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents within the confines of the town nor shall other utilities interfere with the grantee's system. 
(e)  The grantee shall have knowledgeable, qualified grantee representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries 24 hours per day and seven days per week. 
(f)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time, including wait time and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed 30 seconds. This standard shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time as measured on an annual basis. 
(g)  Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the total time that the office is open for business. 
(h)  Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. A standard installation is one that is within 175 feet of the existing system. 
(i)  Excluding those situations that are beyond its control, the grantee will respond to any service interruption promptly and in no event later than 24 hours from the time of initial notification. All other regular service requests will be responded to within 36 hours during the normal workweek for that system. The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities will be: "morning"; or "afternoon"; not to exceed a four-hour "window" during normal business hours for the system, or at a time that is mutually acceptable. The grantee will schedule supplemental hours during which appointments can be scheduled based on the needs of the community. If at any time an installer or technician is running late, an attempt to contact the customer will be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time that is convenient to the customer. 
(j)  Customer service centers and bill payment locations will be open for walk-in customer transactions a minimum of eight hours a day Monday through Friday, unless there is a need to modify those hours because of the location or customers served. The grantee and the town by mutual consent will establish supplemental hours on weekdays and weekends if it would fit the needs of the community. 
(k)  Upon service interruption and/or outages of subscriber's cable service, the following shall apply: 
(1)  For service interruptions and/or outages of over four hours and up to seven days, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a credit of one-thirtieth of one month's fees for affected services for each 24-hour period service is interrupted for four or more hours for any single subscriber, with the exception of subscribers disconnected because of nonpayment or excessive signal leakage; and 
(2)  For service interruptions and/or outages of seven days or more in one month, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a full month's credit for affected services for all affected subscribers. 
(l)  The grantee will provide written information in each of the following areas at the time of installation and at any future time upon the request of the customer: 
(1)  Product and services offered; 
(2)  Prices and service options; 
(3)  Installation and service policies; and 
(4)  How to use the telecommunications services. 
(m)  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable, with all cable services itemized. 
(n)  Credits will be issued promptly, but no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the resolution of the request and the return of the equipment by the grantee if service has been terminated. 
(o)  Customers will be notified a minimum of 30 days in advance of any rate or channel change, provided that the change is within the control of the grantee. 
(p)  The grantee shall maintain and operate its network in accordance with the rules and regulations as are incorporated herein or may be promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission, the United States Congress, or the State of Wisconsin. 
(q)  The grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise, to maintain the technical standards and quality of service set forth in this chapter. Should the town find, by resolution, that the grantee has failed to maintain these technical standards and quality of service, the grantee shall be required to implement a plan for resolution. Failure to make such improvements within three months of such resolution will constitute a breach of a condition for which penalties contained in section 22-46 are applicable. 
(r)  The grantee shall keep a monthly service log which will indicate the nature of each service complaint received in the last 24 months, the date and time it was received, the disposition of said complaint, and the time and date thereof. This log shall be made available for periodic inspection by the town. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 23, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-24. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If the grantee elects to over build, rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the town gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew this franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. 
(b)  If there is a change of franchise, or if a new operator acquires the system, the grantee shall cooperate with the town, new franchisee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services until it no longer operates the system. 
(c)  If the grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without prior approval of the town or without just cause, the town may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the town or a permanent operator is selected. If the town is required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the town for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by the town that are the result of the grantee's failure to perform. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 24, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-25. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  The town clerk is designated as having primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and implementation of complaint procedures. 
(b)  During the terms of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain a central office for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters. The office must be reachable by a local, toll-free telephone call to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment functions and similar matters. The grantee will use its good faith efforts to arrange for one or more payment locations in a central location where customers can pay bills or conduct other business activities. 
(c)  As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, the grantee shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed. 
(d)  When there have been similar complaints made, or where there exists other evidence, which, in the judgment of the town, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service, the town shall have the right and authority to require the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system. The grantee shall fully cooperate with the town in performing such testing and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within 30 days after notice. Such report shall include the following information: 
(1)  The nature of the complaint or problem, which precipitated the special tests; 
(2)  What system component was tested; 
(3)  The equipment used and procedures employed in testing; 
(4)  The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved; and 
(5)  Any other information pertinent to the tests and analysis, which may be required. 
(e)  The town may require that tests be supervised, by an independent professional engineer or an equivalent of the town's choice. The engineer should sign all records of special tests and forward to the town such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken. Should such a test prove that the grantee failed to meet the technical standard, the grantee shall bear the cost of the test. If the test should prove that the grantee met the technical standards, the town shall bear the cost of the test. 
(f)  The town's right under this section shall be limited to requiring tests, analysis and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the town has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the public against substandard cable service. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 25, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-26. - Grantee rules and regulations. 
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 26, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-27. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  For the reason that the streets of the town to be used by the grantee in the operation of its system within the boundaries of the town are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the town at great expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to the grantee to the streets is a valuable property right without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, the grantee shall pay to the town an amount equal to five percent of the grantee's gross annual revenue from the operations of the grantee within the confines of the town or contract area. If the statutory five percent limitation on franchise fees is raised or the federal statute deletes the franchise fee limitation entirely, then the franchise fee may be subject to renegotiation. 
(b)  This payment shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed to the town by the grantee. 
(c)  The franchise fee and any other costs or penalties assessed shall be payable annually on a calendar year basis to the town and the grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross receipts as previously defined within 45 days after the end of the year as established between the town and the grantee. 
(d)  The town shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter; provided, however, that such audit shall take place within 24 months following the close of each of the grantee's fiscal years. Any additional amount due to the town as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the town which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. 
(e)  If any franchise payment or recomputed amount, cost or penalty, is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be charged daily from such date at the legal maximum rate charged by the United States Internal Revenue service for late tax payments and the grantee shall reimburse the town for any additional expenses and costs incurred by the town by reason of the delinquent payment. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 27, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-28. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  Except as may be provided in a franchise agreement, this franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the town. The grantee may, however, transfer or assign the franchise to a wholly owned subsidiary of the grantee and such subsidiary may transfer or assign the franchise back to the grantee without such consent, providing that such assignment is without any release of liability of the grantee. The proposed assignee must show financial responsibility as determined by the town and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise. The town shall have 120 days to act upon any request for approval of such a sale or transfer submitted in writing that contains or is accompanied by such information as is required in accordance with FCC regulations and by the town. The town shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer or assignment if its refusal to consent is not communicated in writing to the grantee within 120 days following receipt of written notice and the necessary information as to the effect of the proposed transfer or assignment upon the public unless the requesting party and the town agree to an extension of time. The town shall not unreasonably withhold such consent to the proposed transfer. 
(b)  Except as may be provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly notify the town of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the grantee. The term "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons of ten percent of the voting shares of the grantee. Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the town shall have consented thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the town may inquire into the qualification of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the town in such inquiry. 
(c)  The consent or approval of the town to any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the town in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of this franchise. 
(d)  In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the town will not approve any transfer or assignment of an initial franchise prior to substantial completion of construction of the proposed system. 
(e)  In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory to this franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 28, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-29. - Availability of books and records. 
(a)  The grantee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable times, and the town shall have the right to inspect, where reasonably necessary to the enforcement of the franchise, books, records, maps, plans and other like materials of the grantee applicable to the cable television system, at any time during normal business hours; provided, where volume and convenience necessitate, the grantee may require inspection to take place on the grantee's premises. 
(b)  The following records and/or reports are to be made available to the town upon request, but no more frequently than on an annual basis unless mutually agreed upon by the grantee and the town: 
(1)  A quarterly review and resolution or progress report submitted by the grantee to the town; 
(2)  Periodic preventive maintenance reports; 
(3)  Any copies of FCC form 395-A (or successor form) or any supplemental forms related to equal opportunity or fair contracting policies; 
(4)  Subscriber inquiry/complaint resolution data and the right to review documentation concerning these inquiries and/or complaints periodically; and 
(5)  Periodic construction update reports, including where appropriate the submission of as-built maps. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 29, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-30. - Other petitions and applications. 
Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports either submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable television operations authorized pursuant to the franchise or received from such agencies shall be provided to the town upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 30, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-31. - Fiscal reports. 
The grantee shall file annually with the town no later than 120 days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, a copy of a gross revenues statement certified by an officer of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 31, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-32. - Removal of cable television system. 
At the expiration of the terms for which this franchise is granted and any renewal denied, or upon its termination as provided herein, the grantee shall forthwith, upon notice by the town, remove at its own expense all designated portions of the cable television system from all streets and public property within the town. If the grantee fails to do so, the town may perform the work at the grantee's expense. Upon such notice of removal, a bond shall be furnished by the grantee in an amount sufficient to cover this expense. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 32, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-33. - Required services and facilities. 
(a)  Minimum channel capacity and bandwidth. The cable television system shall have a minimum channel capacity of 77 channels and at least 750 MHz of bandwidth available for future use. 
(b)  Two-way communications. Such system shall maintain a plant having the technical capacity for two-way communications. 
(c)  Required channels and institutional network. The grantee shall maintain the following: 
(1)  At least one specially-designated, noncommercial public access channel available on a first-come, nondiscriminatory basis; 
(2)  At least one specially-designated channel for use by local educational authorities; 
(3)  At least one specially-designated channel for local governmental uses; 
(4)  At least one specially-designated channel for leased access uses; provided, however, these uses may be combined on one or more channels until such time as additional channels become necessary in the opinion of the town. Financial and technical support, replacement and maintenance of equipment of this facility shall be separately incorporated into a franchise agreement; and 
(5)  An institutional network (I-Net) of cable, optical, electrical or electronic equipment, used for the purpose of transmitting two-way telecommunications signals interconnecting designated entities as set forth in the franchise agreement and mutually agreed to by the grantee and the grantor. Such institutional network may be provided as needed by utilizing capacity on the subscriber system. 
(d)  Emergency override. The grantee shall incorporate into its cable television system the capacity, which will permit the town, in times of emergency, to override, by remote control, the audio of all channels simultaneously, which the grantee may lawfully override. The grantee shall provide emergency broadcast capacity pursuant to FCC rules. The grantee shall cooperate with the town in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system. 
(e)  Interconnection of cable television systems. 
(1)  Required. The grantee may be required to interconnect its system with other adjacent cable television systems for the purpose of sharing public, educational, and governmental access programming. Such interconnection shall be made within a reasonable time limit to be established by the town. 
(2)  Interconnection procedure. Upon receiving the directive of the town to interconnect, the franchise shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected system or systems in order that all costs may be shared equally among cable companies for both construction and operation of the interconnection link. 
(3)  Relief. The franchise may be granted reasonable extensions of time to interconnect or the town may rescind its order to interconnect upon petition by the franchisee to the town. The town shall grant the request if it finds that the franchisee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the operator or franchising authority of system to be interconnected, or the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates. 
(4)  Cooperation required. The grantee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or town, county, state and federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the town. 
(5)  Initial technical requirements to ensure future interconnection capability. 
a.  All cable systems receiving franchises to operate within the town shall use the standard frequency allocations for television signals. 
b.  All cable systems are required to use signal processors at the headend for each television signal. 
c.  The town also urges franchisees to provide local origination equipment that is compatible throughout the area so that videocassettes or videotapes can be shared by various systems. 
d.  The grantee shall provide such additional services and facilities as are contained in its application, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 33, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-34. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  In addition to the inherent powers of the town to regulate and control this cable television franchise, and those powers expressly reserved by the town, or agreed to and provided for herein, the right and power is hereby reserved by the town to promulgate such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful powers and furtherance of the terms and conditions of this franchise; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  The town may also adopt such regulations at the request of grantee upon application. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 34, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-35. - Performance evaluation sessions. 
(a)  The town and the grantee may hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions within 30 days of the third, sixth, and 12th anniversary dates of the grantee's award or renewal of the franchise and as may be required by federal and state law. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the town or the grantee. 
(c)  All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with legal notice. The grantee shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation sessions by announcements on at least one channel of its system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for five consecutive days preceding each session. 
(d)  Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Service rate structures; 
(2)  Franchise fee; 
(3)  Penalties; 
(4)  Free or discounted services; 
(5)  Application of new technologies; 
(6)  System performance; 
(7)  Services provided; 
(8)  Programming offered; 
(9)  Customer complaints; 
(10)  Privacy; 
(11)  Amendments to this chapter; 
(12)  Judicial and FCC rulings; 
(13)  Line extension policies; and 
(14)  Grantee or town rules. 
(e)  Members of the general public may add topics either by working through the negotiating parties or by presenting a petition. If such a petition bears the valid signatures of 50 or more residents of the town, the proposed topic or topics shall be added to the list of topics to be discussed at the evaluation session. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 35, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-36. - Rate change procedures. 
Pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the town is currently certified to regulate the basic service rates charged by grantee. Under these rules, grantee is required to obtain approval from the town for a rate increase for any change to the rates for basic service. Should federal or state law permit further rate regulation beyond the basic service the town shall assume such rate regulation and adopt appropriate procedures for such regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 36, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-37. - Forfeiture and termination. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the town under this franchise or otherwise, the town reserves the right to forfeit and terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder in the event of a substantial breach of its terms and conditions. A substantial breach by the grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Violation of any material provision of the franchise or any material rule, order, regulation or determination of the town made pursuant to the franchise; 
(2)  Attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise or practice any fraud or deceit upon the town or its subscribers or customers; 
(3)  Failure to begin or complete system construction or system extension as provided under section 22-20; 
(4)  Failure to provide the services promised in the grantee's application if any as incorporated herein by section 22-4; 
(5)  Failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of interrupted service, except when approval of such interruption is obtained from the town; or 
(6)  Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of the franchise. 
(b)  The foregoing shall not constitute a major breach if the violation occurs but is without fault of the grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. The grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees. 
(c)  The town may make a written demand that the grantee comply with any such provision, rule, order or determination under or pursuant to this franchise. If the violation by the grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the town may place the issue of termination of the franchise before the town board. The town shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least 20 days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue that the town board is to consider. 
(d)  The town board shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear any person interested therein and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any violation by the grantee has occurred. 
(e)  If the town board shall determine the violation by the grantee was the fault of the grantee and within its control, the board may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be forfeited and terminated unless there is compliance within such period as the board may fix, such period shall not be less than 60 days, provided no opportunity for compliance need be granted for fraud or misrepresentation. 
(f)  The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed upon the board agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance. The board then may terminate the franchise forthwith upon finding that the grantee has failed to achieve compliance or may further extend the period, in its discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 37, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-38. - Foreclosure. 
Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the system, the grantee shall notify the town of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken place, and the provisions of this franchise governing the consent of the town to such change in control of the grantee shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 38, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-39. - Right of acquisition by the town. 
(a)  Federal regulations as per USC 537 shall apply to the right of acquisition by the town. In the event that the relevant federal regulations are repealed, the guidelines specified in subsection (b) of this section shall apply. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the term of the franchise and denial of any renewal or upon any other termination thereof as provided herein the town at its election and upon the payment to the grantee of a price equal to the fair market value shall have the right to purchase and take over the system upon resolution by the town board. If the town has denied the grantee's petition for renewal of its franchise as provided by section 22-7, the town must exercise its option to purchase the system within 60 days of the denial of renewal and at least six months prior to the end of the franchise. Nothing shall prohibit the grantee in the event of the election of the town to purchase the system from requesting the court to set a reasonable bond of the town to secure the purchase price. The grantee shall execute such warranty deeds and other instruments as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 39, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-40. - Receivership. 
The town shall have the right to cancel this franchise 120 days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of 120 days, or unless: 
(1)  Within 120 days after his election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and 
(2)  Such receiver or trustee, within the 120 days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise granted to the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 40, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-41. - Compliance with state and federal laws. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this franchise to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof; provided, however, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall require the grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit the grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of this franchise or of any law or regulation of the town, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the town of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the town or this franchise. 
(b)  If the town determines that a material provision of this chapter is affected by any subsequent action of the state or federal government, the town and the grantee shall negotiate to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 41, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-42. - Landlord/tenant. 
(a)  Interference with cable service prohibited. Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof to receive cable communication service, cable installation or maintenance from a cable communication grantee regulated by and lawfully operating under a valid and existing franchise issued by the town. 
(b)  Gratuities and payments to permit service prohibited. Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall ask, demand or receive any payment, service or gratuity in any form as a condition for permitting or cooperating with the installation of a cable communication service to the dwelling unit occupied by a tenant or resident requesting service. 
(c)  Penalties and charges to tenants for service prohibited. Neither the owner or any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident, or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or receives cable communication service from a grantee operating under a valid and existing cable communication franchise issued by the town. 
(d)  Reselling service prohibited. No person shall resell, without the expressed, written consent of both the grantee and the town, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a cable communication grantee under a franchise issued by the town. 
(e)  Protection of property permitted. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable communication system facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning, appearance and value of premises or the convenience and safety of persons or property. 
(f)  Risks assumed by grantee. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring a grantee from agreeing to indemnify the owner, or his agents or representatives for damages or from liability for damages caused by the installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable communication facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 42, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-43. - Applicant's bids for initial franchise. 
(a)  All bids received by the town from the applicants for an initial franchise will become the sole property of the town. 
(b)  The town reserves the right to reject any and all bids and waive informalities and/or technicalities where the best interest of the town may be served. 
(c)  All questions regarding the meaning or intent of this chapter or application documents shall be submitted to the town in writing. Replies will be issued by addenda mailed or delivered to all parties recorded by the town as having received the application documents. The town reserves the right to make extensions of time for receiving bids as it deems necessary. Questions received less than 14 days prior to the date for the opening of bids will not be answered. Only replies to questions by written addenda will be binding. All bids must contain an acknowledgment of receipt of all addenda. 
(d)  Bids must be sealed, and submitted at the time and place indicated in the application documents for the public opening. Bids may be modified at any time prior to the opening of the bids, provided that any modifications must be duly executed in the manner that the applicant's bid must be executed. No bid shall be opened or inspected before the public opening. 
(e)  Before submitting a bid, each applicant must: 
(1)  Examine this chapter and the application documents thoroughly; 
(2)  Familiarize himself with local conditions that may in any manner affect performance under the franchise; 
(3)  Familiarize himself with federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations affecting performance under the franchise; and 
(4)  Carefully correlate the bid with the requirements of this chapter and the application documents. 
(f)  The town may make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine the ability of the applicant to perform under the franchise, and the applicant shall furnish to the town all such information and data for this purpose as the town may request. The town reserves the right to reject any bid if the evidence submitted by, or investigation of, such applicant fails to satisfy the town that such applicant is properly qualified to carry out the obligations of the franchise and to complete the work contemplated therein. Conditional bids will not be accepted. 
(g)  All bids received shall be placed in a secure depository approved by the town and not opened nor inspected prior to the public opening. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 43, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-44. - Financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure for initial franchises. 
(a)  No initial franchise will be granted to any applicant unless all requirements and demands of the town regarding financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure have been met. 
(b)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall fully disclose all agreements and undertakings, whether written or oral, or implied with any person, firm, group, association or corporation with respect to this franchise and the proposed cable television system. The grantee of this franchise shall disclose all other contracts to the town as the contracts are made. This section shall include, but not be limited to, any agreements between local applicants and national companies. 
(c)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall submit all requested information as provided by the terms of this chapter or the application documents, which are incorporated herein by reference. The requested information must be complete and verified as true by the applicant. 
(d)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose the numbers of shares of stock, and the holders thereof, and shall include the amount of consideration for each share of stock and the nature of the consideration. 
(e)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application documents regarding other cable systems in which they hold an interest of any nature, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Locations of all other franchises and the dates of award for each location; 
(2)  Estimated construction costs and estimated completion dates for each system; 
(3)  Estimated number of miles of construction and number of miles completed in each system as of the date of this application; and 
(4)  Date for completion of construction as promised in the application for each system. 
(f)  Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application documents regarding pending applications for other cable systems, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Location of other franchise applications and date of application for each system; 
(2)  Estimated dates of franchise awards; 
(3)  Estimated number of miles of construction; and 
(4)  Estimated construction costs. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 44, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-45. - Theft of services and tampering. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person may intentionally do any of the following: 
(1)  Obtain or attempt to obtain cable television service from a company by trick, artifice, deception, use of an illegal device or illegal decoder or other fraudulent means with the intent to deprive that company of any or all lawful compensation for rendering each type of service obtained. The intent required for a violation of this subsection may be inferred from the presence on the property and in the actual possession of the defendant of a device not authorized by the cable television company, the major purpose of which is to permit reception of cable television services without payment. This inference is rebutted if the defendant demonstrates that he purchased that device for a legitimate use; 
(2)  Give technical assistance or instruction to any person in obtaining or attempting to obtain any cable television service without payment of all lawful compensation to the company providing that service. This subsection does not apply if the defendant demonstrates that the technical assistance or instruction was given or the installation of the connection, descrambler or receiving device was for a legitimate use; 
(3)  Make or maintain a connection, whether physical, electrical, mechanical, acoustical or by other means, with any cables, wires, components or other devices used for the distribution of cable television services for the purpose of distributing cable television service to any other dwelling unit without authority from a cable television company; 
(4)  Make or maintain a connection, whether physical, electrical, mechanical, acoustical or by other means, with any cables, wires, components or other devices used for the distribution of cable television services for the purpose of obtaining cable television service without payment of all lawful compensation to the company providing the service. The intent required for a violation of this subsection may be inferred from proof that the cable service to the defendant's residence or business was connected under a service agreement with the defendant and has been disconnected by the cable television company and that thereafter there exists in fact a connection to the cable system at the defendant's residence or business; 
(5)  Make or maintain any modification or alteration to any device installed with the authorization of a cable television company for the purpose of intercepting or receiving any program or other service carried by that company which that person is not authorized by that company to receive. The intent required for a violation of this paragraph may be inferred from proof that, as a matter of standard procedure, the cable television company places written warning labels on its converters or decoders explaining the tampering with the device is a violation of law and the converter or decoder is found to have been tampered with, altered or modified so as to allow the reception or interception of programming carried by the cable television company without authority to do so. The trier of fact may also infer that a converter or decoder has been altered or modified from proof that the cable television company, as a matter of standard procedure, seals the converters or decoders with a label or mechanical device, that the seal was shown to the customer upon delivery of the decoder and that the seal has been removed or broken. The inferences under this subsection are rebutted if the cable television company cannot demonstrate that the intact seal was shown to the customer; 
(6)  Possess without authority any device or printed circuit board designed to receive from a cable television system any cable television programming or services offered for sale over that cable television system, whether or not the programming or services are encoded, filtered, scrambled or otherwise made unintelligible, or perform or facilitate the performance of any of the acts under subsections (a)(1)—(5) of this section with the intent that device or printed circuit be used to receive that cable television company's services without payment. Intent to violate this subsection for direct or indirect commercial advantage or private financial gain may be inferred from proof of the existence on the property and in the actual possession of the defendant of a device if the totality of circumstances, including quantities or volumes, indicates possession for resale; or 
(7)  Manufacture, import into this state, distribute, publish, advertise, sell, lease or offer for sale or lease any device, printed circuit board or any plan or kit for a device or for a printed circuit designed to receive the cable television programming or services offered for sale over a cable television system from a cable television system, whether or not the programming or services are encoded, filtered, scrambled or otherwise made unintelligible, with the intent that the device, printed circuit, plan or kit be used for the reception of that company's services without payment. The intent required for a violation of this subsection may be inferred from proof that the defendant has sold, leased or offered for sale or lease any device, printed circuit board, plan or kit for a device or for a printed circuit board in violation of this subsection and during the course of the transaction for sale or lease the defendant expressly states or implies to the buyer that the product will enable the buyer to obtain cable television service without charge. 
(b)  Civil liability for theft of telecommunications service (including cable television service). 
(1)  Any person who incurs injury as a result of a violation of this section may bring a civil action against the person who committed the violation. Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section, if the person who incurs the loss prevails, the court shall grant the prevailing party actual damages, costs and disbursement. 
(2)  If the person who incurs the loss prevails against a person who committed the violation willfully and for the purpose of commercial advantage or prevails against a person who has committed more than one violation of this section, the court shall grant the prevailing party all the following: 
a.  Except as provided in subsections (b)(2)e and (b)(2)f of this section, not more than $10,000.00; 
b.  Actual damages; 
c.  Any profits of the violators that are attributable to the violation and that are not taken into account in determining the amount of actual damages under subsection (b)(2)b of this section; 
d.  Notwithstanding the limitations under Wis. Stats. § 799.25 or 814.04, costs, disbursement and reasonable attorney fees; 
e.  If the court finds that the violation was committed willfully and for the purpose of commercial advantage, the court may increase the amount granted under subsection (b)(2)a of this section not to exceed $50,000.00; and 
f.  If the court finds that the violator had no reason to believe that the violator's action constituted a violation of this section, the courts may reduce the amount granted under subsection (b)(2)a of this section. 
(3)  If damages under subsection (b)(2)c of this section are requested, the party who incurred the injury shall have the burden of proving the violator's gross revenue and the violator's deductible expenses and the elements of profit attributable to factors other than the violation. 
(4)  In addition to other remedies available under this section, the courts may grant the injured party a temporary or permanent injunction. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 45, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-46. - Penalties. 
For the violation of any of the following provisions of this franchise, penalties shall be chargeable to the letter of credit or performance bond as applicable as follows and the town may determine the amount of the fine for other violations which are not specified in a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each violation, with each day constituting a separate violation. 
(1)  Failure to furnish, maintain, or offer all cable services to any potential subscriber within the town upon order of the town: $200.00 per day, per violation, for each day that such failure occurs or continues; 
(2)  Failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance, construction bond, performance bond, or other required financial security: $200.00 per day, per violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues; 
(3)  Failure to provide access to data, documents, records, or reports to the town as required by sections 22-19, 22-29, 22-30, 22-31 and 22-37: $200.00 per day, per violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues; 
(4)  Failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, or maintenance standards: $300.00 per day, per violation; 
(5)  Failure to comply with a rate decision or refund order: $500.00 per day, per violation, for each day such a violation occurs or continues. The grantor may impose any or all of the above enumerated measures against grantee, which shall be in addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has under the franchise or under any applicable law; 
(6)  Any violations for noncompliance with the customer service standards of sections 22-23—22-25 the grantee shall pay $200.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues; and 
(7)  Any other violations of this franchise agreement to be determined by the grantor in a public hearing but not specifically noted in this section shall not exceed $500.00 per day, per violation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 46, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 22-47. - Procedures. 
(a)  Whenever the town believes that the grantee has violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this franchise, and wishes to impose penalties, a written notice shall be given to the grantee informing it of such alleged violation or liability. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific violation so as to afford the grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation. The grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation before the town may impose penalties unless the violation is of such a nature so as to require more than 30 days and the grantee proceeds diligently within the 30 days to correct the violation, or as promptly as possible thereafter to correct the violation. In any case where the violation is not cured within 60 days of notice from the town, or such other time as the grantee and the town may mutually agree to, the town may proceed to impose liquidated damages. 
(b)  The grantee may, within ten days of receipt of notice, notify the town that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by the grantee to the town shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by the grantee and shall stay the running of the 30-day cure period pending town board decision as required below. The town board shall hear the grantee's dispute. The grantee must be given at least five days' notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the grantee shall be entitled to the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. After the hearing, the town shall provide the grantee a copy of its action, along with supporting documents. In the event the town upholds the finding of a violation, the grantee shall have 30 days subsequent, or such other time period as the grantee and the town mutually agree, to such determination to correct the alleged violation before penalties may be imposed. 
(c)  The rights reserved to the town under this section are in addition to all other rights of the town whether reserved by this franchise or authorized by law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to penalties shall affect any other right the town may have. 
(d)  The town shall stay or waive the imposition of any penalty set forth above upon a finding that any failure or delay is a result of an act of nature or due to circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, § 47, 8-9-2000)  
Chapter 26 - COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Joint municipal court created. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 755, there is created and established a municipal court designated "Joint Municipal Court for the Village of North Prairie, the Town of Mukwonago, the Village of Eagle, and the Town of Eagle" (hereinafter "joint municipal court") presided over by a municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1(1), 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 26-2. - Qualifications of municipal judge. 
To be eligible for the office of municipal judge a person must be a qualified elector in either the Village of North Prairie or the Town of Mukwonago, or the Village of Eagle. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1(2), 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 26-3. - Election and term of municipal judge. 
The municipal judge shall be elected at large at the spring election, commencing with the 2000 election for a term of two years commencing on May 1 succeeding his election. Electors of the Village of North Prairie or Town of Mukwonago or Village of Eagle or Town of Eagle shall be eligible to vote for the municipal judge of the joint municipal court. The current municipal judge for the joint municipal court shall serve as municipal judge for the joint municipal court until the end of his term. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1(3), 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 26-4. - Salary of municipal judge. 
The municipal judge shall receive a salary and fringe benefits, including municipal judge training pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.18, as determined from time to time by the Village Board of the Village of North Prairie and the Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago, and the Village Board of the Village of Eagle, and the Town Board of the Town of Eagle, subject to Wis. Stats. § 755.04, which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. The salary shall be paid quarterly. No salary shall be paid to the municipal judge for any time during his term for which he has not executed and filed the official bond and oath as required by section 26-5. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1(4), 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 26-5. - Bond and oath of municipal judge. 
The municipal judge shall, after election or appointment to fill a vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 757.02(1), pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.03, with the clerk of the circuit court for the county, and at the same time shall execute and file an official bond in the penal sum of $3,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1(5), 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 26-6. - Bond and oath of municipal clerk. 
The municipal court clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of the office, take and file the official oath as prescribed in Wis. Stats. § 19.01, with the village clerk of the Village of North Prairie and with the town clerk of the Town of Mukwonago and with the village clerk of the Village of Eagle, and with the town clerk of the Town of Eagle and at the same time, shall execute and file an official bond in the penal sum of $3,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1(6), 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 26-7. - Jurisdiction of municipal judge. 
The municipal judge shall have jurisdiction as provided by statute and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 755.045. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1(7), 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 26-8. - Procedures of joint municipal court. 
(a)  The joint municipal court shall be open as determined by order of the municipal judge. 
(b)  The joint municipal court shall be held in the courtroom located in the Village of North Prairie Municipal Center, provided that the joint municipal judge may order that the joint municipal court may be held in an alternate public building within the Village of North Prairie, or the Town of Mukwonago, or the Village of Eagle, or the Town of Eagle. 
(c)  The procedure in joint municipal court shall be as provided by statute and law. 
(d)  The municipal judge shall collect all forfeitures, fees, penalties, assessments and costs in any action or proceeding before the joint municipal court and shall pay over all such monies to the Village of North Prairie Village Treasurer not later than the fifth business day following official receipt thereof in joint municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1(8), 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 26-9. - Contempt in joint municipal court. 
The municipal judge may impose a sanction as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 800.12(2), for contempt of court as defined in Wis. Stats. § 785.01(1), in accordance with the procedures under Wis. Stats. § 785.03. 
(Ord. No. 99-5, § 1(9), 11-10-1999)  
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Outdoor fires. 
(a)  Use of incinerator required. No outside burning shall be permitted on any premises used for residential purposes except in an incinerator which shall be a metal container or masonry product built or fabricated to be completely enclosed, except having a top opening for loading, and a lower opening for draft control. Such openings shall be covered with a metal screen of mesh with openings not greater than one-half inch measured across the largest diameter. Such residential incinerator shall be located at a distance of at least 20 feet from any structure, and shall have all grass and other flammable material cleared away from its base for a distance of three feet from all exterior surfaces of the incinerator. Occupants of residential premises using an approved incinerator are excluded from the requirements of obtaining a burning permit as provided in this section. 
(b)  Burning of certain material prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn in an outdoor residential incinerator any garbage, trash, rubber or rubber products, asphaltic type materials or any other such related materials which create by burning a smoke or odor nuisance. The term "garbage" as used in this section is defined as putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. The term "trash" as used in this section is defined as human or animal excrement, animal remains or offal, petroleum products, vegetable products, mineral products and metal pressurized containers. 
(c)  Grass fires. 
(1)  Regulation of setting of field and grass fires. No person shall set fire to grass, field, brush or similar combustible material in its natural state without first having secured a permit therefor from the fire chief or an officer of the town fire department. 
(2)  Location of fire. No such fire shall be set within 100 feet of a building or where there is an immediate danger to such building of destruction by fire. 
(3)  Issuance of permit. Application for permits for open burning shall be made on forms furnished by the fire department and permits issued shall be in force for a length of time which shall be determined by the chief or officers of the town fire department. No burning permit shall be required if an approved incinerator is used. 
(d)  Responsibility for fires. Any person who negligently sets a fire on any land or shall fail to properly attend the fire so as to allow the fire to escape to adjoining land or shall set a fire in violation of any provision of this section or shall set a fire without the use of an incinerator as provided in this section shall upon conviction be subject to the forfeiture provided in subsection (e) of this section, and in addition thereto shall be liable for all expenses incurred in the suppression of any such fire which the town clerk shall certify to such person by itemized statement. If any claim is not paid within 60 days from the date of billing by the town clerk, the town may maintain an action against the person for the collection of such claim in addition to the forfeiture provided. The term "person" as used in this section shall include the owner and any person in possession of any real estate upon which a fire is set. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate, neglect, or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section or who shall build any fire for which a permit has not been issued shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 4, 6-13-1977)  
Sec. 30-2. - Fire district. 
(a)  Generally. All that part of the town as shown on the map on file in the chief's office shall be known as the fire district. 
(b)  Regulations within fire districts. Every building erected, enlarged or moved within or into the fire district shall be of fireproof construction, except as otherwise provided by this article. Enclosing walls, division walls and partial walls shall conform to the requirements for standard fire walls as set forth in the Wisconsin State Building Code, requirements of parapet walls in the Wisconsin State Building Code is hereby made a part of this section with respect to all buildings and structures within the fire district. No building of frame construction shall be built within or moved into the fire district. 
(c)  Razing old or damaged buildings. Any existing frame building within the fire limits which may be damaged by fire, or which has deteriorated to an amount greater than one-half of its assessed value, exclusive of the foundation, shall not be repaired or rebuilt, but shall be ordered removed under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0413 by the building inspector. 
(d)  Fireproof roofing. 
(1)  Every roof hereafter constructed within the fire district, including buildings listed in section 30-46(b), shall be covered with a roofing having a fire resistive rating equivalent to Class "B" or better of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., classification. 
(2)  No roofing on an existing roof shall be renewed or repaired to a greater extent than one tenth of the roof surface, except in conformity with the requirements of subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1, 8-11-1999)  
Secs. 30-3—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to prescribe regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises within the town. Compliance with standards of the American Insurance Association or the National Fire Protection Association or other approved nationally recognized safety standard shall be deemed to be prima facia evidence of compliance with this intent. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(1)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-32. - State codes adopted. 
In addition to the regulations, standards and procedures set forth in this article, compliance shall be made with the provisions of the state administrative code and regulations of the state department of commerce, all of which are made a part of this section by reference; provided, however, that in the event of conflict or ambiguity concerning any of the foregoing, the stricter provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(2)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-33. - Application of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply equally to new and existing conditions except that existing conditions not in strict compliance with the terms of this article shall be permitted to continue where the exceptions do not constitute a clear hazard to life or property. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as applying to the transportation of any article or thing shipped under the jurisdiction of and in compliance with the regulations prescribed by the United States Department of Transportation (DOT), nor as applying to the military forces of the United States. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to one-family and two-family dwellings used solely for the housing of two families or less, except for sections 30-5, 30-36 through 30-41, 30-45 and 30-46(b). 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(3)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-34. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meaning indicated in this section: 
Approval, as applied to a material, device or mode of construction , means approval by the chief of the fire department or building inspector in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Assembly occupancy means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof by a gathering of 100 or more persons. 
Automatic fire alarm system means a system which automatically detects a fire condition and actuates a fire alarm signal device. 
Business occupancy means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof for the transaction of business or the rendering or receiving of professional services; including offices. 
Chief of the fire department means the head of the municipal fire department or a duly authorized deputy. 
Combustible liquids means liquids with a flash point at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit are referred to as combustible liquids and may be subdivided as follows: Class II: Liquids shall include those having flash points as or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit and below 140 degrees Fahrenheit. Class IIIA: Liquids shall include those having flash points at or above 140 degrees Fahrenheit and below 200 degrees Fahrenheit. Class IIIB: Liquids shall include those having flash points at or above 200 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Dangerous materials means materials that could cause a lost time injury from exposure to the detrimental effects of highly flammable or highly self-reactive materials such as: 
(1)  Flammable liquids and solids. 
(2)  Highly toxic materials which are likely to cause some injury or illness but not death from a moderate exposure. 
(3)  Materials which could cause destruction of tissue, particularly the eyes, if not removed from the body in a very short time. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities. 
Educational occupancy means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof by persons assembled for the purpose of learning or of receiving educational instruction. 
Extremely dangerous materials means materials that can cause death or disabling injury or brief exposure or are extremely volatile flammable liquids or flammable gases, or detonative materials. A further breakdown is: 
(1)  Explosive and explosively unstable materials. 
(2)  High level radioactive materials. 
(3)  Highly flammable gases and materials which give off extremely flammable vapors. 
(4)  Extremely toxic materials which are so poisonous that no bodily exposure should occur, such as parathion and hydrogen cyanide. 
(5)  Materials which are extremely corrosive to living tissue such as bromine, which can injure almost instantaneously or hydrochloric acid, which can strike through the skin to the tissues beneath and cause deep, slow healing burns. Also included are materials that could cause severe eye injury. 
Fire resistance rating means the time in hours that the material or construction will withstand the standard fire exposure as determined by a fire test made in conformity with the Standard Method of Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials, ASTM E119, IL Inc. 263, or NFPA No. 251. 
Fire resistive construction means the type of construction in which the structural members including walls, partitions, columns, floors and roofs are of noncombustible or limited combustible materials and have fire resistance ratings not less than those specified in Table 6-5A, NFPA Manual Fire Protection Hand Book, 14th Edition. 
Fire walls means a wall which has a fire resistance rating of not less than four hours and which subdivides a building or separate building to restrict the spread of fire including a three foot parapet wall. 
Flammable liquids means any liquid having a flash point below 100 degrees Fahrenheit and having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 psi at 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(1)  Class I: Liquids shall include those having flash points below 100 degrees Fahrenheit and may be subdivided as follows: 
(2)  Class IA: Shall include those having flash points below 73 degrees Fahrenheit and having a boiling point below 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(3)  Class IB: Shall include those having flash points below 73 degrees Fahrenheit and having a boiling point at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(4)  Class IC: Shall include those having flash points at or above 73 degrees Fahrenheit and below 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Hazardous materials means materials that could cause temporary disability or injury which presumably would heal without permanent effects. Hazardous materials are moderately combustible or self-reactive and they include the following: 
(1)  Tear gases. 
(2)  Severe irritants. 
(3)  Toxic (but not highly or extremely toxic) materials. 
(4)  Combustible materials which must be heated before they can be ignited. 
Hazardous occupancies mean those occupancies of property described in Table 7-2M, NEG "Hazardous Locations Classification" (1975) as set forth in Section 7-30, NFPA Manual Fire Protection Hand Book, 14th Edition. 
High hazard occupancy means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof that involves highly combustible, highly flammable, hazardous chemical or explosive material, or which has inherent characteristics that constitute a special fire hazard as determined by the chief of the fire department. 
Industrial occupancy means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof for assembling, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing operations; except when classified as a high hazard occupancy. 
Institutional occupancy means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof by persons harbored or detained to receive medical, charitable or other care or treatment or by persons involuntarily detained. 
Mercantile occupancy means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof for the displaying, selling or buying of goods, wares or merchandise; except when classified as a high hazard occupancy. 
Multi-family house means the occupancy or use of a building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units. 
NFPA means the National Fire Protection Association. 
Nuisance hazards means temporary irritation or discomfort that would clear up when the exposure is ended or materials which are only slightly combustible such as Class B liquids. 
Ordinary construction means the type of construction in which exterior bearing walls or bearing portions of exterior walls are of noncombustible or limited combustible materials and have minimum hourly fire resistance ratings and stability under fire conditions; nonbearing exterior walls are of noncombustible or limited combustible materials, and roofs, floors and interior framing are wholly partially of wood of smaller dimensions than required for heavy timbered construction. 
Owner means the owner and includes the owner's duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary, or a person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question. 
Storage occupancy means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof for the storage of goods, wares, merchandise, raw materials, agricultural or manufactured products, including parking garages, or the commercial sheltering of livestock and other animals; except when classified as a high hazard occupancy. 
Wood frame construction means the type of construction in which exterior walls, bearing walls and partitions, floors and roofs and their supports are wholly or partly of wood or other combustible material, when the construction does not qualify as heavy timbered construction or ordinary construction. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(4)), 8-11-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-35. - Enforcement. 
The chief of the fire department is authorized and it shall be his duty to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.06(5)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-36. - Penalties. 
(a)  Adult penalties. 
(1)  First violation. Any adult violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture under this article shall subject any violator to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(2)  Second and subsequent violations. Any person found guilty of violating this article who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same provision of this article within one year shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(b)  Youth penalties. 
(1)  For any juvenile adjudged to have violated this article the court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 938.17(2), 938.343 and 938.344, in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and such statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section. The court is also authorized to require payment for alcohol and other drug abuse services in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 938.361, and such statute is hereby adopted and incorporated in this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statutes incorporated in this section, are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(2)  For any juvenile adjudged to have violated this article who violates a condition of a dispositional order of the court imposed under Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 or 938.344, the court is authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 938.355(6)(d), and 895.035, in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and such statutes are adopted and incorporated in this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current statutes incorporated in this section, are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.07), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-37. - Orders to eliminate dangerous or hazardous conditions. 
Whenever any of the officers or inspectors of the fire department shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials, he or they shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied. The following shall be deemed hazardous conditions but the enumeration hereof shall not exclude other conditions from being deemed hazardous: 
(1)  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials; as defined in Section 3, Chapter 10 "Identification of Hazardous Materials of NFPA, Fire Protection Hand Book." 
(2)  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials; as defined in Section 3, Chapter 10, "Identification of Hazardous Materials" and Section 7, Chapter 6 of "Refuse Handling Systems and Equipment" of the NFPA Fire Protection Hand Book. 
(3)  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or other highly combustible materials; as defined in Section 4, Chapter 14 "Waste Controls" and Section 5, Chapter 1 of "Indoor Storage Practices: and Section 5, Chapter 2 of "Outdoor Storage Practices," of NFPA Fire Protection Hand Book. 
(4)  Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts or inadequate clearances to unprotected material from hoods, grease, extractors, and ducts; as defined in Section 3 Chapter 8 "Dust," Section 7, Chapter 5 of "Air Moving Equipment," and Section 16, Chapter 4 of "Inspection and Maintenance of Fire Extinguisher Systems," of NFPA, Fire Protection Hand Book. 
(5)  Obstructions to or on fire escapes, designated openings in exterior walls for fire department use, stairs, passageways, doors, or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire; as defined in Section 6, Chapter 9 of "Concepts of Egress Design" of NFPA, Fire Protection Hand Book. 
(6)  Any building or other structure covered by this code which for want of repairs, lack of adequate exit facilities automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated conditions, or from any other cause, created a hazardous condition, as defined in Section 6, Chapter 9 of "Concepts of Egress Design" and Section 16, Chapter I of "Extinguishers in Fire Protection" and Section 12, Chapters 1 through 5, of "Sprinkler Systems" and Section 12, Chapters 1 through 5 of "Detection Systems" of NFPA Fire Protection Hand Book. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(5)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-38. - Service orders. 
(a)  Generally. The service or orders for corrections of violations of this article shall be made, in writing, upon the owners, occupant or other person responsible for the conditions, either by delivering the service or orders to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in the case no such person is found on the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of such premises. Thereafter a copy of such order shall be mailed to the owner and occupant addressed to their last know post office address. No person shall remove such affixed notice without the written consent of the fire chief. 
(b)  Compliance. Any such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner and occupant of such building, structure or premises. The owner and occupant may within 24 hours appeal to the chief of the fire department for a review of such order who shall thereafter as soon as possible file his decision. Unless such order is revoked or modified by the chief of the fire department, it shall remain in full force and be complied with within the time affixed in such order. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall apply to all buildings except: 
(1)  Private residences and accessory buildings in connection therewith; 
(2)  Temporary buildings or sheds used for construction purposes only; 
provided, if any building or structure, whether exempted or not, is especially liable to fire, and is situated to endanger other buildings or property, or contains any combustible or explosive material dangerous to the safety of any building or premises or the occupants thereof, or endangering or hindering firefighters in case of fire, such building or structure shall be subject to these orders so far as may be necessary to protect adjoining or other buildings and their occupants and firefighters. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(6)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-39. - Permits. 
(a)  A permit shall be required in order to maintain, store or handle materials, or to conduct processes, which produce conditions hazardous to life and property, or to install equipment used in connection with such activities. Such permit, when approved as described in this section, may be issued by the chief of the fire department and does not take the place of any license required by law. It shall not be transferable, and any change in use or occupancy of premises shall require a new permit. 
(b)  Before a permit may be issued, the chief of the fire department, or his assistants, shall inspect and approve the receptacles, vehicles, buildings or storage places to be used. In cases where laws and regulations enforceable by departments other than the fire department are applicable, joint approval shall be obtained from all departments concerned. 
(c)  All applications for a permit required by this article shall be made to the chief of the fire department in such form and detail as he shall prescribe. 
(d)  Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated therein, and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any officer of the fire department. 
(e)  One permit only shall be required by establishments dealing in or using, two or more flammable, combustible or explosive materials to be kept in the establishment at any one time, but each of the materials shall be listed in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(7)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-40. - Revocation of permit. 
The chief of the fire department may revoke a permit or approval issued if any violation of this article is found upon inspection or in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(8)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-41. - Modification of requirements. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department shall have the same power to modify any of the provisions of this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article, provided that the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy of such application and decision shall be filed with the clerk. 
(b)  If the chief of the fire department disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this article have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal within 30 days from the date of any such decision or interpretation of this article to the building inspection department and the planning commission of the town. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(9)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-42. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed to hold the town responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized in this article or failure to inspect or reinspect or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.01(9)), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-43. - Fire extinguishers required. 
(a)  Every building exclusive of one- and two-family residences, shall have at least one ten-pound fire extinguisher equipment on the premises at all times. In multi-occupancy buildings each occupancy shall have at least one five-pound extinguisher on the premises at all times. All extinguishers shall be in view and shall not be hung more than five feet above the floor to the hanger. 
(b)  At least one ten-pound extinguisher is required for the first 1,500 square feet of floor area and an additional extinguisher for each additional 2,500 square feet of floor area. In addition, one additional extinguisher shall be located in any area determined to be hazardous or high hazard area as defined in this article. 
(c)  In any occupancy determined to be hazardous or a high hazard occupancy, there shall be at least two extinguishers of at least five pounds each. 
(d)  All extinguishers shall be of an A-B-C type unless otherwise recommended by the fire chief after review of the specific hazard or occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.02), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-44. - Automatic sprinkler systems. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meaning indicated in this section. 
Approved, as applied to automatic fire sprinkler systems , means approved by the authority charged with the enforcement of this section. 
Approved, as applied to automatic fire sprinklers and devices , means approval by a recognized testing laboratory. 
Area means ground area of buildings or of sections of buildings divided by approved fire walls, each section being considered a separate area. 
Automatic fire sprinkler equipment means an integrated system of underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fire engineering standards. The system includes a suitable water supply such as a gravity tank, fire pump, reservoir or pressure tank and/or connection by underground piping to a municipal water main. The portion of the sprinkler system above ground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically designed piping installed in a building, structure area, generally overhead, and to which sprinklers are connected in a systematic pattern. The system includes a controlling valve and a device for actuating an alarm when the system is in operation. The system is usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area. Automatic Fire Water Sprinkler Systems are further described in Section 14, Chapter 1 through 6, of the NFPA Fire Protection Hand Book. 
Basement means any story where less than half of the height between floor and ceiling is above the average level of the street, sidewalk or finished grade. 
Story means that part of a building comprised between a floor and the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
(b)  Where installed. Every building constructed or structurally altered shall have an approved automatic sprinkler system installed and maintained when occupied in whole or in part for the following purposes: 
(1)  Generally. The manufacture, storage or sale of combustible goods or merchandise in: 
a.  Fire resistive buildings if over 10,000 square feet in area, or over one story in height and exceeding 5,000 square feet in area, or over four stories in height, regardless of area; 
b.  Throughout every building, regardless of the number of stories where the floor area is undivided by fire walls and exceeds 10,000 square feet and where any point within the building is more than 50 feet, measured in a straight line, from any exterior accessible opening of the building; or 
c.  Throughout every building of nonfire resistive construction over 5,000 square feet in area and over two stories in height regardless of area. 
(2)  Garages. Throughout public garages as follows: Fire resistive buildings over 5,000 square feet in area. 
(3)  Basements. Throughout all basements and cellars of buildings having an area of 3,000 square feet or more used for the manufacture or storage of combustible material or merchandise, or the housing of automobiles. 
(4)  Hotels, motels. Throughout hotel and motel buildings of nonfire resistive construction more than three stories in height, and more than two stories in height if over 5,000 square feet total floor area. 
(5)  Multi-family dwellings and dormitories. In the basements, cellars, storerooms, workrooms, hallways and stairways of multi-family buildings and dormitories of nonfire resistive construction, two or more stories in height, or over 5,000 square feet in area. 
(6)  Theaters and halls. Throughout buildings occupied or used as places of public assembly having a stage arranged for theatrical, operatic, or similar performances, excepting only the auditorium, foyers, and lobbies; and throughout all such buildings of nonfire resistive construction if such places of assembly are located above the first floor, whether or not there is a stage. 
(7)  Institutional building and hospitals. Throughout all hospitals, nursing, convalescent, old age and other institutional buildings. 
(8)  Educational occupancies. Throughout all buildings of nonfire resistive construction. In such buildings of fire resistive construction, throughout basements, workshops, laboratories, stairways and corridors, stage areas of auditoriums. Janitor closets, kitchens, cafeterias, storage areas, throughout all other areas where combustible materials are handled and stored. 
(9)  Hazardous occupancies. Throughout every building which by reason of its construction or highly combustible occupancy involves a severe life hazard to its occupants or, in the judgment of the chief of the fire department, constitutes a fire menace. 
(c)  Exceptions. The following classes of buildings shall be exempt from the requirement of automatic sprinkler systems: 
(1)  Any portion of a building housing a process or material which would interact with water to create a greater fire hazard than without water, provided an alternate fire suppression system is used. 
(2)  Dwellings with a capacity of fewer than two families and individual dwelling units. 
(d)  Fire department hose connections. Every automatic sprinkler system installed in new or existing buildings shall be equipped with at least one fire department hose connection at a location approved by the chief of the fire department. 
(e)  How installed. 
(1)  Approved automatic fire sprinkler equipment shall be installed in accordance with the current edition of Pamphlet #13, "Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems" and other applicable standards of the NFPA. 
(2)  No automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed or altered in a building until plans have been submitted to and approved by the chief of the fire department. Three copies of the plans and specifications shall be submitted for review; the approved plan shall be stamped "Approved Fire Department," the date of such approval and one copy returned to the owner, the others kept on file by the fire department. 
(3)  Underground water mains, hydrants and valves shall conform to current specifications of the town or as approved by the town engineers. 
(4)  The fire department requires all tests as may be required by the National Fire Protection Association's Standards. Such tests shall be conducted under the supervision of a fire department representative who shall certify acceptance or rejection of the system or by a recognized testing laboratory whom shall certify the results. 
(f)  Interim installations. 
(1)  Unless, or until such time as a municipal water supply is available to service a building in which installation of an automatic sprinkler system is required, connection of the system to a water supply shall not be required; however, all design characteristics of systems installed under this section shall include provisions for eventual connection to a municipal water supply. In addition, such interim installations shall also include: 
a.  One or more fire department connections with two female couplings with National Standard Threads attached to a header of adequate size in accordance with fire protection engineering standards, but not less than four inches to supply the system; and 
b.  An automatic fire detection and alarm system of a type approved by the state department of commerce. 
(2)  All fire sprinkler systems installed under the requirements of this section shall be connected to a municipal water system within six months after water mains to serve the building are available for use. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.03), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-45. - Regulations for storage, handling and use of flammable or combustible liquid. 
(a)  Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons, firms, corporations, co-partnerships and governmental agencies, except federal, storing, handling or using flammable or combustible liquids, and to the owner or lessee of any building, premises or equipment in or on which flammable or combustible liquids are stored, handled or used. 
(b)  Restricted locations. 
(1)  The storage of Class I liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the town, except a permit may be issued for temporary installations in those areas designated as industrial districts or parcels of land in excess of one acre used for single-family residences. 
(2)  No new bulk plants shall be constructed within the town except within those areas designated as industrial districts and approval of the fire department has been given for the proposed location with respect to topography, nearness to places of public assembly and adequacy of water supply for fire control. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued for the construction of a refinery or plant storing or handling crude petroleum within that part of the town zoned solely for residential occupancies or for mercantile establishments predominantly retail in character; or until approval has been given for the proposed location after consideration of topography, nearness to places of public assembly and adequacy of water supply for fire control. 
(c)  Retroactivity. Existing plants, stores, equipment, building, structures and installations for the storage, handling, or use of flammable or combustible liquids which are not in strict compliance with the terms of this section may be continued in use provided these do not constitute a distinct hazard to life and property. When the chief of the fire department deems that the continued use will constitute a clear hazard to life and adjoining property, he shall issue an order for correction as provided in section 30-37. 
(d)  Permits for the storage, handling and use of flammable or combustible liquids. A permit issued pursuant, to this section shall be obtained from the fire department for any of the following: 
(1)  Storage, handling, or use of Class I liquids in excess of 12 gallons in a dwelling or other place of human habitation; or in excess of 12 gallons in any other building or other occupancy; or in excess of 20 gallons outside of any building; except that no approval shall be required for the following: 
a.  For the storage or use of flammable or combustible liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant, mobile heating plant, or domestic heating appliance. 
b.  For the storage of use of paints, oils, varnishes, or similar flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days. 
(2)  Storage, handling, or use of Class II or Class III flammable liquids in excess of 25 gallons in a building; or in excess of 60 gallons outside a building. 
(3)  For the manufacture, processing, blending, or refining of flammable or combustible liquids. 
(4)  For the storage of flammable or combustible liquids in stationary tanks, whether above ground or below. 
(5)  For the abandonment or removal of underground tanks which have contained flammable or combustible liquids. 
(e)  Inspection and approval. 
(1)  Application for approval to construct or erect facilities for the storage, handling or use of flammable liquids or combustible liquids as required in this article shall be made in writing to the fire department. The fire department shall then cause to be made an inspection of the premises and equipment proposed to be used. If they are found to be in compliance with this article, a statement to that effect shall be made on the application and the application signed by the person making the inspection. The fire department shall thereupon grant a permit as applied for. 
(2)  Before operating any equipment or storing any flammable or combustible liquid, or covering the underground portions of any such equipment for which a permit is required, notification shall be given to the fire department and such department shall, within 24 hours, cause such premises or equipment to be inspected. 
(3)  The fire department may at any reasonable time inspect premises, buildings, installations or equipment for the storage, handling or use of flammable or combustible liquids. If a violation of this article is found to exist, written notice shall be filed with the owner, occupant or operator citing the violation and ordering its correction. If such order is not complied with within five days, the fire department may revoke the permit granted for such facility. 
(4)  Containers, tanks, equipment and apparatus meeting the standards of nationally recognized inspection or test laboratories shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.04), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 30-46. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Decorative material. Decorative material such as flammable window draperies, curtains, streamers, surface coverings applied over the building interior finish for decorative acoustical or other effect, and also cloth, cotton batting, straw vines, leaves, trees and plastics used for decorative effect, except floor coverings and ordinary window shades, shall not be permitted in the following occupancies: 
(1)  Assembly. 
(2)  Educational. 
(3)  Institutional. 
In such buildings, fabric decorations where used shall be flameproofed and so maintained by the owner or occupant of the building. 
(b)  Waste materials. 
(1)  No owner, agent or occupant of any building situated within the town shall allow to accumulate any waste materials such as paper, hay, straw, rags or other waste material of a combustible nature in any building or on any premises more than 24 hours. The fire chief shall order the immediate removal of such accumulated combustible waste material from any building or premises when in his opinion such storage would create a fire hazard. Ashes, when kept in basements of buildings shall be placed in fireproof bins. 
(2)  Combustible cuttings, waste cloth, paper or other waste shall be cleaned up and removed from the building at the close of each day's work, and shall be stored in a separate fireproof storage building, or in a metal container with cover or in a metal lined box with cover or in a fireproof vault or room. 
(c)  No smoking. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to light a match or other flame producing device, or to smoke, carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe in any retail mercantile establishment, except in areas approved for such purposes by the fire chief. It shall be the duty of the person in charge of such establishment for the enforcement of the regulations of this section. 
(2)  Smoking is prohibited in all rooms or parts of buildings which contain flammable liquids in open containers or in which the vapors from flammable liquids are present, or in which flammable liquids are used in any manufacturing process. 
(3)  In all areas where smoking is prohibited, suitable signs lettered "NO SMOKING" shall be displayed. 
(4)  Any person who by smoking or attempting to light or to smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes or tobacco in which a lighter or matches are employed, who shall in a careless, reckless or negligent manner, whether willfully or wantonly or not, set fire to any bedding furniture, curtains, draperies, house or any household furnishing, or any part of any building shall be guilty of violating this article. 
(d)  Commercial and institutional kitchens. All commercial and institutional kitchens shall have a UL approved hood and duct extinguishment systems as approved by the insurance services office of the state. The system shall also be provided with an automatic fuel cutoff. 
(e)  Use of oxyacetylene torches. Any person desiring to use oxyacetylene torches for cutting any metal on any premises and in or on any building, shall obtain permission to do so of the fire chief. The request for such permission shall include the location of the premises where the work is to be done and a description of the work to be done. Before such oxyacetylene torches are used, proper protection of surroundings shall be made by the use of asbestos blankets or other fire resistive materials. Ashes or sand shall be used for the absorption of oil. A fire extinguisher, pails of water, or small hose attached to a water supply shall be conveniently located close to the cutting operations. Such other precautions shall be taken as may be ordered by the fire chief. This section shall not apply to business establishments when such oxyacetylene torch is used in connection with regular business operations. Such establishments shall use the same precautions to prevent fires as required of persons who must obtain permission. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1(24.05), 8-11-1999)  
Secs. 30-47—30-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS 
 
Sec. 30-81. - Penalties. 
(a)  Adult penalties. Any person over the age of 17 years violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator over the age of 17 years to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(b)  Youth penalties. 
(1)  Any person between the ages of 12 and 17 years shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense, or referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 48.17(2). 
(2)  Any person under the age of 12 years shall be referred to the proper authorities, as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(c)  Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this article shall preclude the town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this article. 
(d)  Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of this article, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture and costs. 
(Ord. No. 94-11, § 2, 9-12-1994)  
Sec. 30-82. - Discharge of fireworks restricted; state laws adopted. 
The current and future statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. § 167.10, regulating the use of fireworks, exclusive of any provision therein relating to penalties, are adopted by reference and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any current or future statute incorporated in this section by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future addition, amendment, revision or modification of Wis. Stats. § 167.10, incorporated in this section is intended to be made a part of this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-11, § 1(A), 9-12-1994)  
Sec. 30-83. - Permit required. 
(a)  The use of fireworks, as that term is defined in Wis. Stats. § 167.10(1), is prohibited in the town unless the fireworks are used pursuant to a permit issued by the town according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3), and this article. A permit according to law may be issued only to the following: 
(1)  A public authority; 
(2)  A fair association; 
(3)  An amusement park; 
(4)  A park board; 
(5)  A civic organization; or 
(6)  A group of resident or nonresident individuals. 
(b)  The fee for a permit issued under this article shall be a daily fee, as specified in the fee schedule in the clerk's office, to compensate for investigating, monitoring and enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any fireworks use shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Wind velocity shall not be more than 15 miles per hour as recorded by the U.S. Weather Bureau, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 
(2)  Wind direction at the time of use shall be away from buildings or other combustible materials and structures and shall not carry fireworks onto any adjoining buildings or so as to cause annoyance or danger to other persons or property. 
(3)  Sufficient firefighting implements and personnel shall be available at the scene to control any fire which may be caused by the fireworks use. 
(4)  No fireworks may be used between 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(5)  Only the permit holder or permit holder's agent may discharge fireworks. 
(6)  No fireworks may be used other than from July 1 through July 7 of each year unless all neighbors within 200 feet from the point of discharge have granted permission in writing to the permit holder, and this written permission is on file with the town. 
(d)  Upon the issuance of a citation to any permit holder for the violation of any of the provisions of this article, the person's permit to use fireworks in the town shall be suspended. Upon conviction of any citation issued under this article, a person's permit to use fireworks shall be revoked. 
(e)  No person in the possession of fireworks pursuant to this article may resell those fireworks in the town. 
(Ord. No. 94-11, § 1(B), 9-12-1994)  
Sec. 30-84. - Permit for the use of fireworks. 
(a)  Application for permit. Each person, corporation or organization desiring to use fireworks within the town shall make application to the clerk. The application shall include: 
(1)  The name of the applicant. 
(2)  The address of the applicant. 
(3)  The residential and business telephone numbers of the applicant, if any. 
(4)  The date of birth of the applicant. 
(5)  The date requested for the fireworks use. 
(6)  The time and location for the requested use. 
(7)  The kind or quantity of fireworks and where purchased. 
(8)  The classification of the application as noted in Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3)(c). 
(9)  The proposed location for the storage of the fireworks in the town. 
(10)  A description of the safety protection to be provided during the permitted use. 
(11)  A description of the fire safety equipment to be provided during the permitted use. 
(12)  A diagram of the ground demonstrating fireworks ignition area, areas where persons will be located and areas where persons will not be located. 
(13)  The type and amount of security and sanitation personnel to be provided during the permitted use. 
(14)  Purpose of display, identifying group involved. 
(15)  Proof of insurance in the form of a standard company rider issued by an insurance company satisfactory to the town for the duration of the permit with a minimal limit of comprehensive general liability coverage in the amount of $2,000,000.00 with an insurance company licensed to do business within the state, naming the town and its officers and employees as additional insureds. 
(b)  Investigation of permit. Upon receipt of a permit application under the provisions of this article, the chief of police shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the application complies with all applicable regulations, ordinances and laws. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief of police shall make a recommendation as to whether or not, in his opinion, the permit shall be issued and advise the town board of the recommendation. 
(c)  Issuance of permit. No person, corporation or organization shall be issued or reissued a fireworks permit in the town until the following requirements have been satisfied: 
(1)  The town board has determined that the permit is in compliance with all applicable regulations, ordinances and laws. 
(2)  The town board has determined that all requirements for the application have been satisfied. 
(3)  The appropriate fees have been paid to the clerk. 
(4)  The town board has determined that the permittee has not been charged and/or convicted of any violations of regulations, ordinances or laws regulating the use of fireworks. 
(5)  The town board has determined that the permittee will provide adequate safety protection during the requested use. 
(6)  The town board has determined that the permittee will provide adequate fire safety equipment during the requested use. 
(7)  The town board has determined that the permittee has provided adequate insurance and indemnity. 
(8)  The town board has determined that the permittee will provide adequate security personnel. 
(9)  The town board has determined that the permittee will prevent open fires being ignited at the permitted location during the requested use. 
(10)  The town board has determined that the permittee will provide sanitary facilities at the permitted location during the requested use. 
(Ord. No. 94-11, § 1(C), 9-12-1994)  
Sec. 30-85. - Fireworks application. 
The application for fireworks use can be found on the town website. 
(Ord. No. 94-11, 9-12-1994)  
Chapter 34 - LAND DIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; streets, highways and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 78. 
 
ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Authority. 
These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69(3), 87.30, 281.31, and 236.45. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-1, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to supplement the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the town; 
(2)  Further and ensure the orderly layout and use of land to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
(3)  Provide adequate light and air; 
(4)  Prevent the overcrowding of land; 
(5)  Avoid undue concentration of population; 
(6)  Facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, stormwater management, and other public requirements; 
(7)  Implement the town's official map and/or comprehensive plan, as may be adopted; and 
(8)  Facilitate the further divisions or development of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land or units. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the town, with a view of conserving the value of the buildings placed upon the land providing the best possible environment for human habitation and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-2, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-3. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
It is not the intent of this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or annul any existing rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land, except that the ordinance heretofore known as the "Land Division and Development Control Ordinance for the Town of Mukwonago, Waukesha County, Wisconsin," and all amendments thereto that have been adopted prior to the date of enactment of this chapter, are hereby repealed. Where this chapter conflicts with any other existing rules and regulations, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. Any violation that occurred under the terms of a prior town land division and development ordinance that has since been repealed or modified shall continue to be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties and remedies described herein, and such prior provisions of this chapter or town ordinances shall continue in effect for such purpose. Such violations are not waived or forgiven by the adoption of new ordinances in the town. The effective date of any provision of this chapter that has been repealed and recreated with identical or substantially identical regulatory text shall be the date that the regulatory text at issue was initially adopted, regardless of renumbering changes, codification changes, or other changes that might have been made but do not impact upon the regulatory effect of the particular issue, provided that there has been no substantive lapse in the effectiveness of regulation. (Example: If an ordinance adopted in 1955 established a ten-foot setback on a particular lot; in 1969 such ten-foot setback was renumbered; in 1985 such ten-foot setback and other municipal ordinances were codified; in 1995 such ten-foot setback text was changed to add offset language; and 2010 the entire code was repealed and recreated with this provision unchanged; and at no point from 1955 to present was there a time when the ten-foot setback did not apply to such lot; then the ten-foot setback effective date shall be interpreted to be 1955.) 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-3, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-4. - Interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the town and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-4, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-5. - Non-liability. 
The town does not guarantee, warrant, or represent that only those areas designated as floodplains on plats and certified survey maps will be subjected to periodic inundation, nor does the town guarantee, warrant, or represent that the soils shown to be unsuited for a given land use from tests required by the chapter are the only unsuited soils within the jurisdiction of this chapter, and hereby asserts that there is not liability on the part of the town, or its officers, employees, agents, and independent contractors for any flood damages, sanitation problems, or structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon, or conformance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-5, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-6. - Title. 
The name of this chapter shall be known and cited as the "Land Division and Development Control Ordinance for the Town of Mukwonago, Waukesha County, Wisconsin." 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-6, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-7—34-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 34-21. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Generally. The jurisdiction of this chapter shall apply to all lands of the town within the limits of the county. No land in the town shall be divided or developed, unless that division or development complies with this chapter, the town's zoning regulations, the town's comprehensive plan, the town's official map, and all other appropriate state, county, and town ordinances and statutes. Certified surveys shall be required for all land divisions, unless required to be divided as a subdivision or condominium plat as herein described. Lot design, dedications, and required improvements shall conform to these sections for all proposed developments and not be limited to subdivisions only. Any attempt, whether intentional or unintentional, to bypass the intent of this chapter shall be construed by the courts in favor of the town. 
(b)  Exceptions. In no instance shall the provisions of this chapter apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Transfer of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order. 
(2)  Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages, or easements. 
(3)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property, if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes and meet all specifications required by this chapter, the town's zoning regulations, or other applicable laws or ordinances, subject to the procedures and requirements set forth in section 34-49. 
(4)  Cemetery plats made under Wis. Stats. § 157.07. 
(5)  Assessors plats made under Wis. Stats. § 70.27, provided such assessors plat complies with Wis. Stats. §§ 236.15(1)(ac) through (g) and 236.20(1) and (2)(a) through (e). 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-21, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-21, § 1, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 34-22. - Compliance. 
No persons, firm or corporation shall divide or develop any lands located within the jurisdictional limits of these regulations which results in a subdivision, minor land division, development, or replat as defined herein; no such subdivision, minor land division or replat shall be entitled to record; and, no street shall be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of this chapter and the following: 
(1)  Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(2)  Rules of the state department of transportation relating to safety of access and the preservation of the public interest and investment in the highway system, if the land owned or controlled by the subdivider abuts a state trunk highway or connecting street and all provisions of Wis. Admin. Code Trans 233 and other applicable transportation regulations, including such revisions, re-codifications, renumbering and other amendments as may be made thereto from time to time in the future. 
(3)  Rules of the state department of natural resources setting water quality standards, preventing and abating pollution, and regulating septic systems. 
(4)  Duly approved comprehensive land use plan or comprehensive plan components including zoning ordinances, sanitary codes, the county's highway width map, the rules of the county department of public works establishing regulations for access to and work within county highway rights-of-way, Ordinance No. 156-O-70, the town's official map, and all other applicable county and town ordinances including such revisions, re-codifications, renumbering and other amendments as may be made thereto from time to time in the future. 
(5)  The county shoreland and floodland subdivision control ordinance, and the county shoreland and floodland protection ordinance, on file at the county, and this Code, including such revisions, re-codifications, renumbering, and other amendments as may be made thereto from time to time in the future. 
(6)  The county construction site, erosion control, and stormwater management ordinance on file at the county, including such revisions, re-codifications, renumbering, and other amendments as may be made thereto from time to time in the future. 
(7)  The town's land division review checklist as adopted and amended from time-to-time by separate resolution of the town board. 
(8)  The county's regulations relating to onsite sewage disposal systems 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-22, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-23. - Definitions. 
(a)  General interpretations. The words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the term "person" includes associations, partnerships, or corporations; and the term "shall" is mandatory while the term "may" is permissive. All terms used which are defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 236 shall have the same meaning as ascribed thereto in the chapter, and as the chapter may hereafter be amended, unless otherwise defined in this chapter or unless the context's subject matter clearly indicates otherwise. 
(b)  Specific words and phrases. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advisory agencies means those agencies who for the purpose of this chapter are able to advise the owner/subdivider or the town with respect to the impacts of the proposed development. These may include, but are not limited for lack of enumeration to, the county department of parks and land use, land resource, environmental health, planning and zoning and parks divisions, the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission, the school district and the utility companies. 
Alley means a public way affording only secondary access to abutting properties. 
Approving authorities are as set forth below: 
(1)  If within a municipality, the governing body, but if the plat is within an area, the annexation of which is being legally contested, the governing bodies of both the annexing municipality and the town from which the area has been annexed shall approve. 
(2)  If within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of a municipality: 
a.  The town board; 
b.  The governing body of the municipality if by July 1, 1958, or thereafter it adopted a subdivision ordinance or an official map under Wis. Stats. § 62.23; and 
c.  The county planning agency if such agency employs on a full-time basis a professional engineer, a planner, or other person charged with the duty of administering zoning or other planning legislation. 
(3)  If outside the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of a municipality, the town board and the county planning agency, if there is one. 
(4)  If a subdivision lies within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of more than one municipality, the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0105 shall apply. 
Block means a tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelands or waterways, municipal boundary lines, or county lines. 
Building means a structure built, used, designed, or intended for shelter, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, or properties of any kind where the structure is permanently affixed to the land. 
Building envelope means: 
(1)  The area of a lot remaining after removal of all required setback, offset and shore setback or other separation requirements including those relating to proper location of water supply, wells and onsite sewage disposal systems easements, wetlands and primary environmental corridor elements, which could be degraded by building or other activities on the site; or 
(2)  An area that is smaller than as described in subsection (a) of this section, that is depicted on the face of the certified survey map or subdivision plat. 
Certified survey map means a map prepared according to Wis. Stats. § 236.34 and article VI of this chapter. 
Common open space means undeveloped land that has been designated, reserved, or restricted in perpetuity from further development and is set aside for the use and enjoyment by residents of the development. Common open space shall not be part of individual residential lots, and shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain such recreational facilities for residents as are described in the approved development deed restrictions. 
Comprehensive plan means the plan adopted by the town under Wis. Stats. § 66.1001, which set forth the intent and policies of the adopting body regarding its physical, social, and economic development and includes such elements as land use, traffic circulation, utilities, parks and parkways, open space and environmental corridor protection, housing and economic development, but is not limited to those items for lack of enumeration. 
County means Waukesha County, Wisconsin. 
County planning agency means the county department of parks and land use, planning and zoning division. 
Cul-de-sac (permanent) means a street that is not planned to continue at some future date due to topography, wetlands, preservation of environmental corridors, natural features, or the development of lots located at the end of the same or that are precluded from continuing by the subdivision design. Permanent cul-de-sacs are generally designed and built as such. 
Cul-de-sac (temporary) means a street that is planned to continue at some future date. 
Developer. See Subdivider. 
Developer's agreement. See Subdivider's agreement . 
Development means a lot, or more than one lot, that is to be divided, improved with amenities such as buildings, structures, parking, abutting roadways, abutting sewer mains, or abutting water mains. Development may involve the division of land, as in the case of subdivision, assessor's plats, replats, or minor land division. Development does not necessarily involve the division of land, however, as in the case of condominiums, development of existing parcel or combined parcels. The term "development" does not include cases where one single-family residence is constructed or improved upon a single lot in a district where a single-family residence is a permitted use. 
Drainage easement means any area in a plat or on a certified survey map where a portion of land is delineated on said plat or map for the purpose of providing an area for surface water, drainage and runoff to protect landowners benefiting from the proper drainage of surface water. 
Environmental corridor means an elongated area usually located along streams, valleys, or other significant topographic features which may contain lakes, rivers, floodlands, wetlands, woodlands, significant topography, wet soils, or significant wildlife habitat. Such areas are delineated on the adopted regional plan, the town's comprehensive plan, and the county's park and open space plan. Environmental corridors often include other natural resource elements that serve to support the scenic, recreational, and historic preservation values of the town. 
Environmentally sensitive lands is a general term intended to represent all of the important natural resources of a given area, the preservation and protection of which are important to the maintenance of the overall environmental health and welfare of that area. The term "environmentally sensitive lands" is often used interchangeably with the term "environmental corridor." 
Erosion and stormwater control plan means a descriptive document approved by the town engineer, and the county department of parks and land use, land resources division, specifying methods for controlling soil erosion, surface water runoff, and sediment deposition caused by or resulting from land disturbing and land development activities. 
Extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction area means the unincorporated area within 1½ miles of a fourth class city or village or within three miles of all other cities that have adopted a subdivision ordinance under the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
Filing. A development proposal shall be considered filed upon submittal of a fully complete application, including all information required by this chapter, the number of copies required by this chapter, the required fees, the letter of application, the required state forms and attached fees, and the soils test to the town and the county department of parks and land use. 
Flag lot means a lot that although it does front upon a public street, the frontage is a long, narrow strip of land or a parcel that does not meet the minimum lot width requirements at the building setback line; except that lots which front upon the terminal turnaround at the closed end of a permanent cul-de-sac are not considered to be flag lots. 
Frontage means the total dimension of a lot abutting a public street measured along the street right-of-way line. 
Greenway means linear open space along either a natural corridor, such as a riverfront, stream valley, ridge line, or land along a railroad right-of-way converted to recreational use, a canal, a scenic road, or other route, any natural or landscape course for pedestrian or bicycle passage. An open space connector linking parks, natural reserves, cultural features, or historic sites with each other, and populated areas. 
High-water elevation means the average annual high-water elevation of a pond, stream, lake, flood flowage or wetland referred to an established datum plane or where such elevation is not available, the elevation of the line up to which the presence of water is so frequent as to leave a distinctive mark by erosion, changing or destruction of vegetation or other easily recognizable topography, geologic, or vegetative characteristics. 
Isolated natural area means an area consisting of pockets of wetlands, woodlands, and surface water that are isolated from the primary and secondary environmental corridors and are at least five acres. Such areas are delineated on the adopted regional plan, the town's comprehensive plan, or the county's park and open space plan. Isolated natural areas support the scenic, recreational, and historic preservation values of the town. 
Irrevocable letter of credit means an irrevocable written agreement guaranteeing payment for improvements, entered into by a bank, savings and loan, or other financial institution authorized to do business in the state and which has a financial standing acceptable to the town, which secures a developer's obligation to pay the cost of designing, constructing, and installing required public improvements in a timely manner and certain other obligations in connection with an approved development, and is in a form approved by the town attorney and an amount approved by the town engineer. 
Letter of credit. See Irrevocable letter of credit. 
Lot means a parcel of contiguous land with described land boundaries and abutting or having access by an approved easement to a public street or other approved way and exclusive of any land lying in public rights-of-way, mill tax roads, public streets, streams or other public water body. Where such streams or public rights-of-way divide a single described parcel into two or more parts, such severed portions shall be considered separate individual lots if such separate parcels individually meet the use regulations, building location and area regulations of the zoning district in which they are located. Where such separate parcels do not meet these requirements and have been described as a single parcel of record, together such severed portions shall be considered to be a single lot for regulatory purposes under the provisions of this chapter. Such severed areas shall constitute a single lot for computation of area regulations and other locational provisions of this chapter. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot, which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. 
Lot of record means a lawfully platted lot or lot lawfully created in a certified survey map or a lot lawfully created by metes and bounds description that has been approved by the town and, in each case, has been recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance measured between side lot lines, perpendicular to lot depth and at a point in relation to the depth where the product of the two would produce the minimum required lot area. 
Minor land division means any division of land within the town that is not required to be divided by subdivision plat and otherwise not exempt by law. 
Multi-family units means a lot or building designed for and occupied by two or more residential units including duplexes, row houses, condominiums, and apartment houses. 
Natural drainage area means an area in a plat, development or on a certified survey map that is preserved for natural drainage and is maintained by owner of the land, with the preservation accomplished by easement or deed restriction in a form approved by the town attorney and town engineer. 
Objecting agency means an agency empowered to object to a subdivision plat pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 236. Objecting agencies include the state department of administration (DOA) and the state department of transportation (WDOT). 
Official map means the map indicating the location and size of existing and proposed streets, highways, parkways, parks and playgrounds as adopted and amended by the town board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23(6). 
Open space means a land area used for recreation, agriculture, resource protection, and amenities for recreational purposes or buffers. 
Ordinary high-water mark. See High-water elevation. 
Outlot means a parcel of land, other than a buildable lot or block, so designated on the plat, or certified survey map. Outlots may be created to restrict a lot, to create common open space, to create stormwater facilities or for dedication to a public entity for park and open space purposes or to transfer to a private conservation organization. Outlots may also be parcels of land intended to be re-divided into lots or combined with lots or outlots in adjacent land divisions in the future for the purpose of creating buildable lots. An outlot may also be created if a lot fails to meet requirements for a private onsite wastewater treatment system, but which may be buildable if public sewer is extended to the lot or land division. 
Owner. See Subdivider. 
Park and open space plan means the plan adopted by the town board for the purpose of planning parks and open space in the town. 
Performance bond means a surety bond issued by an insurance company or a bank guaranteeing performance of a contract or obligation through forfeiture of the bond if said contract or obligation is unfulfilled. 
Plat means a map of a subdivision. 
Plat, condominium, means a map which partitions a building or a group of buildings in which units are owned individually and the common areas are owned on a proportional undivided basis, pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 703. 
Plat, final, means a map of a subdivision, which has been accurately surveyed, clearly and definitely showing the streets, alleys, blocks, lots and other divisions thereof, in such manner that the same can be clearly and distinctly identified, along with the final plat data required by this chapter. 
Plat, preliminary, means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purpose of preliminary considerations. A preliminary plat precisely describes the location and exterior boundaries of the parcel proposed to be divided and shows the approximate location of the lots, the proposed public improvements, location of all soils tests, the topography, floodplain, wetland, primary environmental corridor, and other features as may be required, along with the preliminary plat data required by this chapter. 
Private improvement means any improvement that is to be kept and managed by the property owners within the development. 
Public improvement means any improvement that is to be dedicated to the town, the county, or any other governmental division, which shall thereafter be responsible for the ongoing maintenance and operation of such improvement; and otherwise private improvements that are required to be made by the town as part of the development project, or for which the town has enforcement authority. 
Recording a plat means the filing of the original document of the final plat or condominium plat with the county register of deeds for recording. 
Register of deeds means the register of deeds of the county. 
Registered land surveyor means an individual having the credentials required under Wis. Stats. § 443.06. 
Replat means the process of changing the map or plat which changes the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat, certified survey map, or part thereof. 
Residential unit means a building or a portion of a building where a person or persons live together as a single household which contains, sleeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities. 
Residual parcel means the land remaining after lots have been divided. 
Restrictive covenant means a restriction also known as a deed restriction on the use of the land. A restrictive covenant usually runs with the land and is binding upon subsequent owners of the property. 
Street means an area that serves as a primary vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands or to other streets other than an alley. 
Collector street means a street, which collects the traffic from other streets and is designated as a "collector street" on the town's official map or as designated by the town board. 
Frontage street means a street auxiliary to, and located on the side of, an arterial highway for service to abutting property and for control. 
Major street means a principal arterial including highways, parkways, and thoroughfares. 
Minor street means a street intended to serve and to provide access primarily to the properties abutting thereon. A cul-de-sac is a minor street having one opened end and being terminated at the other by a turn-around. 
Subdivider means any person, firm or entity, or any agent thereof, owning, dividing or proposing to divide land resulting in a subdivision, minor subdivision, and condominium plat or replat. For the purposes of this chapter, lots and property shall be considered in the same ownership when owned by: the same individual or corporation; an individual and another in joint tenancy, or as tenants in common, and either of said joint or common tenants owns other lots individually or as a joint tenant or tenant in common, together with another, an individual, and other lots are owned by his spouse, parent, grandparents, children, grandchildren, or a brother or sister or spouse of the brother or sister of such person; when any said lots are owned by an individual and other lots are owned by the corporation (broadly interpreted to include, but not be limited to, business corporations, non-stock corporations, service corporations and limited liability companies) in which said individual is an officer or director or controlling stockholder; when any of said lots are owned by an individual and other lots are owned by a partnership in which said individual is a partner; and when any of said lots are owned by group of individuals who are acting in concert to divide and/or develop adjoining parcels of property. 
Subdivider's agreement means a contract between the subdivider and the town board, in a form approved by the town planner and town attorney. 
Subdivision means a division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner thereof or the owner's agent or subdivider for the purpose of sale or building development where: 
(1)  The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites inclusive of the original remnant parcel of 1½ acres each or less in area; 
(2)  The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites inclusive of the original remnant parcel of 1½ acres each or less in area by successive divisions of any part of the original property by any person within a period of five years; 
(3)  The act of division creates six or more parcels or building sites for residential development inclusive of the original remnant parcel of any size by successive divisions of any part of the original property by any person within a period of five years; or 
(4)  The act of division is authorized by a planned unit development or conservation design development conditional use. 
Town means the Town of Mukwonago, Waukesha County, Wisconsin. 
Waukesha County highway width map means a map adopted by the county, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.1031, that shows the planned width of existing and future roadways. 
Wetland means an area where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophilic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-23, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, §§ 1, 2, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 34-24. - Dedication of open space. 
(a)  In order that adequate open space and sites for public uses may be properly located and preserved as the town develops, the following provisions are established: 
(1)  Where the town's comprehensive plan or park and open space plan designates a portion of a property for public use by the town, county, or state, the subdivider shall be required to develop the property as a planned unit development or conservation design development, in order to preserve that portion of the property, so designated to be owned by the town, state, or county, if so required by the town board. 
(2)  Where it is determined by the town board that a portion of the development is designated for public sites or open space areas as designated in the town's comprehensive plan or park and open space plan, the town clerk shall give notice to the town, county, and state of said determination. If any of the aforementioned entities have an interest in acquiring said area or site, they must give notice of interest to the property owner and the town. Said entity shall have an 18-month option on the purchase of said property from the original notice. 
(3)  In the event that the subdivider and town cannot agree as to the price to be paid for such land, and the town wishes to proceed to acquire the property the town shall follow the condemnation law. 
(4)  If the town board, county, or state chooses not to purchase or condemn the area designated for public sites or open space areas in the town's comprehensive plan or park and open space plan, such plan shall be amended accordingly following the proper procedures in effect at the time, prior to final approval of the final plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat. 
(b)  In lieu of dedication, fees must be paid in accordance with the applicable adopted impact fee ordinance, Ordinance Number 2001-3, titled "Town of Mukwonago Ordinance to Impose Impact Fees on Developers to Pay for the Capital Costs that are Necessary to Accommodate Land Development" and Ordinance Number 2007-6, titled "An Ordinance to Impose Impact Fees on Developers to Pay for the Capital Costs that are Necessary to Accommodate land Development for Parks, Playgrounds and Land for Athletic Fields." 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-24, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-25. - Subdivider's agreement. 
(a)  General. Before, or as a condition of, receiving final approval from the town board of any division or development of land for which public or private improvements are required by this chapter; or for which public improvements, dedications, or fees are being deferred under this chapter, the subdivider shall submit to and receive approval from the town board, town attorney, and the town engineer, a subdivider's agreement (also known as a developer's agreement) for the improvements, including all public, private and site development improvements, prior to commencing construction of any improvement, whether public or private, or site development or approval of the final plat, condominium plat, multi-family, replat or certified survey map, whichever is earlier. 
(b)  Town costs. The subdivider is responsible for reimbursing the town for all costs it incurs in the review and approval of a subdivider's agreement, including work performed by town staff or any consultant or contract employee retained by the town. 
(c)  Amendment. Once a subdivider's agreement is accepted by the subdivider and the town board, such agreement may only be amended with the approval of both parties. 
(d)  Public record. Although a subdivider's agreement is a private contract between two parties, it is considered a public document. 
(e)  Model agreement. The town attorney, town engineer, and town planner shall jointly develop a model subdivider's agreement for projects in the town that is consistent with the provisions of this chapter and may make revisions to such agreement from time to time as may be needed to address changes in this chapter, state law, or best practices. The town clerk shall maintain the most current version and provide copies to subdividers and others upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-25, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, § 3, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 34-26. - Land suitability. 
(a)  No land shall be subdivided or developed which is deemed by the plan commission to be unsuitable for such uses for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formations, unfavorable topography, steep slopes, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents or occupants of the proposed development or of the community. This review will be made by the plan commission at the time of the initial proposal for the development following review by the town engineer, or thereafter if suitability concerns arise. Upon discovering suitability concerns, the plan commission shall notify the subdivider in writing of the concerns, and then afford the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such issues. Thereafter, the plan commission shall determine in writing whether the land is suitable for development or subdivision pursuant to the criteria described herein. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) of this section, the following criteria are to be adhered to: 
(1)  All lands to be subdivided, other than in the R-2 and R-3 districts and conservation design subdivisions, shall comply with the applicable minimum lot size requirements of the zoning code and shall contain at least one acre of buildable land per lot. 
(2)  All lands that are designated as buildable area shall be at least two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not available, five feet above the elevation of the maximum flood on record. 
(3)  All lands that are designated for residential building sites within a development shall be at least five feet above any moderate to severe indication of seasonal groundwater table conditions and at least five feet above any indication of bedrock. 
(4)  No building site shall be created which does not contain lands within each lot boundary meeting the standards established in Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383 and the county's regulations relating to private onsite sewer disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-26, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-27—34-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 34-41. - Pre-application. 
(a)  Prior to submitting for official filing or being placed on a plan commission agenda for approval of a land division or development, the owner or his representative shall consult with the town planner in order to obtain advice and assistance. This consultation is not formal, but is intended to inform the owner of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan components, neighborhood plans, and duly appointed plan implementation devices of the municipality and to otherwise assist the owner in planning the development. The owner is required to provide the town planner with the information requested on the preliminary land division checklist. Prior to being placed on the agenda for preliminary consultation with the plan commission for the municipality, the owner must obtain a finding from the town planner that the town planner has reviewed the proposed land division or development and finds that all items have been properly submitted and the matter is ready to be placed on an upcoming municipal plan commission agenda. 
(b)  Prior to submitting a plat or certified survey map for official filing or filing for approval of a land division or development, the owner or his representative shall consult with the plan commission in order to obtain their advice and assistance. This consultation is not formal, but is intended to inform the owner of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan components, neighborhood plans, and duly appointed plan implementation devices of the municipality and to otherwise assist the owner in planning the development. In doing so, both the owner and the plan commission may reach mutual conclusions regarding the general program and objective of the proposed development and its proposed effects on the neighborhood and community. The owner will gain a better understanding of the subsequent required procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-41, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-42. - Residential development permit system. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the residential permit system is to establish a system to evaluate proposed subdivision development or multi-family units in the town; to encourage a variety of lot sizes available; to encourage the location and development of residential dwellings, which will promote the protection of the natural resource base such as the soils, lakes and streams, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands, wildlife and other environmentally sensitive areas; to preserve the prime agricultural areas in order to maintain the agricultural economy and ensure the preservation of the rural atmosphere of the town; to permit development properly related to the available and proposed facilities such as proposed municipal sewer, police protection, and emergency services, fire protection, and roads and highways, and to implement the goals and objectives of the towns' comprehensive plan and the town's zoning regulations. 
(b)  Application. The subdivider shall submit the following to the town clerk: 
(1)  A completed application form provided by the town. 
(2)  The application fee established by the town board. 
(3)  A preliminary layout at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet on a topographic map, showing: 
a.  All physical features on the site and adjacent properties as required by the conditional use provisions for conservation design developments and planned unit developments. 
b.  All proposed roads. 
c.  Configuration of the lots and dimensions. 
d.  Extent of open space. 
e.  Land which will be preserved in agricultural use. 
This shall not be considered the filing of a preliminary plat. 
(4)  Method of sanitary sewage disposal. One soil boring test per lot for all development not served by public sewer must be submitted at the time of the submittal of the preliminary layout. 
(5)  Preliminary grading plans indicating the existing and proposed grades for all road, stormwater improvements, and building sites, and the extent of the site alterations to the property caused by the proposed development. 
(6)  Preliminary drainage plan indicating the impact of the stormwater runoff and the methods to control, infiltrate, and retain the run off created by the development and any water flowing through the site. Such plans shall include a preliminary erosion control plan. 
(7)  Preliminary landscape plan, if deemed appropriate by the town planner. This plan shall include the existing location of trees over six inches in diameter measured at six feet above the grade, on all proposed lots, roads and stormwater facilities, outline of wooded areas, and general location of trees that are to remain in the open space areas. 
(8)  Proposed dwelling unit sizes. 
(9)  Anticipated amounts of impervious surface on the individual lots, roads, and open space improvements. 
(10)  Architecturally significant proposals. 
(11)  A development schedule setting forth a proposed time table for the development and sale of lots. 
(12)  A preliminary outline of deed restrictions as to special amenities proposed for the development. 
(13)  All environmental corridors, (both primary and secondary) isolated natural areas, wetland, floodplains, and agricultural class I and II soils must be delineated on the face of the layout. 
(14)  Any other information required by the town. 
(c)  Evaluation. 
(1)  The plan commission and town board shall jointly review the applications for residential development permits with respect to the criteria set forth in Exhibit 1 in appendix C to this chapter. The town board and plan commissions may request reports from the appropriate town, county, school district, other governmental agencies, boards, or staffs as they deem necessary. 
(2)  The plan commission and town board shall jointly have the latitude to interpolate the maximum and minimum points designated in the range in each category set forth below. The following guidelines illustrate the point totals that will be assigned for the particular issues described in order to guide the town board and plan commission in the particular facts and circumstances presented on a case-by-case basis. These guidelines are not intended to be an exclusive list of the relevant facts and circumstances that may be presented. If the development has outstanding or exceptional circumstances, the town plan commission and town board, jointly, have the latitude of the maximum range shown in each category. 
(d)  Allocation. 
(1)  No residential development permit shall be issued for a development receiving fewer than ten points in the plan commission and town board's joint evaluation. 
(2)  Reversion of unused residential permits. If a residential subdivision development, which has been allocated residential development permits does not receive final approval of a preliminary plat within 12 months from the date of allocation of the permits, or does not have the final subdivision plat recorded within the statutory time period following the final approval of the preliminary plat, the residential development permits shall be automatically withdrawn from the property in question. If a multi-family development, which has been allocated residential development permits, does not receive final approval of a conditional use permit within 12 months from the date of allocation of the permits, the residential development permits shall be automatically withdrawn from the property in question. 
(3)  The development shall be carried out in substantial compliance with the representations in the application. To ensure compliance with the criteria upon which the plan commission and town board evaluated the development initially, the town board may require plat restrictions, deed restrictions, or other agreements necessary to ensure the compliance with the preliminary layout. 
(e)  Appeal procedures. The developer may appeal to the circuit court the decision of the plan commission and town board with respect to the allocation of residential development permits. Written appeal shall be filed with the circuit court within 40 days after written notice to the developer of the plan commission's and town board's decision respecting allocation of residential development permits for the developer's property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-42, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-43. - Allotment system for residential development permits. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the allotment system for residential development permits is to establish a system to evaluate proposed subdivision development and multi-family units in the town to control the rate of growth in accordance with the town's comprehensive plan, population projections and building permit history of the town; to encourage a variety of lot sizes available in the town; to encourage the location and development of residential dwellings, which will promote the protection of the natural resource base such as the soils, lakes and streams, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands, wildlife and other environmentally sensitive areas; to preserve the prime agricultural areas in order to maintain the agricultural economy and ensure the preservation of the rural atmosphere of the town; to permit development properly related to the available and proposed facilities such as proposed municipal sewer, police protection, and emergency services, fire protection, and roads and highways, without imposing an unreasonable burden on the tax payers and residents of the town and the school district. 
(b)  Allotment. During each calendar year the plan commission and town board shall jointly allot a total of no more than 50 residential development permits to qualifying subdivision plats, planned unit developments or multi-family units, each residential development permit representing a lot or residential unit, subject to the following terms and conditions of this section: 
(1)  If 50 total residential development permits are not issued in a given year, the excess shall be carried forward one year only, and may be issued only if qualifying developments in the succeeding year exceed the residential development permit allotment for that year. If no residential development permits were carried forward, the plan commission and town board may exceed the maximum number of allotted residential development permits in the subsequent year by not more than ten percent, upon showing of good cause, provided that the total number of residential development permits allotted for any five-year period does not exceed 250 permits for the five-year period. 
(2)  The plan commission and town board may only allot residential development permits if there are 100 or fewer of the following residential units in the town (referred to herein as "vacant residential development units"): 
a.  Lots which were created by the subdivision platting process in the preceding five years for which a building permit has not been issued and the construction has not commenced; and 
b.  Residential units within multi-family units authorized by conditional use approval in the preceding five years for which a building permit has not been issued for said multi-family units, and the construction has not commenced. 
1.  Construction shall be considered to have commenced when the footings have been installed. 
2.  If there are more than 100 vacant residential development units in the town, as described above, no residential development permits may be allocated by the plan commission and town board until the number of vacant residential development units in the town, as described above, is 100 or fewer. 
(c)  Application. 
(1)  December pre-determination. Applicants may choose to apply for residential development permits in the year immediately prior to the year in which the permits would be issued, as follows: Applications shall be submitted to the plan commission and town board no sooner than October 1 and no later than noon on the second Wednesday of November of the year immediately prior to the year in which the permits would be issued. Those applications shall be considered at the December plan commission and town board meetings or at such different date as the town board may determine, but only to the extent that there are residential development permits available. If all residential development permits allocated for a given year are issued, applications will be held for consideration, unless withdrawn by the developer, for the longer of the following time periods: either for the following year's allotment or until such time that 100 or fewer vacant parcels exist that were created by the subdivision platting process in the preceding five years. No priority will be given to developments which have been submitted in previous years that were not granted an allotment that year. 
(2)  Subsequent applications for remainder. If residential development permits are available for the year in question following the December pre-determination described in subsection (c)(1) of this section, applicants may choose to apply for those permits at any time after the deadlines established in subsection (c)(1) of this section. Applications shall be made by the developer to the plan commission and town board. 
(3)  Every application shall be accompanied by all documents required to be submitted in section 34-42(b). 
(d)  Evaluation. The plan commission and town board shall jointly review the applications for the allotment for residential development permits with respect to each of the criteria set forth in section 34-42(c). The town board and plan commission may request reports from the appropriate town, county, school district, other governmental agencies, boards, or staffs as they deem necessary. 
(e)  Allocation. 
(1)  Timing. After the December meeting of each year or at such later date as residential development permit determinations is made, the town board shall notify the developers whose applications were properly on file and under consideration of the allocation decision in writing. 
(2)  Minimum standards. No residential development permit shall be issued for a development receiving fewer than ten points in the plan commission and town board's joint evaluation. 
(3)  Allocation of residential development permits. As to the December pre-determination, applications submitted pursuant to section 34-42(b), if the total number of dwelling units in the proposed developments that receive ten or more points, does not exceed the allotment for the year in question, and there are 100 or fewer vacant parcels created by the subdivision platting process in the preceding five years, then the town plan commission and town board, acting jointly, may issue residential development permits for all dwelling units in all developments. The plan commission and town board reserves the right to prorate the allotment over a three-year period, in which case the number of lots assigned to each of the three years shall be applied against the total residential development permits that are available for each of those years, respectively. The balance of the residential development permits allotted for any given year shall be allocated to qualifying subdivisions submitted pursuant to the remainder applications process described in subsection (b) of this section on a time of submission basis. 
(f)  Excessive development proposal. If the total number of dwelling units in the proposed developments that receive ten or more points exceeds the total number of residential development permits that are available in a given year, the qualifying developments will be prioritized by points. The development that received the highest point total must receive some residential development permits, if they are available. In the event a development receives residential development permits prorated over a two- or three-year period, at least 20 percent of the proposed dwelling units shall be allocated to each year. 
(g)  Appeal procedure. The developer may appeal to the circuit court the decision of the plan commission and town board with respect to the allocation of residential development permits. Written appeal shall be filed with the circuit court within 40 days after written notice to the developer of the plan commission's and town board's decision respecting allocation of residential development permits for the developer's property. 
(h)  Required submissions. Prior to preparation and submission of a preliminary or final plat, the subdivider shall submit for approval all plans, specifications, and reports as required in this chapter or as required by the county department of parks and land use land resource division, planning and zoning division and/or environmental health division, the county department of public works and any conditional use approval for a planned unit development or a conservation design development. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-43, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-44. - Preliminary plat submittal. 
(a)  Before submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat prepared by a registered land surveyor. No preliminary plat may be submitted until the developer has received the necessary residential development permits and allotment in accordance with sections 34-42 and 34-43. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter and the town land division checklist. The subdivider shall file the application with the town clerk or the county department of parks and land planning and zoning division, accompanied by the required number of copies of the preliminary plat stated below, as needed for forwarding to the appropriate agencies involved with the reviewing of the plat: 
(1)  Four copies to the county department of parks and land use planning and zoning division with a copy of the soil boring results. 
(2)  Two copies for the county department of parks and land use, environmental health division, with the original copy of the soil boring results. 
(3)  Two copies for the state department of administration plat review unit, along with the following, if applicable: 
a.  Two copies to the state department of transportation for the state, if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or connecting street. 
b.  Two copies to the state department of natural resources, if shoreland or floodlands are contained within the proposed subdivision or land included in the plat lies within 500 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable stream, lake, or other navigable body of water. 
(4)  Two copies to the county department of public works, if the property abuts or adjoins a county trunk highway or a connecting street. 
(5)  Fifteen copies for the town, with two copies of the soil boring results. 
(6)  Two copies for any municipality exercising extra-territorial plat jurisdiction, pursuant Wis. Stats. §§ 236.02(2), 236.10(b)(2), and 236.10(2). 
(7)  One copy for each utility serving the area. 
(8)  One copy for the county department of parks and land use land resources division. 
(b)  If the plat abuts Walworth County, the subdivider shall file two copies of the preliminary plat with the Walworth County Land Use and Resource Management Department. 
(c)  The state department of administration, plat review section, and the state department of transportation are objecting agencies. All other agencies mentioned, except for utility companies, the county department of public works, the county land resources division, and the department of natural resources are approving agencies. 
(d)  Within 20 days of the date of receiving the copies of the plat, any agency having objecting authority shall notify the subdivider and all approving and other objecting authorities of any objections which it may have, based upon failure of the plat to comply with state statutes or rules which its examination is authorized to cover. If there are no objections, it should be so certified on a copy of the plat and return that copy to the approving authority from which it was received. If any objections are received by an objecting authority, a re-submittal of the preliminary plat shall be required with the required corrections noted. Such re-submittal shall be filed, as required, by subsection (a) of this section. If the objecting agency fails to act within the established 20-day period, it shall be deemed to have no objections to the plat. 
(e)  The plan commission shall conduct a public hearing to review the preliminary plat unless waived by the plan commission. The town clerk shall send a written notice via certified mail of the public hearing to those property owners owning property within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision. The town engineer and town planner shall review the preliminary plat and give a recommendation, in writing, to the town plan commission. The town plan commission may view the site, provided public notice of the meeting is provided as may be required by state law. 
(f)  After all the objecting authorities have formally removed objections; the approving agencies may approve the plat upon compliance with all other rules, regulations, or plans which are in effect in the area of the plat. 
(1)  The town plan commission shall, within 90 days of the date of receipt of a preliminary plat by the town clerk, approve, conditionally approve, or deny such plat. One copy of the plat shall be returned to the submitting agent with the date and action endorsed thereupon; and if conditionally approved or rejected, a letter setting forth the conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection shall accompany the plat. One copy each of the plat and letter shall be placed in the plan commission's permanent file. The town may not approve a plat upon which an objection has been certified under Wis. Stats. ch. 236. 
(2)  Failure of the town board to act within 90 days shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat as submitted unless the review period is extended by consent of the developer or the developer's agent in writing. 
(3)  Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat, except that if the final plat is submitted with 36 months of the preliminary plat approval and conforms substantially to the preliminary plat and its conditions of approval, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.11(1)(b), the final plat shall be entitled to approval. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-44, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-45. - Final plat submittal. 
(a)  The developer shall prepare a final plat (prepared by a registered land surveyor) and a letter of application in accordance with this chapter, together with a list of the authorities to which the plat must be submitted for approval or objection, and shall file an adequate number of copies of the plat with the town or the county, which shall within two days formally file the plat as follows: 
(1)  The town clerk shall, within two days after filing, distribute copies as follows: 
a.  Four copies to the county department of parks and land use; 
b.  Two copies to the county department of public works if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a county trunk highway; 
c.  Two copies to the state department of administration; 
d.  Two copies to the regional office of the state department of transportation, if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or connecting street; and 
e.  Two copies to the regional office of the state department of natural resources if land included in the plat lies within 500 feet of the ordinary highwater mark of any navigable stream, lake, or other navigable body of water, or if any shoreland or floodland areas are located within the plat. 
(2)  Within 20 days of the date of receiving the copies of the plat, any agency having authority to object shall notify the subdivider and all approving or objecting authorities of any objection it has. If objections are received, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to resubmit his plat in accordance with the foregoing procedures. If there are no objections, it shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and return that copy to the approving authority from which it was received. The plat shall not be approved or be deemed approved until any objecting agency fails to act within the 20-day limit, it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat. 
(3)  In lieu of the procedure outlined in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section, the subdivider may submit the original plat to the state department of administration who shall forward two copies each to the objecting agencies. 
The required number of copies shall be made at the subdivider's expense. Within 20 days of the date of receiving the copies of the plat, any objecting agency shall notify the subdivider, and all agencies having the authority to object, of any objection based upon failure of the plat to comply with the statutes or rules which its examination is authorized to cover. If there are no objections, it shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and return that copy to the state department of administration. After each agency and the department of administration have certified that they have no objection or that their objections have been satisfied, the department of administration shall so certify on the face of the plat. If an agency fails to act within 20 days from the date of receipt of copies of the plat, and the department of administration fails to act within 30 days of receipt of the original plat, it shall be deemed that there are no objections to the plat and, upon demand, it shall be so certified on the face of the plat by the department of administration. 
(b)  The town board shall within 60 days of the date of filing of the final plat with the town clerk approve or reject such plat unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider or unless objections have been filed which would require a formal re-submittal of the plat after the corrections have been made. The town board shall examine the final plat as to its conformance with the approved preliminary plat; this chapter and all ordinances, rules, regulations, or other plans which may affect the plat. No final plat may be approved until all required public and private improvements have been installed or constructed as set forth in section 34-221. The final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record at that time if a phasing plan has been prepared by the developer and approved by the town board. The final plat may be rejected if it is not submitted within 36 months of the date of the last required approval of the preliminary plat. No approval by any approving agency can be granted until all formal objections have been satisfied. Failure of any approving agency to act within 60 days, the time not having been extended and no objections having been filed, shall constitute an approval. The necessary certificates shall also be placed upon the original drawing of the final plat and must be signed by all appropriate review agencies prior to recording. 
(c)  Recordation. After the final plat has been approved by the town board and required improvements either installed or a contract and sureties ensuring their installation is filed, the town clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to such approval to be duly executed. The town clerk shall record the final plat with the county register of deeds. The county register of deeds shall not record the plat unless it is offered within 12 months from the date of the last approval. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-45, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, § 4, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 34-46. - Replat of an existing subdivision. 
When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or any part thereof, so as to change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded plat as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.40 through 236.44. The developer, or person wishing to replat, shall then follow procedures and requirements for a preliminary plat and final plat as specified in this chapter, except as modified in this section. The town clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the plan commission when a preliminary plat of a replat of lands within the town is filed, and shall cause notices of the proposed replat and public hearing to be mailed to the owners of all properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat and to the owners of all properties within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-46, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-47. - Condominium plat. 
(a)  Generally. A condominium plat prepared by a registered land surveyor is required for all condominium plats, multi-family, planned unit developments, or any amendments or expansions thereof. It shall comply in all respects with Wis. Stats. § 703.11 and shall be reviewed in the same manner as a subdivision plat as set forth in this chapter. Such plats shall comply with the design standards improvements, and all other town and county ordinances, as if the same were land divisions. 
(b)  Application. The subdivider shall submit the following to the town clerk: 
(1)  A completed application form as provided by the town. 
(2)  The application fee established by the town board. 
(c)  Density. Adequate open space shall be provided so that the average density and intensity of land use shall be no greater than that permitted or the zoning district in which it is located. To the extent that such a plan or plat proposes that particular portions or areas of the development have higher density or intensity of land use, the plan commission or town board may require additional information pertaining to such development, including information not otherwise required of subdivision plats. It is the intent of this section to permit the plan commission and town board to have sufficient information, when presented with unique or higher density or intensity of land use development projects, to adequately review the overall development. 
(d)  Review and approval. 
(1)  The plan commission and town board shall review the proposed plan, including, but not limited to, the following: the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring land and water uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, waste disposal, water supply systems, and the effects of proposed uses, structures, improvements and operation upon the area and upon flood damage protection, water quality, shoreland cover, natural beauty, and wildlife habitat. 
(2)  The plan commission and town board may approve the plat, provided that the proposed uses and structures are in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter and are found not to be hazardous, harmful, offensive, or otherwise adverse to the environmental quality, shoreland cover, or property values in the town. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-47, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-48. - Minor land divisions. 
(a)  Generally. Any division of land, other than a subdivision, as defined herein, shall be surveyed and a certified survey map prepared and recorded as provided in Wis. Stats. § 236.34 and this chapter. 
(b)  Prior to the preparation of the map, it is required to first submit the proposed division to the town planner and the plan commission as set forth in section 34-41 for informal preliminary discussion and approval in accord with section 34-41. It shall be reviewed to establish conformity with surrounding, existing or proposed developments; adjacent or future streets; schools; or other environmental corridor parkways; or other planned public developments; analysis of soil types; topography; drainage; access to any abutting street or highway; conformance with the county's highway width map; and generally for the effect the land sale would have on the development of surrounding property. 
(c)  After conceptual concurrence has been granted by the plan commission as to the general land divisions, the subdivider may prepare a certified survey map consistent with Wis. Stats. § 236.34. The subdivider shall be required to dedicate any street and public improvements, which the town deems necessary and shall be required to build the street and public improvements to town road standards and in conformance with this chapter. All other dedications, and payments, established by section 34-24 shall be required of the subdivider. 
(d)  Fifteen copies of the final certified survey map shall be submitted to the town clerk along with a completed application form as may be used by the town and the application fee as may be established by the town board. If any lots to be divided are not served by municipal sanitary sewer, soil borings tests shall be submitted for approval in accordance with the county's regulations relating to onsite sewage disposal systems, and the administrative rules of the state department of safety and professional services relating to subdivisions (Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383). The plan commission shall refer the certified survey map with its recommendations to the town board within 40 days of its submission, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. The town board shall approve or reject the certified survey map within 90 days of its submission to the plan commission, unless the same is extended by agreement with the subdivider. No certified survey map may be approved until all required public and private improvements have been installed or constructed as set forth in section 34-221. If the certified survey map is approved by the town board, upon satisfaction of any conditions precedent, the approval shall be certified by the town clerk on the original of the certified survey map. 
(e)  The original of the certified survey map shall be filed with the county register of deeds within 90 days of its approval by the governing body, shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34, and shall contain certificate of approval of the town board along with any other certificates as may be required by statute. The applicable recording fee shall also be filed along with the map. If the certified survey map is not recorded within the 90 days, the previously approved map is thereby automatically rejected and the subdivider must recommence the entire procedure in this chapter, unless an extension of time to file has been granted by the town board. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-48, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, § 5, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 34-49. - Prior review of sales or exchanges of parcels between adjoining landowners. 
(a)  Generally. In every situation, regardless of circumstances, that a property owner seeks to convey land in a manner that would adjust a lot line or create or eliminate a lot line, and that conveyance does not require a certified survey map or subdivision plat pursuant to this chapter, and where an adjacent property owner intends to acquire such interest in land, the proposed conveyance shall be submitted to the town planner for review before the conveyance documents are signed and before the conveyance is recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(b)  Review procedure. The general steps outlined below shall be used to review an application for a sale or exchange between adjoining landowners. 
(1)  Pre-submittal meeting. Before submitting an application, the applicant or the applicant's agent may meet with the town planner to review applicable regulations and procedures and the proposed transfer. 
(2)  Submittal of application materials. The applicant shall submit a completed application and other required materials to the town planner along with the application fee set forth in the fee schedule adopted from time to time by the town board. 
(3)  Staff review. Within ten days of submittal, the town planner shall either determine that the application is incomplete and notify the applicant, in writing, of any deficiencies or make a decision based on the decision criteria contained in this section to: 
a.  Approve the application; 
b.  Approve the application with conditions; or 
c.  Deny the application. 
The town planner shall take no further steps to process the application until the deficiencies are remedied. The incomplete application shall be retained as a public record. 
(4)  Applicant notification. Within a reasonable time following his decision to approve or deny the application, the town planner shall mail the decision notice to the applicant by regular mail. 
(5)  Public record copy. A duplicate copy of the decision notice shall be retained as a public record. 
(c)  Review criteria. The review by the town planner and by the plan commission, on appeal, shall be limited to considering whether the conveyance is in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 236.45(2)(am)3 and the applicable laws cited therein, including these regulations, the town's zoning regulations, and other applicable laws and ordinances. Such conveyance can only be approved if the same number of lots exist prior to the conveyance as would exist after the conveyance. Such conveyance can only be approved if the resulting lots would all be both legal and conforming, even if any such lots are legal nonconforming prior to the conveyance, because the conveyance creates new lots which do not predate the ordinance and therefore have no legal nonconforming rights. Such conveyance must not be approved if the conveyance includes land that has a legal nonconforming use, because the legal nonconforming rights are limited to use of the preexisting lot. Such conveyance shall not be approved if any of the resulting lots and the existing improvements on the lots would be in violation of applicable open space requirements. Such conveyance shall not be approved if the conveyance would make an existing conforming structure illegal or nonconforming, or would increase the extent of any preexisting legal nonconformity of an existing structure. 
(d)  Expiration of an approval. An approval granted under this section shall automatically expire 12 months after the date of issuance if the transaction has not been recorded in the county register of deeds office. 
(e)  Appeal. An aggrieved person may appeal the town planner's final decision by filing an appeal with the plan commission within 30 days of such decision. Following the final decision of the plan commission, an aggrieved person may appeal such decision by filing an appeal with a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-21, § 2, 9-3-2014)  
Secs. 34-50—34-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-61. - Preliminary plat data. 
A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions and shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor and the plat prepared on tracing cloth or paper of good quality at a scale of not less than 200 feet to the inch and shall show correctly on its face the following information: 
(1)  Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. 
(2)  Location of proposed subdivision by: government lot, quarter section, township, range, county and state. 
(3)  Location map, showing section in which division lies, oriented the same direction as the main drawing and any contiguous streets or highways. 
(4)  Names and addresses of the owner, developer, engineer or registered land surveyor preparing the preliminary plat, along with the engineer's or land surveyor's registration number. 
(5)  Land contiguous to the proposed plat owned or controlled by the developer or owner of the property shall be included on the preliminary plat, even though only a portion of said property is proposed for immediate development. 
(6)  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
(7)  Floodplain limits of the 100-year recurrence interval flood as determined by a federal flood insurance study, the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission (SEWRPC), or other technical document. Where such data is not available, the elevation shall be determined by a registered professional engineer and the town engineer shall approve the sealed documents. A contour line lying a vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood, or where such data is not available, five feet above the maximum flood on record or a known high-water elevation. 
(8)  Topographic contours (existing and proposed) not to exceed two-foot intervals, if available, if not available five-foot intervals on the preliminary land division. 
(9)  Soil types, slopes, and boundaries as shown on the soil survey maps prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), U.S. Department of Agriculture and the location of all required soil borings. 
(10)  High-water and low-water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and wetlands based upon mean sea level datum. Floodland and shoreland boundaries shall be delineated. 
(11)  Wetlands including the source and date of the delineation, if field verified, and all streams, channels, and ditches on or adjacent to the site. 
(12)  Delineation of the county shoreland and floodland protection ordinance jurisdictional limits. 
(13)  Designated primary and secondary environmental corridors isolated natural areas and woodland features as delineated on the county development plan or any sewer service amendment for the area. If corridors or natural areas have been field verified, by a qualified professional designate the date of the staking, who did the staking and the approval date by Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission (SEWRPC). 
(14)  Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision referenced to a corner established in "U.S. Public Land Survey" and the total acreage encompassed thereby. 
(15)  Location and names of any adjacent developments and/or property along with the location, established and existing width of all roads and names of all existing streets, alleys, or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way and in the immediate area of the plat. The type, width, and elevation of existing street pavements within or adjacent to the proposed development together with any legally established centerline elevations referred to mean sea level datum. 
(16)  All existing structures on and within 50 feet of the property line, including usage and horizontal offset and setback to existing and/or proposed property lines, visible and known wells onsite and within 100 feet of septic or stormwater facilities as required by the department of natural resources (DNR) well code, watercourses, drainage ditches, existing property lines of abutting property, and other features pertinent to property division. 
(17)  Existing easements type and dimensions on the preliminary proposal and proposed easements, if known. Easements types may be conservation easements, access easements, scenic easements, mineral easements, or air right easements. 
(18)  Preplanned building sites and other improvements and any preplanned waste disposal systems, when limited by existing physical features. 
(19)  Lot and outlots numbers and dimensions. 
(20)  Curve information either on the curve, in a table, or along the street radius. 
(21)  Public dedication of parcels, outlots and rights-of-way. 
(22)  Location of soil borings with numerical cross-reference to data (frequency, location, and depth need to be determined). 
(23)  Building or setback lines from wetlands and floodplain as required in the municipal code and county shoreland and floodland protection ordinance and by a Trans 233 permit issued by the state department of transportation, if applicable. 
(24)  Historic or cultural features, such as Indian mounds as designated on the state historical society of the state division of historical preservation archeological site inventory. 
(25)  Foundation limitations due to high groundwater, bedrock, or stormwater management facilities, and appropriate disclosure statements. 
(26)  Open and closed landfill sites within 1,000 yards of the proposed land division. Manure or other waste storage facilities onsite or consistent with existing administration rules or as listed on the "Registry of Waste Disposal Sites of Wisconsin." 
(27)  Location of any known drain tile on the site or on adjacent properties and their function, if known. 
(28)  Stormwater management facilities and easement locations, dimensions and who is responsible for maintenance of said facilities. 
(29)  Access easements limitations, restrictions to adjacent roads and access for stormwater facility and open space maintenance. 
(30)  Designate source documents for mapping features such as wetland, floodplains, environmental corridors, etc. 
(31)  Soil boring information and other information required by the county's regulations relating to onsite sewage disposal systems for land divisions not being served by sanitary sewers shall be attached to and submitted with the division. 
(32)  Ownership of all outlots within and adjacent to the parcel, to be divided. 
(33)  Watershed delineations before and after development shall be submitted on separate topographic maps. 
(34)  Existing zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision along with corporate limit lines. 
(35)  Proposed lake and stream access in the subdivision along with any improvement or relocation of the lake or stream, as approved by the state department of natural resources, the county, and the town. 
(36)  Additional setbacks or building lines required by the plan commission which are more restrictive than the regulations of the zoning district in which the parcel is located. 
(37)  Additional setbacks which are more restrictive than the regulations of the zoning district in which the division is located or which are proposed by the developer and included in recorded protective covenants. 
(38)  All lands reserved for future public acquisition. 
(39)  Location, size and invert elevation of any existing sanitary or storm sewers, culverts and drain pipes, including any downstream that may be affected by the development, the location of manholes, catch basins, hydrants, electric power and telephone poles or underground installations, location and size of any existing water and gas mains within the area of the plat or adjacent thereto. If no sewers, water mains or other utility facilities are located on, or immediately adjacent to the tract, the nearest such facilities which might be extended to serve the tract shall be indicated by their direction and distance from the tract, their size, and their invert elevation. 
(40)  Location of existing property boundary lines, structures, drives, streams or watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, railroad tracks and other similar significant features within the tract being divided or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(41)  The proposed preliminary grades of roadways, drainage ways, and culverts shall be noted on the preliminary plat. 
(42)  Deed restrictions pertaining to the land included in the plat. 
(43)  Any additional information requested by the town to verify ownership, clarify questions raised during the approval procedure and any other information the town deems necessary to reach a decision on the division. 
(44)  Preliminary review letter from the county land resource division on the stormwater management plan. The surveyor shall also submit the following documentation: 
a.  Compliance with local and county zoning jurisdiction. 
b.  Compliance with the town's comprehensive plan. 
c.  Compliance with the land use category and density in the county development plan. 
d.  Compliance with the town's official map. 
e.  Compliance with the county's highway width map. 
f.  Compliance with the town's park and open space plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-61, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-62. - Street and drainage facilities plans and profiles. 
(a)  It shall be required that the developer prepare and submit street plans and profiles to the town engineer for his recommendation and/or approval prior to submittal of the final plat. These plans and profiles shall show existing ground surface, proposed and established street grades, and profiles, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the boundary of the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  The plans shall also include drainage retention facilities, culvert sizes, calculations of drainage facilities, and tabulation of driveway culvert sizes. Details of special features shall be furnished and vertical control documentation provided within the subdivision and noted on the plans. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-62, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-63. - Detailed construction site, erosion, and stormwater management plan. 
The developer shall submit construction site, erosion control, and stormwater management plans for review and approval by the town engineer. Such plans shall generally follow guidelines and standards as set forth in "Guidelines for Submittal of a Drainage and Erosion Control Plans" and "Minimizing Erosion in Urbanizing Areas," prepared by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), as amended. In granting final plat approval, the plan commission shall specify any conditions which it deems appropriate regarding timing, methods, and financial guarantees for the installation of various items, as may be suggested in the required plans. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-63, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-64. - Borings and soundings. 
The town may require that borings and soundings be made in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and water or bedrock. These provisions may be in addition to the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383 and shall be submitted for review with the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-64, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-65. - Protective covenants. 
Protective covenants may be required by the town board whereby the developer intends to regulate land use in the proposed subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. Proposed covenants shall be in conjunction with submittal of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-65, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-66. - Certification. 
The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land division and features and that he has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter. The preliminary plat shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the registered land surveyor who prepared or directed and controlled preparation of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-66, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-67—34-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINAL PLAT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-81. - Final plat data. 
The final plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Wis. Stats. § 236.20, the following: 
(1)  Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. 
(2)  Location of proposed subdivision by: government lot, quarter section, township, range, county, and state. 
(3)  Location map showing the section in which the division lies, oriented the same direction as the main drawing and any contiguous streets or highways. 
(4)  Names and addresses of the owner, developer, engineer, and registered land surveyor preparing the final plat, along with the land surveyor's certificate signed, dated, sealed and any revision dates on all pages. 
(5)  Sheet numbers and total number of sheets notation and signature certificates. 
(6)  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
(7)  Floodplain limits of the 100-year recurrence interval flood as determined by a federal flood insurance study, the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission (SEWRPC), or other technical document. Where such data is not available, the elevation shall be determined by a registered professional engineer and the sealed documents shall be approved by the town engineer. A contour line lying a vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood, or where such data is not available, five feet above the maximum flood on record or a known high-water elevation. 
(8)  High-water and low-water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and wetlands based upon mean sea level datum. 
(9)  Wetlands including the source and date of the delineation, if field verified, and all streams, channels, and ditches on or adjacent to the site. 
(10)  Delineation of the county shoreland and floodland protection ordinance jurisdictional limits. 
(11)  Designated primary and secondary environmental corridors, isolated natural areas and woodland features as delineated on the county development plan or any sewer service amendment for the area. If corridors or natural areas have been field verified by a qualified professional, designate the date of the staking, who did the staking and the approval date by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission (SEWRPC). 
(12)  Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision referenced to a corner established in "U.S. Public Land Survey" and the total acreage encompassed thereby. 
(13)  Location and names of any adjacent developments and/or property along with the location, established and existing width of all roads and names of all existing streets, alleys, or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way and in the immediate area of the plat. The type, width, and elevation of existing street pavements within or adjacent to the proposed development together with any legally established centerline elevations referred to mean sea level datum. 
(14)  All existing structures on and within 50 feet of the property line, including usage and horizontal offset and setback to existing and/or proposed property lines, visible and known wells onsite and within 100 feet of septic or stormwater facilities as required by the department of natural resources (DNR) well code, watercourses, drainage ditches, existing property lines of abutting property, and other features pertinent to property division. 
(15)  Existing easements type purpose and dimensions and proposed easements. Easements types may be conservation easements, access easements, scenic easements, mineral easements, or air right easements. 
(16)  Preplanned building sites and other improvements and any preplanned septic system sites when limited by existing physical features. 
(17)  Vision corners and vision corner easements. 
(18)  Lot and outlots numbers and dimensions. 
(19)  Curve information, either on the curve or in a table or along the street radius. 
(20)  Public dedication of parcels, outlots and rights-of-way. 
(21)  Location of soil borings with numerical cross-reference to data. Frequency, location and depth need to be determined by the town engineer based upon the USDA soils maps. 
(22)  Building or setback lines from wetlands and floodplain as required in this Code or the county shoreland and floodland protection ordinance and by Trans 233 permit issued by the state department of transportation, if applicable. 
(23)  Historic or cultural features such as Indian mounds as designated on the state historical society of the state division of historical preservation archeological site inventory. 
(24)  Foundation limitations due to high groundwater, bedrock, or stormwater management facilities, and appropriate disclosure statements. 
(25)  Open and closed landfill sites within 1,000 yards of the proposed land division. Manure or other waste storage facilities onsite or consistent with existing administration rules or as listed on the registry of waste disposal sites of the state. 
(26)  Stormwater management facilities and easement locations dimensions and who is responsible for maintenance of said facilities. 
(27)  Access easements, limitations, restrictions to adjacent roads and access for stormwater facility and open space maintenance. 
(28)  Designate source documents for mapping features such as wetland, floodplains, environmental corridors, etc. 
(29)  Ownership of all outlots within and adjacent to the parcel to be divided. 
(30)  Proposed lake and stream access in the subdivision along with any improvement or relocation of the lake or stream, as approved by the state department of natural resources, the county, and the town. 
(31)  Additional setbacks or building lines required by the plan commission which are more restrictive than the regulations of the zoning district in which the parcel is located. 
(32)  Additional setbacks which are more restrictive than the regulations of the zoning district in which the division is located or which are proposed by the developer and included in recorded protective covenants. 
(33)  All lands reserved or designated for future public acquisition. 
(34)  Deed restrictions pertaining to the land included in the plat. 
(35)  Any additional information requested by the town to verify ownership, clarify questions raised during the approval procedure and any other information the town deems necessary to reach a decision on the division. 
(36)  All final plats shall contain a statement that the subject parcels are within a "state designated groundwater management area." 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-81, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-82. - Final plat mapping standards. 
The final plat shall be drawn with a permanent non-fading black image on durable white media that is 22 inches wide by 30 inches long. The plat shall have a binding margin of 1½ inches wide on the left side and a one-inch margin on all other sides. Seals or signatures reproduced on images complying with this section shall be given the force and effect of original signatures and seals. The following information shall be shown: 
(1)  Boundary lines. Boundary lines with length of courses to hundredths of a foot and bearings to seconds as determined by an accurate field survey performed by a registered land surveyor and balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one foot in 3,000 feet. 
(2)  Recorded streets. The exact location and the width along the property line of all existing recorded streets intersecting or abutting the boundaries of the tract. 
(3)  Tie to government survey. True bearings and distances to nearest established survey lines or other official monuments, which monuments shall be located or accurately described on the plat. Any patent or established survey or corporation lines shall be accurately monumented and located on the plat. 
(4)  Monuments. The accurate location and material of all permanent reference monuments as specified in Wis. Stats. § 236.15. 
(5)  Design. The exact design including: 
a.  Street and alley lines. Names, bearings, angles of intersection, widths including widths along the line of any obliquely intersection street length of centerlines, etc. 
b.  Curve data. Lengths of arcs, bearings, and lengths of main chords, radii, central angles, and tangent bearings at either the point of curve or point of tangency shall be shown either in their proper place or in a separate table for all streets and alleys. Lot lines may be shown in the same manner or by bearings and distances. 
c.  Easements, natural drainage areas, drainage easements, and rights-of way. Easements, natural drainage areas, drainage easements, and rights-of-way shall be shown by centerline and width when lines are parallel to a boundary, otherwise boundary bearings and distances shall be shown. 
d.  Blocks. Blocks, if designated, shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions. The exact length and bearings of the boundary lines of all blocks shall be shown. 
e.  Lots. All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. Outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block. The square footage of each lot and outlot shall be shown on the plat and in addition thereto the plat shall show the exact acreage for each lot or outlot on the plat. No lot will be approved that is not a buildable lot. 
f.  Outlots. No outlots will be approved for inclusion on a plat or certified survey unless an ultimate development or disposition plan is filed and approved by the plan commission and town board. 
g.  Meander lines. Distances and bearings for meander lines shall be shown with the distance between the point of intersection of such meander lines with lot lines and high-water mark also shown. 
h.  Spite strips. No strips of land will remain un-platted, commonly known as spite strips, if such parcels of land affect future extensions of public highways or easements. 
i.  Additional requirements. As required by Wis. Stats. § 236.20. 
(6)  Name of subdivision. The name of the subdivision shall be shown and shall not duplicate the name of any other subdivision in the county. 
(7)  Affidavits and certificates. The surveyor's certificate, the owner's certificate, the certificate of taxes paid, and other affidavits and certificates required by Wis. Stats. ch. 236 shall be lettered in ink or typed legibly in black ink on the final plat. 
(8)  Additional information. Any additional information required by Wis. Stats. ch. 236 or required by the town. 
(9)  Reproducible tracing. An acceptable reproducible tracing of the final plat shall be filed with the town before the town's approval is affixed to the final plat. 
(10)  House numbers assigned. The developer shall place upon a copy of the final plat on each lot shown on said plat the correct legal house number assigned to that lot in conformity with the grid system in effect in the county. 
(11)  Easement and drainage easement areas. 
a.  Easements shall be centered on rear or side lot lines whenever possible. Easements shall be the responsibility of the town to maintain only if easement rights and conditions are clearly described as being conveyed to the town. 
1.  Utility. Easements shall be provided for utilities where required by the town board and shall be at least ten feet wide. 
2.  Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed or contains a drainage easement area, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-or-way conforming substantially to the lines of such drainage easement area, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained in an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
b.  General deed restrictions. When it is in the best interest of the town, the town board may require that private deed restrictions be either shown on the plat or filed separately with the county register of deeds. 
c.  Drainage deed restrictions. All natural drainage areas shown on the plat will be accompanied by deed restrictions prohibiting the construction of any buildings, grading or filling or in any way interfering with the natural holding and percolation of ground water and granting the town the right to enter upon any lot which contains a drainage deed restriction area to inspect, repair, or restore using any necessary means to return the area to its natural state and to maintain the movement holding or percolation of water. Said deed restrictions shall be permanent and shall run to the town. In the event the town incurs any expenses in inspecting, repairing, or restoring these areas to their stated purpose, then and in that event such charge may be placed against the tax roll and collected as a special charge by the town. 
(12)  Offsets and setbacks. Offsets, setbacks, and proposed location of passing the required percolation tests for septic system shall be shown on copy of final plat or certified survey map. These requirements are to be used as a guide for the town only and shall not be deemed to give a property owner any vested rights should the town later change the requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-82, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-83—34-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-101. - Certified survey map data. 
A certified survey map prepared by a registered surveyor shall be required for all minor land divisions. Any improvements necessary for proper use of the subject parcels shall be required as specified by this chapter. The certified survey map shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34 and the following: 
(1)  Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. 
(2)  Location of proposed certified survey map by quarter section, township, range, county and state. 
(3)  Location map showing section, in which division lies, oriented the same direction as the main drawing and any contiguous streets or highways. 
(4)  Names and addresses of the owner, developer, engineer, and registered land surveyor preparing the certified survey map and land surveyor's certificate signed, dated, sealed and any revision dates on all pages. 
(5)  Sheet numbers and total number of sheets notation and signature certificates. 
(6)  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
(7)  Floodplain limits of the 100-year recurrence interval flood as determined by the federal flood insurance study, Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission (SEWRPC), or other technical document. Where such data is not available, the elevation shall be determined by a registered professional engineer and the sealed documents shall be approved by the town engineer. A contour line lying a vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval flood, or where such data is not available, five feet above the maximum flood on record or a known high-water elevation. 
(8)  High-water and low-water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and wetlands based upon mean sea level datum. 
(9)  Wetlands including the source and date of the delineation, if field verified, and all streams, channels, and ditches on or adjacent to the site. 
(10)  Delineation of the county shoreland and floodland protection ordinance jurisdictional limits. 
(11)  Designated primary and secondary environmental corridors isolated natural areas and woodland features as delineated on the county development plan or any sewer service amendment for the area. If corridors or natural areas have been field verified by a qualified professional, designate the date of the staking, who did the staking and the approval date by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission (SEWRPC). 
(12)  Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed certified survey map referenced to a corner established in "U.S. Public Land Survey" in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 236 and the total acreage encompassed thereby. 
(13)  Location and names of any adjacent developments and/or property along with the location, established and existing width of all roads and names of all existing streets, alleys, or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way and in the immediate area of the map. The type, width, and elevation of existing street pavements within or adjacent to the proposed development together with any legally established centerline elevations referred to mean sea level datum. 
(14)  All existing structures on and within 50 feet of the property line, including usage and horizontal offset and setback to existing and/or proposed property lines, visible and known wells onsite and within 100 feet of septic or stormwater facilities as required by the department of natural resources (DNR) well code, watercourses, drainage ditches, existing property lines of abutting property, and other features pertinent to property division. 
(15)  Existing easements type purpose and dimensions and proposed easements. Easement types may be conservation easements, access easements, scenic easements, mineral easements, or air right easements. 
(16)  Preplanned building sites and other improvements and any preplanned waste disposal systems, when limited by existing physical features. 
(17)  Vision corners and vision corner easements. 
(18)  Lot and outlot numbers and dimensions. 
(19)  Curve information either on the curve or in a table or along the street radius. 
(20)  Public dedication of parcels, outlots and rights-of-way. 
(21)  Location of soil borings with numerical cross-reference to data. The frequency, location, and depth need to be determined by the town engineer based upon the U.S.D.A. soils maps. 
(22)  Building or setback lines from wetlands and floodplain as required in the municipal code and the county shoreland and floodland protection ordinance and by a Trans 233 permit issued by the state department of transportation, if applicable. 
(23)  Historic or cultural features, such as Indian mounds, as designated on the state historical society of the state division of historical preservation archeological site inventory. 
(24)  Foundation limitations due to high groundwater, bedrock, or stormwater management facilities, and appropriate disclosure statements. 
(25)  Open and closed landfill sites within 1,000 yards of the proposed land division. Manure or other waste storage facilities onsite or consistent with existing administration rules or as listed on the registry of waste disposal sites of the state. 
(26)  Stormwater management facilities and easement locations dimensions and who is responsible for maintenance of said facilities. 
(27)  Access easements limitations, restrictions to adjacent roads and access for stormwater facility and open space maintenance. 
(28)  Designate source documents for mapping features such as wetland, floodplains, environmental corridors, etc. 
(29)  Ownership of all outlots within and adjacent to the parcel to be divided. 
(30)  Additional setbacks or building lines required by the plan commission which are more restrictive than the regulations of the zoning district in which the parcel is located. 
(31)  Additional setbacks which are more restrictive than the regulations of the zoning district in which the division is located or which are proposed by the developer and included in recorded protective covenants. 
(32)  All lands reserved for future public acquisition. 
(33)  Deed restrictions pertaining to the land included in the certified survey map. 
(34)  Any additional information requested by the town to verify ownership, clarify questions raised during the approval procedure and any other information the town deems necessary to reach a decision on the division. 
(35)  All certified survey maps shall contain a statement that the parcels are located within a "state designated groundwater management area." 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-101, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-102. - Additional information. 
Each certified survey map shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Registered land surveyor. The survey has been performed and the map prepared by the registered land surveyor. 
(2)  Monuments. All corners have been monumented consistent with Wis. Stats. § 236.15(1)(c) and (d). 
(3)  Map. The map shall be prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.34 on durable white paper 8½ inches wide by 14 inches long. All lines shall be made with non-fading black ink on a scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch. 
(4)  Certificates and description. The certified survey map shall include the certificate of the registered land surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel including a clear and concise description of the land surveyed by bearings and distances, commencing with some corner marked and established in the government survey and acceptable to the town engineer. The owner's certificate duly notarized and the board's approval certificate shall also be shown. 
(5)  Percolation and boring tests. Percolation test data, test boring information and any other information required by the county department of parks and land use, environmental health division for areas not served by sanitary sewers shall be attached to and submitted with the certified survey map. No lot will be approved that is not a buildable lot. A suitable site for a septic system must be on each buildable lot. 
(6)  Certified survey maps. Certified survey maps must meet the requirements of section 34-101, including repayment to the town of those necessary expenses as determined by the town board for engineering, planning, attorney fees and/or architectural consulting or reviews. 
(7)  New parcels. All new parcel creations must have passing percolation data or contain a statement on the face of map stating "unbuildable until a state approved septic system can be installed." 
(8)  No spite strips allowed. No strips of land shall remain unplatted, commonly known as spite strips, if such parcels of land affect future extensions of public highways or easements. 
(9)  Additional information. The map shall show all existing building, watercourses, drainage ditches, setbacks, or building lines if required by the town board and other information deemed pertinent by the town. The reference meridian shall also be given. 
(10)  Remaining parcels. Any remnant parcel created by the certified survey must have passing percolation data or contain a statement on the face of map stating "unbuildable until a state approved septic system can be installed." 
(11)  Any additional information. As may be required by the town. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-102, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-103. - Recordation. 
The certified survey map shall be recorded with the county register of deeds after the certificates and signatures are placed on the face of the map. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-103, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-104—34-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 34-121. - General. 
The proposed subdivision or certified survey map shall conform to the provisions of Wis. Stats. ch. 236, all applicable ordinances of the town, and design and construction standards as established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-121, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-122. - Street design. 
(a)  General considerations. In any new subdivision, the street layout shall conform to the arrangement, width and location indicated on the town's official map, the town's comprehensive plan, the county's highway width map, or any neighborhood development plan of the governmental unit. In areas for which such plans have not been completed, the street layout shall recognize the functional classification of the various types of streets and shall be developed and located in proper relation to: 
(1)  Existing and proposed streets; 
(2)  The topography; 
(3)  Natural features such as streams and tree growth; 
(4)  Public convenience or safety; 
(5)  The proposed use of the land to be served by such streets; and 
(6)  The most advantageous development of adjoining areas. 
The subdivision shall be designed so as to provide each lot with satisfactory access to a public street. 
(b)  Street classification. 
(1)  Major streets. Major streets shall be properly integrated as principal arteries of through traffic. The minimum right-of way width of a major street shall be as shown on the town's official map or the county's highway width map, but not less than 80 feet. 
(2)  Collector streets. Collector streets shall be properly related to mass transit routes, to special traffic generating from facilities such as schools, churches, shopping centers, to population densities, and to the major streets into which they feed traffic and shall have minimum right-of-way of at least 80 feet. 
(3)  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be designed to conform to topography to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and to require the minimum length of street necessary to provide convenience and safe access to the property and shall have minimum right-of-way of not less than 66 feet. 
(4)  Frontage streets. Frontage streets shall be designed in relation to the major street, which it serves, and to the existing topography to provide for safe traffic flow and property value preservation and shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet. 
(c)  Half-streets Where a half-street exists adjacent to the subdivision, the other half-street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. Platting of new half streets shall be permitted only with specific approval of the town board. 
(d)  Access reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where the access control has been placed under board control and such control has been accepted by the town board. 
(e)  Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs are regulated as follows: 
(1)  Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall not be permitted where it is possible to provide a loop street or a through street. The feasibility of a through street or a loop street shall be based on the physical features of the tract proposed for development, the potential for extension of the street to adjoining lands, restrictions imposed by other governmental regulations, and the ability of the design to meet all other requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Temporary cul-de-sac streets shall not be permitted where it is possible to provide a loop street or a through street, unless a waiver or modification is granted as provided for in this chapter. The feasibility of a through street or a loop street shall be based on the physical features of the tract proposed for development, the potential for extension of the street to adjoining lands, restrictions imposed by other governmental regulations, and the ability of the design to meet all other requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  When cul-de-sac streets are proposed, whether permanent or temporary, the application for the conceptual discussion shall be accompanied by a written analysis by the developer of the merits of the design and the reasons that a through street or loop street would not be feasible. 
(4)  Approval of cul-de-sac streets, whether permanent or temporary, shall be made at the sole discretion of the town board after referral and receipt of a recommendation from the plan commission, all which must occur prior to submittal of a preliminary plat. 
(5)  The length of a cul-de-sac, whether temporary or permanent, shall be measured from the centerline intersection with the through street to the center point of the turnaround. 
(6)  Permanent cul-de-sacs shall include a terminal turnaround, which shall be provided at the closed end with a right-of-way radius of not less than 66 feet. 
(7)  Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be provided with a temporary terminal turnaround, which shall be provided at the closed end with a right-of-way radius of not less than 66 feet. The temporary terminal turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to lot boundary line and the right-of-way of the same widths, as the street shall be carried to said property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. No "T" shaped turnarounds, "hammerhead" shaped turnarounds or dead end streets are allowed. 
(8)  Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length and no waiver or modification may be granted to this restriction. 
(9)  Temporary cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length, unless a waiver or modification is granted to this restriction. In order to be granted a waiver or modification to this requirement, the developer must submit proof that the temporary cul-de-sac has an ability to be extended. This feasibility shall be based on the physical features of the tract proposed for development, the physical features of the adjoining tract, the potential of extension of the street to adjoining lands, restrictions imposed by other governmental entities, the ability of the design to meet all other requirements of this chapter, a review of topographic, wetlands, environmental corridors, and natural features and adequate access for emergency vehicles. 
(10)  Consideration should be given when approving all streets, whether permanent or temporary, that there is place to put snow. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-122, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-123. - Intersections. 
(a)  Right angle. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and not more than two streets shall intersect at one point unless approved by the board. 
(b)  Corners. The minimum turning radius at an intersection shall not be less than 40 feet. 
(c)  Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. 
(d)  Hazards. If a proposed street is to enter a town, county, or state arterial and it is deemed a hazardous entrance by the governing body having jurisdiction over the road, it will be the responsibility of the subdivider to correct the potential hazard through an agreement with the governing body or else relocate the proposed entrance to a more suitable location. 
(e)  Connections. Minor and collector streets may normally not empty into state and federal highways at intervals less than 1,300 feet and into county trunk highways at less than the rules of the county department of public works' establishing regulations for access to and work within county highway rights-of-way, Ordinance Number 156-O-70. They shall be in alignment with existing and planned streets entering the above highways from the opposite side. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-123, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-124. - Alleys. 
(a)  Residential districts. Alleys shall not be provided in residential districts unless necessitated by topographic or other exceptional circumstances accepted by the board. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial districts. The town board may require alleys in commercial and industrial districts when necessary to ensure service access for off-street loading and parking. Alleys shall have a minimum width of 30 feet. 
(c)  Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys and "T" or "L" shaped alleys shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-124, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-125. - Blocks. 
(a)  Shape and size. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the type of development contemplated but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 2,000 feet nor be less than 600 feet measured from center to center of intersection unless approved by the board. 
(b)  Pedestrian crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 20 feet wide may be required by the town board within blocks more than 900 feet long to provide convenient pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-125, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-126. - Lots. 
(a)  General. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(b)  Depth and width. Lots shall be designed so that the depth to width ratio does not exceed 2.5 to 1 unless a waiver is granted by the plan commission and town board. 
(c)  Lot area. Lot area shall meet the minimum requirements of the town's zoning code. Residential lots to be served by private sewerage disposal facilities shall comply with the county's regulations relating to onsite sewage disposal systems or Wis. Admin. Code ch. SPS 383 as to minimum area where it exceeds the minimum required by the zoning code. 
(d)  Commercial and industrial lots. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(e)  Fronting or backing into major streets. Residential lots, fronting or backing into major roads, shall be platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between the buildings and such traffic ways even if the 2.5 to 1 ratio has to be exceeded. 
(f)  Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit full building setback from both streets and shall have buildable lot area equal to or exceeding adjacent parcels. 
(g)  Access to public streets. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street; except that this subsection does not apply to flag lots, which are separately regulated by subsection (n) of this section. A lot shall only be considered to be abutting on a public street if: 
(1)  The lot abuts a public street for at least 60 feet; and 
(2)  Either of the following is true: 
a.  The lot meets the minimum average width requirement of the zoning district in which it is located at the building setback line; or 
b.  One-half the depth of the lot is at least the minimum average width of the zoning district in which it is located; and 
(3)  Provided further, that a lot which has a narrow strip as part of the lot extending to the public street from the main part of the lot where the building could lawfully be placed, shall only be considered to be abutting on the public street if the narrow portion of the lot is as wide as the required minimum average width for the district in which it is located. 
(h)  Right angles. Lots at right angles, (i.e., butt lots), shall be avoided unless the lot exceeds three acres. 
(i)  Lot lines. Lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(j)  Oversized lots. Where lots are created of a size larger than normal for the area, the town board may require that the plat be so designed as to allow for the possible future re-subdivision of such lots into normal sizes compatible with the immediate area. 
(k)  Survey boundaries. Lots shall follow town boundary lines wherever practicable. 
(l)  Double frontage and reversed frontage. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(m)  Fences. The town board may require fencing of any or all of a subdivision boundary. 
(n)  Flag lots. Flag lots may only be permitted with plan commission and town board approval where they: 
(1)  Provide flexibility in the design; 
(2)  Reduce the length of permanent cul-de-sacs; or 
(3)  Avoid preservation areas such as floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, or primary or secondary environmental corridors, while permitting the construction of homes having minimal impact on the environment. The access drive to the proposed building must be paved or graveled from the road right-of-way to the residence to a width of at least 12 feet and not conflict with the future development of streets in the area. The grade of the proposed access drive must meet the building code requirements, or extension of the street to adjoining lands restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-126, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-127. - Construction standards. 
Improvements shall comply with the construction standards set forth in appendix A to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-127, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-128—34-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - EXISTING SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD 
 
Sec. 34-141. - Conveyance and building permit issuance restricted. 
In the case of legal lot of record, which does not conform to the town's zoning regulations and, which adjoins a lot held in the same ownership, even if separated by a public or private road, easement, or body of water, no such lot shall be conveyed to another owner, nor shall a building permit be issued for a structure on said lot, except as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-141, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-142. - Procedure for determination. 
(a)  Petition. The owner of any substandard lot, as set forth above may, at any time prior to the proposed conveyance of such lot or request for a building permit, file an application with the plan commission and town board at least two weeks prior to their regularly scheduled meeting for a determination as to whether the lots should be combined, re-divided, and/or rezoned prior to any such sale or building permit issuance. 
(b)  Referral to plan commission. Such petition shall be submitted to the town planner and the town engineer, who shall prepare a report for the plan commission for use in making a recommendation to the town board. The town planner and town engineer shall determine the practical possibility of use, re-division, or combination of said lots, or construction of a permitted structure, which shall be as much in conformity to the zoning district regulations as possible. 
(c)  Recommendation and final decision. The plan commission shall make a recommendation to the town board and the town board shall make a final determination upon consideration of the following, as to whether the lots should be combined, re-divided, and/or rezoned: 
(1)  Compatibility. The size, quality, and character of the existing lots and building development in the immediate area with a view toward maintaining compatibility and protecting existing property values. 
(2)  Sewage disposal. All newly created lots must conform to the county's regulations relating to onsite sewage disposal systems. 
(3)  Practicality. The economic and engineering practicality of any possible re-division or combination. 
(4)  Building Location. All newly created parcels shall have a building site location, which complies with locational requirements of the municipal code. 
(5)  Public improvements. All newly created lots must meet the minimum standards for public road access, and if public road improvements would be necessary, the proposed public road improvements must meet the minimum standards for public road improvements, including in relation to topography, access to the newly created and adjacent parcels, and maneuvering area within the public right-of-way. 
(6)  Compliance with zoning district regulations. All newly created lots must comply with the zoning district regulations for the district in which the lots are located, pursuant to the town's zoning regulations, even if that can only be achieved by rezoning the property to a zoning district that would allow the creation of the proposed lots, except as follows: If the combination of all of the lots in common ownership would result in a single lot that is necessarily and unavoidably less than 100 feet wide and/or less than 20,000 square feet in area, then compliance with the zoning district regulations for the district in which the lot is located is not required to combine the substandard lots into one lot. 
The plan commission shall make its recommendation to the town board within a reasonable time after receiving all necessary information and the town board shall act within a reasonable time to receipt of the plan commission's recommendation. 
(d)  Method of re-division or combination. Such re-division or combination must be accomplished by a certified survey map approved by the town board. 
(e)  Determination. The town board's determination shall either require or not require the combination, re-division, or rezoning of the lots as follows: 
(1)  Combination, re-division, rezoning required. If the town board determines that conveyance or issuance of a building permit shall be prohibited unless a combination and/or re-division and/or rezoning of the lots is completed, the town board may suggest a proposed combination, re-division, and/or rezoning. The town board may impose reasonable conditions upon any such determination. Any plat or certified survey map or rezoning petition that would ensue is subject to all applicable review proceedings required by law, and the town board's determination made pursuant to this article shall not be interpreted as warranting that all required approvals would be granted. If, however, the town board determines that a lot may be created that is less than 100 feet in width and/or less than 20,000 square feet in area pursuant to subsection (c)(6) of this section, the town may not thereafter deny the request on the sole basis that the lot is less than 100 feet in width and/or less than 20,000 square feet in area, if the application for combination of such lots is received within one year of such determination and it is in substantial compliance with the town board's determination. 
(2)  Combination, re-division, rezoning not required. If the town board determines that conveyance or issuance of a building permit can take place without a combination or re-division or rezoning of the lots, the town board shall notify the applicant and the building inspector of this determination. The town board may impose reasonable conditions upon any such determination. Thereafter, upon satisfying any conditions precedent that may be imposed, the conveyance and/or issuance of the building permit may proceed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-142, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-143. - Continuing effect. 
When a determination is made pursuant to section 34-142(e) the determination shall be final. Any lot created pursuant to a determination made in section 34-142(e), and any lot that is allowed to be separately conveyed or constructed upon pursuant to a determination made in section 34-142(e)(2) and the adjacent lot(s) in common ownership, shall be considered a legal lot of record and all provisions in the town's zoning regulations, which pertain to a legal lot of record shall apply. To the extent such a determination allows greater use of non-conforming lots than would otherwise be permitted, this determination shall be deemed to be a special exception to the terms of the town's zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-143, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-144. - Determination of ownership. 
For the purposes of this article, lots and properties shall be considered in the same ownership when owned by: the same individual or corporation; an individual and another in joint tenancy, or as tenants in common, and either of said joint or common tenants owns other lots individually or as joint tenant or tenant in common with another; an individual and other lots are owned by said spouse, parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, or the spouse of any child or grandchild, or a brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister of such person; and when any of said lots are owned by an individual and other lots are owned by a corporation in which said individual is an officer or director or controlling stockholder. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-144, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-145—34-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MULTI-FAMILY UNITS 
 
Sec. 34-161. - Generally. 
No conditional use permit involving residential units or building permits for multi-family development shall be issued unless residential development permits and the necessary allotment has been granted by the plan commission and the town board for each residential unit and all of the following have been submitted to and approved by the plan commission, town planner, and the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-161, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-162. - Development plan submittal. 
A development plan for all multi-family developments shall be required based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor, engineer and the development plan shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet, and shall show correctly on its face all the information required in section 34-61. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-162, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-163. - Density. 
A minimum of 40 percent of the entire site shall be in vegetative open space, and said multi-family development shall provide that the average density of the land use shall be no greater than that permitted in a yield plan which complies with all requirements of section 34-61 and the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-163, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-164. - Street and drainage facilities, plans and profiles. 
Developers shall prepare and submit street plans and profiles to the town engineer for his recommendation and/or approval prior to submittal of the final development plan for the multi-family development. These plans and profiles shall show existing contours, proposed and established street grades and profiles, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the boundary of the proposed certified survey map. The plan shall include drainage retention facilities, culvert sizes, calculations of drainage facilities, and tabulation of driveway culvert sizes. Details of special features shall be furnished in vertical control monumentation, provided within the development and noted on the plans. These plans shall be prepared and comply with all the provisions of article VII of this chapter unless otherwise waived by the town board. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-164, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-165. - Detailed erosion and stormwater management plans. 
The developer for any multi-family development shall submit with the preliminary development plan a letter from the county land resources division stating that they have conducted a preliminary stormwater review, which complies with the county construction site and erosion control and stormwater management ordinance and prior to approval of the final multi-family development an erosion and stormwater waste permit must be issued by the county land resources division. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-165, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-166. - Soil suitability. 
The developer shall submit soil tests that verify that the soils on the subject property are suitable for onsite sewage disposal systems, foundation and basement construction, and road construction. These soil tests shall verify the subsurface soil: rock, water, or bedrock. The soil tests must prove that adequate measures are taken to comply with the county's regulations relating to onsite sewage disposal systems. Anytime there is more than one unit proposed on an individual septic system, this will be considered a community septic system and must be approved by the county department of parks and land use environmental health division and the town board. The applicant shall submit a preliminary draft of the declaration of restrictions and protective covenants which shall address the above issues to the plan commission, which shall specify all architectural requirements, open space and ownership restrictions, and maintenance regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-166, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-167. - Review and approval. 
The plan commission and town board shall review the proposed development plan, the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring land and water uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, waste disposal, water supply systems and the effect of the proposed uses, structures, improvements and operation upon the area and upon flood damage protection, water quality, shoreland cover, natural beauty and wildlife habitat. The plan commission may approve the plan, provided that the proposed uses and structures are in accordance with the purpose and intent of the chapter and are found not to be hazardous, harmful, offensive, or otherwise adverse to the environmental quality, shoreland cover, or property values in the town, and then forward its recommendation to the town board. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-167, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-168. - Final development plan. 
The final development plan for multi-family units shall then be submitted for review and approval by the plan commission and town board addressing all of the issues of the planned unit development or multi-family conditional uses, and Wis. Stats. § 703.11 if applicable, as it pertains to the development of condominium plats. Prior to approval by the plan commission and town board, documentation shall be presented from the town planner and town engineer acknowledging that, to the best of their knowledge, the application complies with all applicable laws and ordinances of the town, the county and the state, and that all necessary access, erosion and stormwater management permits have been issued by the county land resources division and that the town attorney and town engineer have approved the letter of credit and developers agreement and the necessary sanitary permit has been issued for the onsite sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-168, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-169—34-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - REPLATS, VACATING AND ALTERING PLATS, CORRECTION INSTRUMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-181. - Replats. 
A replat of all or any part of a recorded subdivision may not be made or recorded except after proper court action has been taken to vacate the original plat or the specific part thereof; provided that such replat may be made and recorded without taking court action to vacate the original plat or the specific part thereof when all the parties in interest, including the town, in writing agree thereto, if allowed by applicable laws. The subdivider shall follow the same procedure for processing a replat as he does for any other preliminary and final plat. The town will then apply the applicable provisions of this chapter to the replat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-181, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-182. - Vacating and altering plats. 
The owner of the subdivision, the owner of any lot in the subdivision by tax deed, or the county board, if the county has acquired an interest in the subdivision or in any lot in the subdivision by tax deed, may apply to the circuit court for the county for the vacation or alteration of all or part of the recorded plat of that subdivision. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 236.40, 236.41, 236.42, 236.43, 236.44, and 236.45 shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-182, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-183. - Correction instruments. 
Correction instruments approved by the town board shall be recorded with the county register of deeds as provided by Wis. Stats. § 236.295 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-183, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-184—34-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - FEES 
 
Sec. 34-201. - Administrative and development review fees. 
(a)  Initial application fees. From time to time, the town board may be resolution establish an application fee for each of the various development review procedures required in this chapter. 
(b)  Professional charge-back fees. The developer, or the developer's agent, shall reimburse the town for professional fees pursuant to sections 2-2 and 2-3. The town board may require that a cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit be provided prior to signing the final plat to guarantee payment of all related fees. In those instances where a project requires multiple reviews, all charge-back fees that have been invoiced shall be paid prior to submittal of a subsequent application. 
(c)  Administrative fees. From time to time, the town board may by resolution establish fees to cover the cost of performing administrative duties required, or allowed, in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-201, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-202. - Public site fee. 
Fees shall be as set forth in the town's adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-202, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-203—34-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - APPROVALS AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-221. - Improvements. 
(a)  Responsible party. The subdivider is responsible for installing or constructing those public and private improvements as may be required under this chapter. 
(b)  Commencement of work. No construction or installation of any public or private improvement or any land-disturbing activity shall commence until after: 
(1)  The town board approves the preliminary plat or preliminary certified survey map; 
(2)  The subdivider complies with those conditions of approval which must be satisfied before the commencement of work as enumerated in this chapter and/or the town's approval; 
(3)  The town engineer approves all required plans or permits including street plans, storm drainage plans, grading plans, and erosion/sediment control plans; 
(4)  The subdivider obtains all other approvals from other authorities as may be required or necessary to undertake the construction or installation of any public or private improvement or any land-disturbing activity; and 
(5)  The subdivider shall also provide a financial guarantee, as follows: 
Prior to commencing construction, the subdivider shall provide the town with a financial guarantee approved by the town board that is equal to 115 percent of the estimated cost of improvements and other fees, costs and other money as determined by the town engineer. The town engineer may from time to time adjust the amount of estimated costs of said improvements and within 30 days of written notice of said change, the subdivider shall increase the financial security by that amount or any other amount acceptable to the town board. Reduction of the financial security for any purpose shall be made only after written approval of the town board. As the required improvements are installed and accepted, the town board may authorize reductions of the financial security in the amount deemed appropriate. 
(c)  Ongoing inspections. The town engineer is authorized to conduct periodic inspections of any work related to any public improvement. The subdivider shall reimburse the town for all costs it incurs related to these inspections. 
(d)  Corrective actions. If prior to final acceptance the town engineer determines that any aspect of any public improvement is defective, is not completed in a good worker-like manner, or does not comply with approved plans, the subdivider shall correct such deficiency in a timely manner. The town engineer shall provide a written report to the town board that documents any corrective actions taken by the subdivider in this regard and shall certify that all public improvements comply with this chapter and approved plans and have been completed in a good worker-like manner. 
(e)  Completion of work. Prior to submitting a final plat or final certified survey map for review all public and private improvements shall be completed by the subdivider and approved by the town engineer. Upon petition by the subdivider, the town board may allow the subdivider to provide a cash bond or a letter of credit to secure the installation of any required public and/or private improvement, provided the subdivider's agreement for the project addresses the use and administration of the cash bond or letter of credit. 
(f)  Approval of contractors and subcontractors required. Contractors and subcontractors retained by the subdivider to construct or install public improvements and use or to prepare contracts and contract specifications for such improvements shall be subject to the approval of the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-221, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, § 6, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 34-222. - Contractor listing. 
The subdivider shall supply the town with a list of contractors from whom the subdivider proposes to solicit proposals for the installation of the improvements. The information shall include prequalification statements from each proposed contractor. The town board shall have the right to review said information and discuss it with the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-222, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-223. - Initial acceptance. 
Written initial acceptance shall be issued as set forth in the developers agreement only after all fees due the town have been paid and after the grading, initial bituminous concrete paving, seeding and other erosion control construction is completed. The initial acceptance shall mean that the town accepts and approves only the paved surface for snow plowing. Other road and ditch maintenance shall be the responsibility of the subdivider until final acceptance is given. Before the initial acceptance can be issued, the subdivider shall furnish sufficient proof that all costs for consideration have been or will be paid by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-223, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-224. - Maintenance prior to final acceptance. 
The subdivider shall be responsible for the maintenance of all required improvements in the subdivision until the date the town board accepts the specified public improvements. If any repairs should be required as determined by the town engineer, the town clerk shall give the subdivider a 14-day written notice to perform such repairs. If the repairs are not begun within the 14-day period and completed within a reasonable time thereafter, as determined by the town board, the town may complete the repairs. The cost of the repairs shall be billed to the subdivider and paid by the subdivider within a reasonable time, as determined by the town board, taken out of the cash deposit or letter of credit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-224, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, § 7, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 34-225. - Final acceptance. 
Written final acceptance by the town board shall be issued to the subdivider only after the final inspection of the road surface, ditches and improvements indicates compliance with this chapter and the applicable requirements of the subdivider's agreement. The subdivider shall be notified of any deficiencies found by the town engineer during the final inspection. The subdivider shall correct any deficiencies and shall notify the town that the required repairs have been completed. If the re-inspection indicates satisfactory compliance with this chapter and the applicable requirements of the subdivider's agreement and the subdivider gives the town a cash deposit or letter of credit for continued maintenance as provided for in section 34-226, the town board shall issue the written final acceptance to the subdivider. Following the date of final acceptance, the town shall, within a reasonable period of time, return the remaining balance of the cash deposit, together with interest, if any, to the subdivider or terminate the letter of credit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-225, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, § 8, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 34-226. - Maintenance guarantee after final acceptance. 
Prior to final acceptance of the required public improvements, the subdivider shall provide the town with a cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the town attorney, that is equal to 15 percent of the amount of the cash deposit or letter of credit the subdivider provided the town prior to the start of construction, or the largest amount allowed by law, whichever is greater. If within one year of final acceptance, the town engineer determines that the public improvements need repair due to faulty materials or workmanship or the subdivider damages town property and/or improvements, the town clerk shall give the subdivider a 14-day written notice to perform such repairs. If the repairs are not begun within the 14-day period and completed within a reasonable time thereafter, as determined by the town board, the town may complete the repairs. The cost of the repairs shall be billed to the subdivider and paid by the subdivider within a reasonable time, as determined by the town board, or taken out of the cash deposit or letter of credit. If the town draws against the cash deposit or letter of credit, the subdivider shall within ten working days of such draw replenish said monies up to the aggregate amount. This financial guarantee shall not be a bar to any action the town might have for negligent workmanship or materials. State law on negligence shall govern such situations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-226, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, § 9, 9-3-2014)  
Sec. 34-227. - Letter of credit. 
(a)  Performance bond. If a subdivider provides a performance bond under this chapter, the form of the bond shall be subject to the approval of the town attorney and the amount of the bond is subject to the approval of the town engineer. Such performance bond shall comply with requirements as established by the town, including, but not limited to, the following terms: 
(1)  There shall be no assignment, modification, or change of the contract, change in the work, or extension of time releases the surety on the performance bond. 
(2)  Upon notification of default, the surety must complete the contract, unless the town board expressly allows the contractor to complete, or the town board expressly allows the surety to pay the guarantee amount to the municipality. 
(3)  The surety must perform within 15 days of the date of a written notice from the town engineer that the contractor is in default. 
(4)  The surety is obligated to pay for completion of the project, correction of defective or unsuitable work; and for legal, design, professional, and delay costs incurred by the town as a result of the default, and as a result of the surety's failure to act in a timely manner under the bond. 
(5)  The surety is obligated to pay liquidated damages as specified in the contract, and also obligated to pay reimbursement of fees as specified in the contract. 
(6)  The surety is obligated to warrant the work as specified in the contract. 
(7)  The bond shall specify the jurisdiction and venue of courts that may hear claims arising under the bond, which shall be locations convenient to the municipality. The provision of a performance bond shall in no event remove the burden of completing any improvement covered by such performance bond. 
(b)  Letter of credit. If a subdivider provides a letter of credit under this chapter, it shall be irrevocable and the town will not be obligated to pay interest thereon. The form of the letter of credit is subject to the approval of the town attorney and the amount of the letter of credit is subject to the approval of the town engineer. A letter of credit is not accepted by the town until formal action by the town board. The provision of a letter of credit shall in no event remove the burden of completing any improvement covered by such letter of credit. 
(c)  Cash bond. If a subdivider provides a cash bond under this chapter, the town will not be obligated to pay interest thereon. Any such cash bond shall remain in the custody of the town. The amount of the cash bond is subject to the approval of the town engineer. A cash bond is not accepted by the town until formal action by the town board. The provision of a cash bond shall in no event remove the burden of completing any improvement covered by such cash bond. The subdivider shall pay a fee to the town to compensate the town for the additional work required of the town clerk and town treasurer to monitor and handle the cash deposit. The amount of such fee shall be set by the town board from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-227, 4-16-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, § 10, 9-3-2014)  
Secs. 34-228—34-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - REQUEST FOR WAIVER OR MODIFICATION OF PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 34-241. - Generally. 
Upon petition, the town board may waive a requirement in this chapter or modify a requirement as provided in this article. A petitioner may request that the town waive or modify enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter as provided in this article. 
(1)  Request. The petitioner shall submit a written request for a waiver or modification to the town clerk. In the written request for the waiver or modification, the petitioner shall specify the specific provision that the petitioner requests the town to waive or modify, and petitioner's reasons for requesting the same. 
(2)  Referral to town board. Upon receipt of a written request for a waiver or modification, the town clerk shall, within a reasonable time, place the matter on a town board agenda for review and action. 
(3)  Considerations. The town board shall make a determination, which shall include consideration, but not necessarily an affirmative finding, of the following factors: 
a.  Whether the request for a waiver or modification, if granted, would be consistent with the general intent of this chapter. 
b.  Whether the request for a waiver or modification, if granted, would adversely affect property owners in the surrounding area. 
c.  Whether the request for a waiver or modification, if granted, would benefit the petitioner's project in a way that is not inconsistent with the town's interests. 
d.  Whether petitioner is in full compliance with applicable ordinances and agreements with the town. 
e.  Whether, instead of granting the request for a waiver or modification, the chapter itself should be changed to accommodate the kind of situation presented by the petitioner. 
(4)  Grant or denial of request for a waiver or modification. After considering the above-listed factors and any other factors that may be relevant to the matter, the town board shall then determine whether it is objectively reasonable to grant the request for a waiver or modification. A waiver or modification may be granted without making an affirmative finding concerning any one or more of the above-listed factors if, on the whole, it is objectively reasonable to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-241, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-242. - Past noncompliance not waived. 
A waiver or modification that is granted pursuant to a written request as described in this article shall not waive any fines, forfeitures, or other penalties that may have accrued due to violations of the chapter that took place prior to the date of the request being granted, unless specifically stated otherwise in the decision of the town board. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-242, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-243. - Reasonable conditions. 
In granting a waiver or modification, the town board may require such conditions as will in its judgment secure the objectives of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-243, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-244. - Planned unit development and conservation design developments. 
The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the town board after recommendation of the plan commission in the case of a planned unit development or conservation design development per the town's zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-244, 4-16-2014)  
Secs. 34-245—34-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 34-261. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record or monument any land in violation of this chapter or state statutes, and no person, firm or corporation shall be issued a zoning or building permit authorizing the building upon, or improvement of any subdivision, minor subdivision, or replat within the jurisdiction of this chapter, or record as of the effective date of the ordinance until the provisions and requirements of this chapter are fully met. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-261, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 34-262. - Penalties. 
(a)  Penalties shall apply to the following violations: 
(1)  Improper recording of plat or certified survey. For improper recording of a plat or certified survey may, not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of said penalty, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 60 days. 
(2)  Transfer or attempts to transfer lot or parcels. For transfer or attempt to transfer lots or parcels, not less than $300.00, nor more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of said penalty, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 60 days. 
(3)  Disturbing or not placing monuments. For disturbing or not placing monuments, not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of said penalty, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 60 days. 
(4)  Prohibited subdividing or violation of any other provision of this chapter. For prohibited subdividing or violation of any other provision of this chapter, not less than $200.00 or more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of said penalty, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. 
(b)  Each day that a violation exists or continues as provided for above shall constitute a separate offense. Compliance therewith may also be enforced by injunction at the suit of the town, owner or owners of real estate within the area affected by the regulations of this chapter as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. AA, § 34-262, 4-16-2014)  
APPENDIX A. - DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR ROADWAYS, CULVERTS, CURB AND GUTTER, AND SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 1. - General. 
(a)  Specifications. All work performed shall be in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Highway and Structure Construction of State of Wisconsin, Department of Transportation, Division of Highway, 2003 edition, including the most recent supplement, hereinafter known as the "state specifications," unless otherwise specified by these development requirements. 
(b)  Preconstruction conference. 
(1)  The town will schedule and conduct a preconstruction conference in accordance with the general conditions. The conference will be held at a time and location selected by the town. All public improvement projects and subdivision development will require a preconstruction conference. 
(2)  The conference shall be attended by authorized representatives of the contractor and the town and may also include those others who the contractor may desire to invite or the town may request. 
(c)  Work schedule/noise abatement. 
(1)  All work, except for the asphaltic concrete pavement surface course paving, shall be performed during one construction season. The asphaltic concrete pavement surface course shall be installed during the construction season of the following year, thus experiencing one complete winter season (unless otherwise agreed upon in the developer's agreement). The contractor shall submit a detailed work schedule to the town engineer prior to the preconstruction conference. Subdivision construction must start prior to October 15 unless approved by the plan commission to begin at a later date. 
(2)  In order to abate objectionable noise to the extent feasible, motorized construction equipment shall not be operated between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays without prior written approval of the town engineer. Saturday working hours shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. There shall be no work on Sundays or legal holidays. Each item of motorized construction equipment shall be equipped with a muffler constructed according to the equipment manufacturer's specifications or a system of equivalent noise reducing capability. Mufflers and exhaust systems shall be maintained in good operating condition, free from leaks and holes. 
(d)  Alternate materials. If the contractor wishes to substitute an alternate material as an "equal" to the material specified, he shall first submit a detailed description of such to the town engineer for its review and approval/disapproval. The contractor shall not install any alternate materials prior to receiving approval for their use. 
(e)  Protection of work. 
(1)  Openings and surface obstructions: protect with barricades, signs, or other devices. 
(2)  Street barricades, signs and other devices: erect and maintain for public safety and convenience. Follow applicable laws and regulations. Generally, mark hazards within work limits and on detours around work with well-painted, well-maintained barricades, reflectors, electric lights, flashers, and warning and directional signs in quantity and size to protect life and property. Locate and use safeguards to meet changing work conditions. 
a.  Streets closed to through traffic: place barricades at adjacent intersections as well as at obstruction location. Attach detour signs to barricades at adjacent intersections. 
b.  Streets totally closed: at town engineer's request, install snow fence across full width of streets. 
c.  At the end of each day, install snow fence around any open excavation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 1, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 2. - Scope. 
(a)  Included items in grading requirements may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Erosion control, silt fence, tracking mat and wetland delineator posts. 
(2)  Clearing of the site, grubbing and tree removal and disposal. 
(3)  Stripping and stockpiling of topsoil and other specified material. 
(4)  Undercutting of specific areas. 
(5)  Excavation, filling and grading of the site including all berming, detention pond and restoration. 
(6)  Ditch and sediment basin construction including seeding. 
(7)  Rough shaping of the roads and rights-of-way. 
(8)  Replacement of topsoil on the site. 
(9)  Restoration of all disturbed areas including site cleanup. 
(b)  All erosion control measures such as silt fence, hay bales, tracking mat, etc., shall be in place prior to site disturbance and/or clearing or grading activity. These measures shall be maintained until project completion, and removed and the area restored after project completion. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 2, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 3. - Damaged property. 
All damaged private and public property, such as trees, fences, culverts, utility poles, etc. and including existing streets and underground utilities, caused by the construction of this project shall be restored to the condition existing prior to construction at the contractor's expense unless otherwise specified by the town. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 3, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 4. - Utilities. 
The contractor shall contact all utility companies prior to the commencement of construction and shall arrange to have those existing utilities located and staked or marked in the field that are in the construction area or that might affect the proposed location of pavement underdrains. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 4, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 5. - Erosion control. 
(a)  The contractor shall take all measures necessary to minimize erosion, water pollution and siltation caused by construction of this project. Erosion control measures shall be in accordance with section 107.20 of the state specifications as well as the CPS (state department of natural resources conservation practice standards (technical standards), http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/nps/stormwater/techstds.htm) and shall include, but not be limited to, prompt removal of excavated material, proper storage of backfill and bedding materials, construction of erosion control measures such as "inlet protection" on all inlets, catch basins and open grated structures, temporary silt traps, silt fences, prompt cleanup of material tracked onto adjacent streets and timely restoration of damaged surface areas. In order to eliminate sediment material from being deposited outside of this site and onto abutting private and public properties, the contractor shall install and maintain siltation fences, silt screens or geotextile fabric fences around the grading limits of this site. Any erosion control measure necessary to protect any river, stream, lakes, drainage area, retention or detention pond or other waterway shall be installed by the contractor whether the erosion control measure is shown on the plan or not. 
(b)  The contractor shall maintain silt fences, erosion bales, silt traps and any other erosion control measures which are installed by him at all times to prevent sediment from entering any surface water, existing ditches or storm sewers. If maintenance of any existing erosion control measures is needed due to the occurrence of sedimentation from this project, the contractor will be responsible for this maintenance work. 
(c)  The contractor shall remove all erosion control measures installed by him after notification is given by the town or county department of park and land use. If sedimentation and/or erosion does occur, the contractor must promptly remove said sediment material and must repair erosion damage or such property damage caused by said sedimentation and/or erosion. 
(d)  Erosion control inspection and reports will continue until the NOT determination letter from the WDNR is received by the town engineer. The developer's engineer is responsible for all coordinating and execution of all permits related to erosion and sediment control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 5, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 6. - Street design. 
(a)  All street design shall conform with the requirements of this Code; A Policy on the Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, current edition, published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials; Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, current edition, published by the Federal Highway Administration; and these development requirements. 
(b)  All street designs, including construction plans, pavement marking layouts and signage plans must be approved by the town prior to construction. Speed limit signs shall be installed at all development entrances. Where applicable, street signs shall be installed on top of stop signs. 
(1)  Width. The right-of-way width of all streets shall not be less than the width shown in the details. 
(2)  Grades. The grade of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed six percent, and the grade of all other streets shall not exceed ten percent, unless necessitated by exceptional topography and approved by the plan commission. The minimum grade of all streets shall be no less than one-half of one percent, and such minimums shall not be permitted for long sustained distances. Any roadway with grades equal to or greater than five percent will require curb and gutter and storm sewer, if necessary. Any roadway with grades greater than four percent but less than five percent shall not be permitted for long sustained distances. Curb and gutter may be required in these situations in order to avoid future maintenance problems with shoulder washouts. 
(3)  Horizontal curves. A minimum sight distance with clear visibility, measured along the centerline, shall be provided of at least 300 feet on arterial streets, 200 feet for collector streets, and 100 feet on local streets. All streets shall accommodate the WB-50 design vehicle. The WB-62 design vehicle shall be accommodated as directed by the town. 
(4)  Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equal to 20 times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for arterial and collector streets and half that amount for other streets. 
(5)  Cross section. All streets shall be constructed to the dimensions and thickness shown on the respective typical street cross section for the type of street under design and construction. Typical cross sections are included for local and collector streets. Arterial street cross sections will be based on the standards contained in A Policy on the Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, current edition, published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
(6)  Driveways, curb and gutter, and handicap ramps. All driveways, curb and gutter, and handicap ramp construction shall conform to these requirements and the typical details contained in this agreement. No driveway shall be constructed within five feet of the nearest lot line. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 6, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 7. - Street construction. 
(a)  General. All streets shall be classified, designed and constructed in accordance with this chapter. Contact the town engineer for standard detail drawings not included in these requirements. 
(b)  Construction of new roadways. 
(1)  The streets and ditches shall be constructed according to the profiles and typical sections as shown on the plans. All intersections shall be constructed with mountable curb and gutter at the radii (see detail drawing). All streets may have mountable curb and gutter along the inside of tighter curves, as directed by the town engineer. The roadways shall be graded and compacted to bring the subgrade of the roads to the proposed grades as shown on the plans. In the event that materials other than earth are excavated, they shall be disposed of in a properly certified landfill. 
(2)  The base course material for all roadways shall conform to the typical section and sections 301 and 305 of the state specifications. Compaction of the subgrade and the base course shall be in accordance with section 207 of the state specifications, but shall never be less than 95 percent of the maximum density of the material being compacted using the standard Proctor. 
(3)  All manholes, catch basins, etc., shall be adjusted to finished surface course grade. The contractor shall coordinate all utility adjustments with the utility contractor. Manholes shall be ramped. Each ramp shall be a minimum of 30 feet in diameter and shall be installed one-half inch above the manhole frame between the first and second asphalt binder course placement. 
(4)  The base course shall be constructed in accordance with sections 301 and 305 of the state specifications and as shown on the typical cross section. The base course shall be constructed a minimum of ten inches thick, and shall consist of five inches of Gradation #1 crushed limestone traffic bond over five inches of Gradation #2 crushed limestone traffic bond. 
(5)  The asphaltic concrete pavement shall be installed in stages and in accordance with sections 450, 455, 460 and 465 of the state specifications. Submit mix design to town engineer for approval prior to paving. The binder course pavement shall conform to 12.5 mm per the state specifications and shall be constructed in lifts as per the typical cross section. The surface course pavement shall conform to 9.5 mm per the state specifications and shall be constructed in one lift of 1½ inches. The asphaltic concrete surface course shall not be installed for a minimum of one year after the initial construction of the street (i.e., after one winter season has passed, unless otherwise agreed upon in the developer's agreement). A temporary binder wedge shall be installed 18 inches from the gutter flange after the binder has been placed. This wedge shall be milled prior to placing surface course. Asphaltic materials used in the work shall conform to the mixture requirements of E-1.0, unless otherwise directed by the town engineer. For tack coat, follow state specifications 455.2.5, asphaltic material dependent on weather conditions. Apply between each layer of asphaltic concrete. Follow state specifications 455.3. Allow to cure before paving. All existing asphaltic concrete pavements shall be saw cut at all match points. 
(6)  Asphaltic concrete binder course shall not be placed unless the air temperature is 35 degrees Fahrenheit and rising. Asphaltic concrete surface course shall not be placed unless the air temperature is 40 degrees Fahrenheit and rising. 
(7)  Temporary and final shoulders shall be constructed with three-eighths-inch crushed limestone traffic bond in accordance with sections 301 and 305 of the state specifications. Shoulders shall be compacted in place. 
(c)  Repair of existing roadways. The town engineer shall determine the necessary procedure for repair of existing roadways. 
(1)  Surface irregularities. Holes, depressions, bumps and waves in existing pavements shall be repaired by removing all loose and defective material and replacing with a patching mixture in accordance with section 315 of the state specifications. The patching mixture shall be compacted to produce a tight surface conforming to the adjacent area. The surface of the patching area shall be constructed of asphaltic concrete surface course pavement on an in-kind thickness. The surface course shall conform to sections 450, 455, 460 and 465, 9.5 mm per the state specifications. 
(2)  Subgrade and base course failures. Severe depressions and cracking in existing pavements shall be repaired by undercutting unsuitable material to a minimum depth of eight inches, or as directed by the town engineer. Replacement materials shall be constructed following subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 7, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 8. - Subgrade/gravel checks. 
The contractor shall contact the town engineer upon completion of the subgrade and upon completion of the gravel base, respectively, for approval. The contractor shall provide and perform a roll test of the subgrade and gravel base as directed by the town engineer. All tests shall be in the presence of, and directed by the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 8, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 9. - Undercutting subgrade. 
The town engineer may order that the subgrade of the roadway be undercut due to unsuitable soil conditions. Where directed by the town engineer, the contractor shall undercut these areas to a stable base and backfill with compacted backfill material approved by the town. This work may include the placement of geotextile fabric. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 9, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 10. - Utility trench crossings. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Trench crossings and restoration shall be in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin, sixth edition, December 22, 2003, including all addendums. These specifications will hereinafter be referred to as the "standard specifications." 
(2)  All utility firms and contractors shall contact the town engineer a minimum of 48 hours prior to open cutting a town road. 
(b)  Backfill. Slurry backfill shall be required for all future and existing paved or graveled surfaces, such as driveways, parking areas, shoulders, curb and gutter, sidewalks or streets, or within five feet of such surface. Excavated material, in accordance with section 8.43.5 of the standard specifications, may be used in all remaining areas. 
(1)  The materials for the slurry backfill (No. 2 mix) shall be thoroughly mixed in the following proportions: 
1350 lbs. sand; 
775 lbs. #1 stone; 
1150 lbs. #2 stone; 
25 gals. (0 to -0.5 gal.) water per C.Y. 
(2)  This backfill material shall be placed and mechanically compacted in layers not to exceed eight inches in depth. No additional water will be allowed. The above weights are damp weights. This material shall be thoroughly mixed just prior to installation. 
(3)  Granular backfill, where allowed, shall conform to Table 37 of section 8.43.4 of the standard specifications and shall be mechanically compacted following section 2.6.14 of the standard specifications. 
(c)  Surface restoration. Surface restoration shall consist of a five-inch trench patch following section 7 of this appendix (street construction). 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 10, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 11. - Concrete construction. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  All work shall be constructed in accordance with sections 601 and 602 of the state specifications. 
(2)  Concrete shall be air entrained (6+/-1%), maximum slump of three inches, shall have a minimum designed 28 day compressive strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch, and a cement content of at least a six bag mix. Aggregate shall conform to sections 501, 501.2.5.3 and 501.2.5.4 of the state specifications. 
(3)  Prior to beginning any concrete work the contractor shall submit to the town engineer the concrete mix design. In addition to the requirements specified above, concrete materials shall be proportioned according to the procedures outlined in ACI 301-84, Section 3.9 and the maximum allowable water-cement ratio shall not exceed 0.45. 
(4)  Concrete which has not been discharged from the truck within 1½ hours or 300 drum turns after mixing shall be rejected. 
(b)  Expansion joint filler. Type I shall consist of a bituminous (asphalt or tar) mastic composition, formed and encased between two layers of bituminous impregnated felt. 
(c)  Finishing. 
(1)  After the concrete has been placed and struck off to the required elevations, the surface shall be worked by means of long handled wood or metal floats with a circular motion until a thin uniform mortar surface is obtained. The surface shall then be troweled smooth with a metal hand trowel. Immediately after the water glaze or sheen has disappeared, the surface shall again be troweled smooth with a metal hand trowel operated with a circular motion. 
(2)  All sidewalk edges shall be finished with an edging tool having a radius of one-half inch. All dummy joints shall be finished with a jointer having radii of one-half inch and minimum depth of one inch. 
(3)  The final surface finish shall be obtained by brushing light with a damp whitewash brush or with a floor brush having soft bristles. Any marring of the finished concrete surface before it has set will be cause for rejection and replacement of the concrete at the contractor's expense. 
(d)  Joints. 
(1)  Dummy joints for the sidewalks shall be constructed at right angles to the edge of the walk and spaced at a distance equal to the width of the sidewalk, unless otherwise directed. These joints shall be a minimum of one inch in depth and shall be one-fourth inch in width. 
(2)  Dummy joints for curb and gutter shall be constructed at right angles to the edge of the curb at a distance of every ten feet. 
(3)  Expansion joints shall be one-half-inch expansion joint material (Type I) installed to the full depth of the concrete at the following locations: 
a.  The end of all curb and gutter radii; 
b.  Five feet from all catch basins; 
c.  Where walk adjoins a curb; 
d.  At intervals not to exceed 150 feet for curb and gutter; 
e.  Where curb ramp adjoins sidewalk. 
(e)  Curing and protection. 
(1)  All freshly placed concrete shall be protected from rapid drops in temperature and loss of moisture and from subsequent construction operations. No concrete shall be allowed to freeze. An approved liquid membrane-forming curing compound shall be applied to all finished concrete surfaces as soon as possible after placement, but in no case more than two hours after concrete placement. Curing compound shall have white pigmentation having AASHO Designation M148 and be applied in two coats in directions opposite to each other (cross pattern). Each coat should be applied at the recommended application rate. Extreme care shall be taken so as not to injure the surface of the concrete during the process of applying curing compound. Curing compound shall be applied thick enough that the concrete is white, not grey and sprayed on to the top and all exposed sides at the time of placement. 
(2)  Concrete work shall be closed to pedestrian traffic for a period of 24 hours and to vehicular traffic for seven days unless otherwise authorized. The contractor shall provide and maintain sufficient barricades to effectively close the concrete work to traffic. 
(f)  Concrete testing. 
(1)  The contractor shall be responsible for supplying, obtaining and testing of concrete cylinders. Four test cylinders shall be taken for every 50 cubic yards of concrete placed, or as otherwise directed by the town engineer. Test results shall be submitted to the town engineer. 
(2)  The town may take test cylinders at their discretion. Concrete failing to obtain the required 28-day strength shall be rejected as unacceptable material. Areas in which this material was placed shall be removed and replaced with concrete of specified quality and thickness at the contractor's expense. The contractor may have an independent testing laboratory cut cores from a questionable area at his expense. In this case, acceptance of the compressive strength shall be based on the compressive strength of the cores. 
(g)  Hot weather work. 
(1)  Comply with the requirements of ACI 305-77R. During hot weather, that is when the air temperature is above 80 degrees Fahrenheit, special precautions shall be taken, during mixing, transporting, handling and placement, and finishing of all concrete work. Concrete work shall be carefully scheduled and maintained to minimize the elapsed time between mixing and placement. 
(2)  During handling and placement, special efforts shall be directed toward the prevention of excessive loss of moisture from the concrete, loss of slump, flash setting, and the development of cold joints. Subgrades and abutting finished concrete work shall be sprinkled or wetted just prior to placement to prevent suction of water from fresh concrete. All new work shall be carefully protected against excessively rapid drying. 
(3)  The published recommended practices of the ACI and PCA shall be adhered to as they apply to the work. A set-retarding admixture may be used when approved by the town engineer. 
(h)  Cold weather work. 
(1)  Comply with the provisions of ACI 306R. Unless the air temperature is at least 40 degrees Fahrenheit and rising, heat concrete materials at the time of mixing. Handle and protect the mix so that the temperature of the concrete when placed is not less than 55 degrees Fahrenheit. Written authorization from the town engineer must be obtained for concrete placement when the air temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  The use of salts or other chemical additives (i.e., calcium chloride) which prevent the concrete from freezing will not be permitted. 
(3)  All reinforcement, forms, fillers, soils and other surfaces with which the concrete may come in contact shall be free of frost, snow and ice. All concrete must be protected from frost for a minimum of seven days. 
(4)  When the projected overnight temperature is 32 degrees Fahrenheit or below, double polyethylene wrap must be placed over concrete. When the projected overnight temperature is 25 degrees Fahrenheit or below, hay must be placed over concrete in addition to the double polywrap. 
(i)  Sidewalks. The sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the typical section shown on the plans, except as where noted on the plans. 
(j)  Curb and gutter patches. Patches shall be Hi-Early 8-bag concrete mix. Barricade patched area for three days, during which time, traffic will not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 11, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 12. - Landscaping and restoration. 
(a)  The topsoil shall be placed at a minimum thickness of four inches and blended in with the existing grade. The topsoil shall meet the requirements of section 625 of the state specifications. 
(b)  Fertilizing shall be done according to section 629 of the state specifications using Type A fertilizer. 
(c)  The seed mixture used shall conform to mixture Number 10 as designated in section 630 of the state specifications except the white clover shall be eliminated and the respective percentages of the other seeds increased in the same proportion as the original mix. Written evidence of the mixture shall be submitted to the town engineer. Seed shall be so sown in accordance with Method A as described in section 630 of the state specifications. 
(d)  Sodding shall be done according to section 631 of the state specifications. 
(e)  Straw mulch shall be placed in accordance with Method A as described in section 627 of the state specifications, except that the mulch shall be placed within one day after the seeding has been completed. 
(f)  The sodded and/or seeded areas shall be kept thoroughly moist by watering, when rainfall is deficient. Watering shall continue until grass is fully matured. 
(g)  Seeded areas shall be maintained for two months after grass has shown "a catch" or uniform stand verified by the town engineer. Lawn areas shall receive two-inch mowings before acceptance, reseeding areas which fail to show adequate catch. Bare spots shall not exceed two square feet in area and not exceed three percent of the total seeded areas. Reseed areas which do not show a satisfactory stand of established grass, or areas which show erosion, dead grass, or other defects, to produce established, satisfactory grass. Correct damage resulting from erosion, gullies, washouts, or other causes by filling with topsoil, tamping, refertilizing, and reseeding, if damage occurs before work acceptance. Protect grass areas with warning signs during maintenance period. Request inspection by the town engineer at the end of maintenance period. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 12, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 13. - Materials delivery tickets. 
The contractor shall supply all material delivery tickets to the town engineer on a daily basis, or as otherwise directed by the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 13, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 14. - Culverts. 
(a)  A culvert sizing permit shall be obtained by the owner prior to any excavation. The town engineer will review all culvert sizing submittals. 
(b)  The location and capacity of culverts shall be calculated in accordance with the guidelines set forth by the most current revision of the state department of transportation facilities development manual. All applicable guidelines set forth by the county park and planning commission and the Waukesha County Land Conservation District shall also be followed. Crossing culverts under collector streets shall be designed to accommodate the runoff resulting from a 50-year design interval rainfall event. Crossing culverts on minor streets shall be designed to accommodate the runoff resulting from a 25-year design interval rainfall event. Driveway culverts shall be designed to accommodate the runoff resulting from a ten-year design interval rainfall event. Culvert sizing may be increased at the discretion of the town engineer, on a case by case basis. 
(c)  Material and structural design considerations shall be in accordance with the state specifications and the most current revision of the state department of transportation facilities development manual. All crossing culverts under collector streets shall be constructed of reinforced concrete, while all driveway culverts and minor street crossing culverts shall be constructed of reinforced concrete or corrugated metal pipe. 
(d)  Apron endwalls shall be provided on all driveway culverts and on all roadway crossing culverts. All culverts shall be a minimum of 15 inches in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 14, 4-16-2014)  
Sec. 15. - Construction review and testing. 
(a)  The construction of all roads within the town shall be reviewed by the town engineer. In general, each phase of construction must be reviewed and approved by the town engineer prior to initiation of subsequent phases. All phases of road construction shall be reviewed including excavation, grading, construction of subgrade, base and surface courses, shouldering, asphalt surface treatments, culverts, storm sewers, landscaping, erosion control, etc. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to notify the town engineer a minimum of 72 hours in advance of performing work so that construction review services may be scheduled. Failure to do so may result in work being rejected. 
(c)  As directed by the town engineer, testing shall be completed on materials proposed to be incorporated into the work. When material is to be tested for compliance with the specifications, the owner shall obtain samples and deliver them to the town engineer a minimum of ten working days prior to placement. A copy of all test results shall be forwarded to the town engineer for review. Materials not in compliance with the specifications will be rejected and shall not be incorporated into the work. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, § 15, 4-16-2014)  
APPENDIX B. - INDEX TO DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS DETAILS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, app. A, 4-16-2014)  
APPENDIX C. - EVALUATION CRITERIA 
 
Sec. 1. - Exhibit 1, evaluation criteria. 
The following table presents evaluation criteria as referenced in section 34-42: 
EXHIBIT 1. EVALUATION CRITERIA 
1. Preservation of environmental corridors, isolated natural areas, and natural topography in the design of the site 
Description: The proposed development preserves the primary and secondary environmental corridors and isolated natural areas with no building areas or improvements within the environmentally significant areas of the site. The site development preserves the original terrain; the design of the development limits excessive grading for roadways, stormwater facilities. 
Range: +4 to -4 
+3 points 	All primary and secondary environmental corridors and isolated natural area will be preserved. No grading or vegetative removal will occur within the designated corridor or natural areas and minimal site alterations only occurring within the proposed road right-of-way and stormwater facilities. 
+1 point 	Where the only site alterations within the environmental corridor or isolated natural areas are for a proposed public street extension in accordance with the town's official map. 
-3 points 	Site alterations for public and/or private improvements are within the corridors and natural areas other than for the connection of a public street, in accordance with the town's official map and more than ten percent of the entire site, which is designated environmental corridors and isolated natural areas, is proposed to be disturbed for public and private improvementsOr as an alternative on sites which do not contain at least 20 acres of environmental corridors or natural areas, the following shall apply: 
+3 points 	The site is designed to accommodate the natural terrain and the road system follows the topography of the site whereby minimal grade changes are necessary to accommodate surface water drainage patterns and the stormwater facilities are located in the natural depressions on the site. 
0 points 	The design of the development proposes significant grading and destruction of the natural topography to accommodate the proposed road system but the stormwater facilities can be accommodated within the natural depressions on the site. 
-3 points 	The proposed road system in the development does not follow the natural terrain and the stormwater facilities are not being accommodated within the natural depressions on the site and large stormwater retention, detention or infiltration facilities are being artificially created to accommodate the surface water runoff from the impervious surfaces on the site. 
2. Surface water drainage 
Description: The design of the development shall take into account the existing drainage patterns and topography so the development causes no erosion or stormwater impacts on adjacent properties. 
Range: +4 to -4 
+3 points 	Very good surface water drainage. All roadside ditches and other drainage ditches will have a gradient greater than 0.5 percent and less than two percent, and greater than 50 percent of the post development runoff volume for a two-year 24-hour design storm must be retained on the site in infiltration basins, and the remaining stormwater runoff is confined within road rights-of-way, or recorded drainage easements in commonly held outlots with no significant adverse impacts upon downstream drainage or adjacent properties and an area equal to or more than three percent of the developed area* in the effective infiltration area. 
	*Developed area is defined as a change in the land use, i.e., an agricultural field to a residential parcel or impervious surfaces in an open space area or roadways. 
0 points 	Average surface water drainage. All roadside ditches and other drainage ditches shall have a gradient of less than eight percent, and greater than 0.5 percent, and at least 25 percent of the stormwater runoff can be retained on the site and the remaining stormwater runoff is confined within the road right-of-way, or recorded drainage easements on commonly held outlots. 
-3 points 	Poor surface water drainage. Some roadside ditches, and drainage ditches are steeper than eight percent, or there is retention of less than 25 percent of the stormwater within subdivision development or the infiltration, detention or retention basins are on privately owned parcels. 
3. Lot sizes and overall density of the development 
Description: In a conservation design development, a variety of lot sizes is not required. The development should be designed to accommodate the preservation of the physical features of the site; the density should be compatible with existing residential development in the area or less than the existing residential development in the area. On planned unit developments and conventional subdivision plats there should be a variety of lots sizes, as required in the the town's zoning regulations and the town's comprehensive plan. 
Range +3 to -3 
+3 points 	In a conservation design development the overall density is less than the yield plan for a conventional subdivision development. 
+2 points 	In a conservation design development the number of lots or units equals the yield plan of a conventional development. 
+2 points 	In a conventional plat or planned unit development the lot sizes and/or overall density of the development is less than the zoning district allows. There are a variety of lot sizes and all of the proposed lots are larger than the existing development in the immediate area. 
0 points 	Density and lot sizes meet the requirements of the current zoning ordinance and in conventional subdivision developments and planned unit developments all of the lots are at least as large as the adjacent parcels, which allow residential development. 
-2 points 	Proposed development meets the density and lot size standards of the zoning district and intent of the planned unit development provisions, which required varied lot sizes, but the lots are smaller than adjacent residential development in the area. 
4. Preservation of agricultural lands and the rural character 
Description: It is the intent of the town to maintain the agricultural character, preserve the rural atmosphere and other natural resource bases and provide significant open space in the town. 
Range: + 4 to -4 
+3 points 	A minimum of 20 acres of open space is dedicated to the public or a non-profit conservancy agency organization in order to implement the town's comprehensive plan, or Waukesha County's park and open space plan or at least 40 percent of the site (of which 80 percent is upland) in common or public open space. 
+1 point 	At least 50 percent of the class I and II agricultural soils are preserved in open space uses. 
+2 points 	Common space equals at least 50 percent of the total upland area of the development or there is not open space in the proposed development, but all the lot sizes are a minimum of five acres. 
+1 point 	Common space equals at least 40 percent of the upland area of the site is in common open space. 
0 points 	In a planned development or conventional plat, common open space equals 30 percent of the total area of the development. 
0 points 	Common open space for other uses that equal 30 percent of the total area of the development. 
-2 points 	No common or public open space is contained within the development and all the lots are less than three acres. 
5. Traffic circulation and capacity of major streets 
Description: The collector or arterial streets, as designated on the town's official map, into which the traffic of the proposed development will flow, shall be evaluated as to their existing capacity. Failure of any street to satisfy the relevant criteria shall institute an inadequate street linkage. Entrance roads serving the development shall also be considered. Developments of more than 15 units will be considered inadequate if only served by one permanent street entrance. Developments, which connect to existing dead-end streets, and improve circulation through the town, would be considered an improvement. 
Range: + 2 to -2 
+1 points 	An improved street circulation system in accordance with the town's official map. 
0 points 	Adequate street circulation and does not make a connection to an existing dead end street. 
-1 point 	Inadequate street circulation. 
6. Soils consideration for roads and basement construction 
Description: Soils on the proposed development are considered appropriate for residential construction, road construction and minimum grading is allowed. 
Range: + 3 to -3 
+ 2 points 	There are no soils on the proposed development in the area designated for improvements, which are considered hydric soils, contain a groundwater table or bedrock limitation for basement construction, public road construction or will require a change in grade of more than three feet to accommodate residential basement construction or driveways to comply with the town building code requirements. 
0 points 	All of the soils on the proposed development are adequate for road construction; however, there is a fluctuating groundwater table on soils which are not considered hydric on the U.S.D.A. soils maps, which may require special precautions for basement construction. 
- 2 points 	Soils in the proposed development on the areas designated for improvements contain hydric limitations are not suitable for basement construction and/or public road construction without significant amounts of earth-altering activities taking place. 
7. Lot sizes 
Description: The proposed development contains a wide variety of lot sizes, as required in the town's comprehensive plan and under the provisions of the planned unit development standards in the town's zoning regulations, or the development is a conservation design development. 
Range: + 3 to -3 
+ 2 points 	The proposed development has a variety of lot sizes with a range of more than five acres, which does not detract from each specific lot size and from the existing development patterns in that area of the town or the development is a conservation design development which preserves 50 percent of the developable lands in common or public open space or is deeded to a private conservation organization approved by the town board. 
0 points 	At least 75 percent of the lot sizes in the development are basically the same size and the lot sizes have a range in size less than five acres but more than three acres between the largest and smallest lots and the development is a conventional plat or a planned unit development or the development is a conservation design development and has a least 40 percent of the site in common open space with no more than 20 percent of that area considered un-developable. 
-2 points 	At least 75 percent of the lots are similar in size and the range between the largest and smallest lot is less than two acres and the development is not a conservation design development. 
8. Buffers 
Description: The proposed development buffers improvements from the adjacent arterial and collective streets and existing residences and adjacent properties. 
Range: + 3 to -3 
+2 points 	The proposed location of the residences is in such a manner that they will not have a visual impact and will not be visible from the arterial and collector streets in the town and adjacent residential areas. 
0 points 	The proposed development improvements will be visible from adjacent residences, but not from the arterial and collector streets in the town. 
-2 points 	The proposed improvements and public roads will be visible from the arterial and collector streets in the general area and residents on the adjacent parcel. 
9. Future public costs and benefits 
Description: The development of the parcel provides a facility, which is a benefit to the residents of the town. 
Range: +4 to -4 
+3 points 	A public facility or open space consistent with the town's park and open space plan is part of the development, which in the judgment of the town board after recommendation by the plan commission is a benefit to the residents of the town. 
0 points 	The development provides substantial common open space, which is more than 50 percent of the upland area of the site, thereby preserving open space in perpetuity. 
0 points 	No public facilities, which are a benefit to the town, and does not require any extra ordinary maintenance costs of the public improvements by the town. 
-3 points 	The design of the development requires the installation of storm sewers or curbs and gutters, because of excessive road grades, or the building sites have greater than 12 percent slopes. 
 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-15, exh. 1, 4-16-2014)  
Chapter 38 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; court, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The introductory language of Ordinance No. 89-3, adopted February 13, 1989, and codified in this chapter, provided as follows: 
ORDINANCE NO. 89-3 
Whereas , the Town of Mukwonago, did on April 11, 1986, eliminate the position of Constable in the Town of Mukwonago; and 
Whereas , the town board, at the time the constable position was eliminated wanted to retain full authority of our police officers and therefore officers were hired by contract as independent contractors to perform police service for the town; and 
Whereas, the town board feels that the interim control our contracted police officers by the town board is no longer necessary; and 
Whereas , the creation of a police department under Wis. Stats. § 60.56(1)(a)1, allows the town board to create a board of police commissioners, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.13(1); 
Now therefore, the town board of the Town of Mukwonago do ordain as follows: 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Police department created. 
There is created in the town a police department consisting of a chief and as many officers as may be approved by the town board from time to time. Other than those powers and duties specifically granted to the board of police commissioners, by Wis. Stats. § 62.13, and the town board, all other duties, powers and responsibilities over the police department are reserved to the town board. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § I, 2-13-1989)  
Sec. 38-2. - Board of police commissioners created. 
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 60.57(1)(a), there is created a board of police commissioners for the town. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § II, 2-13-1989) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, and committees, § 2-101 et seq.  
Sec. 38-3. - Board of police commissioners; duties and powers. 
(a)  Membership. The membership of the board of police commissioners shall consist of five citizen members, any three of whom shall constitute a quorum. 
(b)  Appointment and term. Each member of the board of police commissioners shall be appointed by the town chair and such appointment shall be confirmed by the town board. Appointments shall be made between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May. Terms of office shall be five years staggered for all members. All appointments shall be five-year terms and coincide with the original appointments. Terms of office for police commissioners shall begin on the second Monday of May. 
(c)  Duties, powers and authority. The board of police commissioners shall conduct their meetings and have all the duties, responsibilities and powers as contained in Wis. Stats. § 62.13, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § III, 2-13-1989)  
Secs. 38-4—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Defined. 
Abandoned property, for purposes of this article, is property that has been seized, confiscated or held by the town police department ("department"), that is not the subject of a pending investigation or court action, and that is not disposed pursuant to court order at completion of a criminal action or proceeding, and that has not been claimed by its rightful owner within 90 days following the date the department determines the property can be released. Property that appears to be or is reported as lost or stolen is not abandoned property unless, in addition to the foregoing, the property is not claimed within 90 days of the date that the department exhausts all reasonable efforts to notify the person who filed the report of the location and times when the property can be claimed from the department. 
(Ord. No. 2004-1, § 1, 1-14-2004)  
Sec. 38-32. - Disposal of abandoned property. 
Except as noted in section 38-33 below, abandoned property shall either be sold at auction as described in Wis. Stats. § 66.0139, or be disposed as follows: 
(1)  Disposition in best interests of the town. The department may dispose of abandoned property in such manner as the chief of the department deems to be in the best interests of the town, including, but not limited to, public or private sale, gift or exchange. It is presumed that if the proceeds of sale are likely to exceed the costs of sale, then sale at the highest price obtainable therefor is in the best interests of the town, unless the chief concludes that this presumption is not appropriate in any particular case in the best interests of the town. 
(2)  Exception. Subsection (1), above, does not apply if the abandoned property is money. Money shall not be sold, given or exchanged. Upon being deemed to be abandoned property the full amount of the money shall be deposited into the town general fund. 
(3)  Inventory required. A written inventory of the disposition shall be maintained as a public record for no less than two years describing: 
a.  A description of the abandoned property; 
b.  The date of disposition; 
c.  The method of disposition; 
d.  The name and address of the person taking possession of the property. 
(4)  General fund. All money received as a result of the disposition, after deducting the necessary expenses of keeping the property and conducting the sale, shall be deposited in the town general fund, shall be deemed town property, and may be used by the town for all lawful purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-1, § 2, 1-14-2004)  
Sec. 38-33. - Exceptions. 
The following exceptions apply: 
(1)  This article does not apply to abandoned motor vehicles, for which Wis. Stats. § 342.40 applies. 
(2)  This article does not apply to dangerous weapons and ammunition, for which Wis. Stats. § 968.20 applies. 
(3)  This article does not apply to flammable, explosive, or incendiary substances, materials or devices that pose a danger to life or property in their storage, transportation, or use immediately upon taking possession thereof ("explosives"), except as follows: In lieu of the procedures otherwise applicable to abandoned property, explosives may be safely disposed by the department in any lawful manner that the department deems best able to protect the health and safety of the public and department personnel, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0139(3). The department may attempt to return explosives to the rightful owner if the explosives have a commercial value in normal business usage and do not pose an immediate threat to life or property. The department shall presume that if explosives appear to be or are reported lost or stolen an attempt must be made to return the material to the rightful owner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-1, § 3, 1-14-2004)  
Chapter 42 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Court, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 38. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - State offenses adopted, generally. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the current and future statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. chs. 939—948 and 951, and Wis. Stats. §§ 938.983, 86.06, 86.192, 134.66, 961.41 and 961.571—961.577, describing and defining regulations against the peace and good order of the state, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a term of imprisonment, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any current or future statute incorporated in this section by reference is required to be prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(b)  Penalties. 
(1)  For any adult adjudged to have violated the provisions of any municipal ordinance, the municipal court is authorized to impose a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture under this section shall subject such violator to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(2)  For any person adjudged to have violated an ordinance relating to truancy or school dropout, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats. § 938.342, in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and such statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statutes incorporated in this section, are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(3)  For any juvenile adjudged to have violated any ordinance other than truancy or school dropout, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 and 938.344, in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and such statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statutes incorporated in this section, are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(4)  For any juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a condition of a dispositional order of the court imposed under Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 or 938.344, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in Wis. Stats. § 938.355(6)(d), in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and such statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statutes incorporated in this section, are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(5)  Any other juvenile shall be referred to the proper authorities as provided in the applicable statute. 
(c)  Enforcement. This section shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.12 and Wis. Stats. ch. 799. 
(Ord. No. 85-6, § 1, 8-12-1985; Ord. No. 96-7, §§ 1—3, 12-11-1996)  
Sec. 42-2. - State statutes adopted; purchase or possession of tobacco products. 
(a)  Generally. The current and future provision of Wis. Stats. § 938.983, entitled purchase or possession of tobacco products prohibited, defining and regulating the purchase or possession of tobacco products by children, excluding provision relating to the penalty to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are adopted and made a part of this section by reference. A violation of any such provision shall constitute a violation of this section. Any future amendments, revisions, modifications or additions of statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be made a part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of tobacco products in this state. 
(b)  Citation. The town board, by this section, adopts and authorizes the use of the citation to be issued for violations of this section. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person over the age of 17 years violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator over the age of 17 years to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(2)  Any person between the ages of 12 and 17 years shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense, or referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator to the provisions of law. 
(3)  Any person under the age of 12 years shall be referred to the proper authorities, as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(Ord. No. 94-14, § 1, 9-12-1994)  
Sec. 42-3. - Loitering of minors. 
(a)  Generally. No person under the age of 18 years shall congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, highways, roads, alleys, parks or vacant lots within the town, either on foot or in or upon any conveyance being driven or parked thereon, between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless accompanied by his parent, spouse, guardian or other adult person having his care, custody or control. The prohibition of this section shall not apply to any person under 18 years of age who is going to or returning from any legitimate business or activity of any kind which has been specifically approved in advance by his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal care or custody. 
(b)  Responsibility of parents. No parent, spouse, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a person under the age of 18 years shall suffer or permit or by inefficient control allow such person to congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, highways, roads, alleys, parks or vacant lots within the town between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless such person under the age of 18 years is accompanied by his parent, spouse, guardian or other adult person having his care, custody or control; provided that any parent, spouse, guardian or other adult person under this section who shall have made a missing person notification to the law enforcement authorities shall not be considered to have suffered or permitted any person to be in violation of this section. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  For any adult adjudged to have violated the provisions of any municipal ordinance, the municipal court is authorized to impose a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject such violator to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(2)  For any person adjudged to have violated an ordinance relating to truancy or school dropout, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats. § 938.342, in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and such statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statutes incorporated in this section, are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(3)  For any juvenile adjudged to have violated any ordinance other than truancy or school dropout, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 and 938.344, in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and such statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statutes incorporated in this section, are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(4)  For any juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a condition of a dispositional order of the court imposed under Wis. Stats. §§ 938.343 or 938.344, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in Wis. Stats. § 938.355(6)(d), in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and such statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statutes incorporated in this section, are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(5)  Any other juvenile shall be referred to the proper authorities as provided in the applicable statute. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 12-11-1996)  
Sec. 42-4. - Limited use of firearms. 
(a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Firearm means a rifle of any caliber, air rifle, shotgun of any gauge, pistol, or revolver of any caliber. 
(b)  Discharge near subdivision. No person shall discharge any firearm in any recorded subdivision in the town or within 100 yards thereof. 
(c)  Discharge near residence. No person shall discharge any firearm within 100 yards of any residence, building or public highway in the town. 
(d)  Rifle prohibition. No person shall discharge or cause the discharge of any rifle firearm larger than .22 caliber, whether pistol or shoulder stock, within the territorial limits of the town. A rifle firearm shall be construed as any firearm having a grooved barrel and upon discharge projecting a solid missile. A shotgun of ten-gauge, 12-gauge or 20-gauge, or 410-gauge having a rifled barrel for the discharge of shotgun slugs is not considered a rifle under this section. 
(e)  Exceptions. Unless otherwise indicated, the prohibitions of this section shall not pertain to: 
(1)  Law officers duly designated and authorized by the town, county, state or federal authority. 
(2)  Activities upon any bona fide target range, provided that the town board must first issue upon written application and within its discretionary power a permit labeling such areas as approved target range. 
(3)  Any property owner or occupant of any real estate within the town may use and discharge any rifle, air rifle, pistol or revolver upon the premises owned or occupied as aforesaid, and may use and discharge a shotgun on such lands even though prohibited in subsection (b) of this section, provided such use is for the sole purpose of protection of life, subject to Wis. Stats. § 939.48, and property, subject to Wis. Stats. § 939.49, or rodent control. 
(f)  No hunting without permission. Hunting on lands within the town not listed in subsection (b) of this section is permitted by the owner or occupant of the land upon which he is hunting, provided such hunting is by use of shotgun or devices not prohibited in subsection (c) of this section, and further that the projection of shot shall not be above or into another's land or a traveled roadway. 
(g)  Parental responsibility. If a minor shall violate this section, his parent or guardian may be held responsible for such violation in the same manner as if such parent or guardian had violated this section, and ignorance of such violation shall not be a defense; prosecution of such parent or guardian shall not be a bar to prosecution of such minor. 
(h)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit or pay a fine of not less than $10.00, nor more than $200.00, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days or until such forfeiture and subsequent costs have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 93-2, §§ 2—7, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 99-6, § 1, 11-17-1999)  
Sec. 42-5. - Hunting prohibited on property owned by the town. 
(a)  Generally. Hunting of any form or nature is hereby prohibited on any property owned by the town. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person violating the terms of subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00 for the first offense. For the second and subsequent offense the minimum fine shall be not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. of 11-1991, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 42-6. - Trespassing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
An invitation means to be on the premises of another may be by express or implied consent. There is an implied consent when the possessor, by his conduct or his words, or both, by implication consents to such other persons being on the premises. 
Trespasser means one who goes upon premises owned, occupied or possessed by another without an invitation, express or implied, extended by such owner, occupant or possessor, and solely for his own pleasure, advantage or purpose. 
(b)  Civil trespassing prohibited. No person shall go upon the premises owned, occupied or possessed by another, without an invitation, express or implied, extended by such owner, occupant or possessor, and solely for his own pleasure, advantage or purpose. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person over the age of 17 years violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00 plus costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture under this section shall subject any violator over the age of 17 years to be sentenced to the county jail until such forfeiture is paid, but not to exceed 90 days. 
(2)  Any person between the ages of 14 and 17 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00 plus costs per each offense or referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject the violator to the provisions of law. 
(3)  Any person under the age of 14 shall be referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, §§ 1—3, 9-12-1983)  
Sec. 42-7. - Use of amplification devices for commercial purposes; licensing and regulation for noncommercial purposes. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. It is hereby declared that the use or operation of any radio device or apparatus or any device or apparatus for the amplification of sounds from any radio, phonograph, or other sound making or sound producing device, or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human voice or other sounds, on the street, in front of or outside of any building, place or premises, or in or upon any vehicle operated, standing or being in or upon any public street, park or place, where the sounds therefrom may be heard by the public, or from any stand, platform or other structure, or anywhere on or in the public streets, parks or places, is detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the town, in that such use or operation diverts the attention of pedestrians and vehicle operators in the public streets, parks and places, thus increasing traffic hazards and causing injury to life and limb. It is further declared that such use or operation disturbs the public peace and comfort and the peaceful enjoyment by the people of their rights to use the public streets, parks and places for street, park and other purposes and disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. Therefore, it is declared as a matter of legislative determination that the prohibition of such use or operation for commercial or business advertising purposes and the proper regulation of such use and operation for all other purposes is essential to protect the health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the town and to secure the peaceful enjoyment by the people of their rights to use the public streets, parks and places for street, park and other public purposes and to secure the peace, quiet and comfort of the town inhabitants. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Sound device or apparatus means any radio device or apparatus, or any device or apparatus for the amplification of any sounds from any radio, phonograph, or other sound-making or sound-producing device, or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human voice or other sounds. 
To use or operate any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place means to use or operate or cause to be used or operated any sound device or apparatus on the street or public place in front of or outside of any building, place or premises, or in or upon any vehicles operated, standing or being in or on any public street, park or place, where the sounds therefrom may be heard in any public street, park, place, or from any stand, platform or other structure, or anywhere in the public streets, parks or places. 
(c)  Commercial uses. No person shall use or operate any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place for commercial or business advertising purposes. 
(d)  Noncommercial uses. 
(1)  Generally. No person shall use or operate any sound device or apparatus in, or near or adjacent to any public street, park or place, unless he shall first obtain a permit to be issued by the town board in the manner prescribed in this section and unless he shall comply with the provisions of this section and the terms and conditions prescribed in such permit. 
(2)  Application for permit. Each applicant for a permit shall file a written application with the town board at least five days prior to the date upon which the sound device or apparatus is to be used or operated. Such application shall describe the specific location where, the day or days when, and the hour or hours during which it is proposed to use or operate such sound device or apparatus, and the application shall likewise specify the volume of sound which is proposed to be used measured by decibels or by any other efficient method of measuring sound, and such other pertinent information as the board may deem necessary to enable it to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Issuance of permit; terms. The town board shall not deny a permit for any specific time, location or use, to any applicant who complies with the provisions of this section, except for one or more of the reasons specified in subsection (d) of this section or for nonpayment of the fee prescribed in subsection (e) of this section, or to prevent overlapping in the granting of permits. Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall describe the specific location in which such sound device or apparatus is to be used or operated thereunder, the exact period of time for which such apparatus or device may be operated in such location, the maximum volume or sound which may be employed in such use or operation and such other terms and conditions as may be for the proper enforcement of this section. 
(4)  Special restrictions. The town board shall not issue any permit for the use of a sound device or apparatus: 
a.  In any location within 500 feet of a school, courthouse or church, during the hours of school, court, or worship, respectively, or within 500 feet of any hospital or similar institution; 
b.  In any location where the board upon investigation, shall determine the conditions of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or both are such that the use of such a device or apparatus will constitute a threat to the safety of pedestrians or vehicular operators; 
c.  In any location where the board upon investigation, shall determine that conditions of overcrowding or of street repair or other physical conditions are such that the use of a sound device or apparatus will deprive the public of the right to safe, comfortable, convenient and peaceful enjoyment of any public street, park or place for street, park or other public purpose, or will constitute a threat to the safety of pedestrians or vehicle operators; 
d.  In or on any vehicle or other device while it is in motion; 
e.  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; or 
f.  Where the volume of sound proposed to be used in the operation of such sound device or apparatus, as specified in the permit, will be audible for a distance in excess of 150 feet from the place or place where such device or apparatus will be located. 
(5)  Fees. Each applicant for a permit issued under the provisions of this section shall pay a fee, as specified in the fee schedule in the clerk's office, for the use of each such sound device or apparatus for each day. 
(6)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use or operation of any sound device or apparatus at any athletic or civically sponsored event, or at any political rally. 
(e)  Violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1960)  
Secs. 42-8—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance, as defined in Wis. Stats. ch. 961, in violation of this section. Drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances. 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances. 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana. 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes or other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
b.  Water pipes. 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
e.  Objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
g.  Chamber pipes. 
h.  Carburetor pipes. 
i.  Electric pipes. 
j.  Air-driven pipes. 
k.  Chillums. 
l.  Bongs. 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(Ord. No. 90-1, § 1(1), 2-12-1990) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-32. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this article shall be seized and forfeited to the town. 
(b)  Any person who violates section 42-34(a), (b) or (d) shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default of payment be imprisoned in the county jail or house of correction until the costs are paid, but not to exceed 20 days. 
(c)  Any person who violates section 42-34(c) shall upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default of payment be imprisoned in the county jail or house of correction until the costs are paid, but not to exceed 40 days. 
(Ord. No. 90-1, § 1(4), 2-12-1990)  
Sec. 42-33. - Determination of drug paraphernalia. 
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, under any city, state or federal law relating to any controlled substance. 
(3)  The proximity of the object in time and space to a direct violation of this article. 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom the person knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this article. The innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object as to a direct violation of this article shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(7)  Oral or written instructions provided with the object concerning its use. 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning its use. 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(11)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
(12)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(13)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Ord. No. 90-1, § 1(2), 2-12-1990)  
Sec. 42-34. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Possession of drug paraphernalia. No person may use, or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this article. 
(b)  Manufacture, sale or delivery of drug paraphernalia. No person may sell, deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this article. 
(c)  Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates subsection (b) of this section by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age is guilty of a special offense. 
(d)  Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. No person may place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication, or upon any outdoor billboard or sign, any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(e)  Exemption. This subsection does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 961. This article does not prohibit the possession, manufacture or use of hypodermics, in accordance with Wis. Stats. ch. 961. 
(Ord. No. 90-1, § 1(3), 2-12-1990)  
Secs. 42-35—42-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY, PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES AND LOITERING RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 42-51. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  This article is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting the health and safety of a child or children from the risk that convicted sex offenders may re-offend in locations close to their residences. The town board finds and declares that sex offenders are a serious threat to public safety. When convicted sex offenders re-enter society, they are much more likely than any other type of offender to be re-arrested for a new sexual assault. The town board further finds that, given the high rate of recidivism for sex offenders and that reducing opportunity and temptation is important to minimizing the risk of re-offense, there is a need to protect a child or children where they congregate or play in public places in addition to the protections afforded by state law near schools, and other places a child or children frequent. The town board finds and recognizes that, in addition to schools, there are other areas where a child or children congregate or play. 
(b)  This article is not intended to impose a criminal penalty or punishment of sex offenders, but rather to serve the town's compelling interest to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of a child or children in the town by creating areas around locations where a child or children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from loitering and/or establishing temporary or permanent residence and by regulating certain activities that may be used by sex offenders to prey upon children. 
(c)  Due to the high rate of recidivism for sex offenders, and because reducing both opportunity and temptation would help minimize the risk of re-offense, the town board finds that there is a compelling need to protect a child or children where they congregate or play in public places. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-20, § 1(1), 7-16-2014)  
Sec. 42-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Child means a person under the age of 18 years. 
Child safety location means the site upon which any of the following are located without regard to whether such site is located within the geographic limits of the town. 
(1)  Facility for children; 
(2)  Group home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(7); 
(3)  Library, that is held open for use by the public; 
(4)  Licensed day care center as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.65; 
(5)  Public or private primary, elementary, secondary, middle, junior high, or high school; 
(6)  Recreational trail, playground or park; 
(7)  Specialized school for children, including, without limitation, a gymnastics academy, dance academy, or music school; 
(8)  Swimming pool, wading pool, or aquatic facility held open for use by the public; 
(9)  A public or private golf course or range; and 
(10)  Church or places of worship. 
Child safety zone means any property within the town that is physically located within 1,000 feet of any child safety location. In the event that any portion of the property falls within a child safety zone, the entire property will be considered part of the child safety zone. 
Children means two or more persons under the age of 18 years. 
Crime against children means any of the following offenses set forth within the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, or the laws of this or any other state or the federal government, having like elements necessary for conviction where the victim is a child, respectively: 
Section 	Offense 
Wis. Stats. § 940.225(1) 	First degree sexual assault 
Wis. Stats. § 940.225(2) 	Second degree sexual assault 
Wis. Stats. § 940.225(3) 	Third degree sexual assault 
Wis. Stats. § 940.22(2) 	Sexual exploitation by therapist 
Wis. Stats. § 940.30 	False imprisonment - victim was minor and not the offender's child 
Wis. Stats. § 940.31 	Kidnapping - victim was minor and not the offender's child 
Wis. Stats. § 944.01 	Rape (prior statute) 
Wis. Stats. § 944.06 	Incest 
Wis. Stats. § 944.10 	Sexual intercourse with a child (prior statute) 
Wis. Stats. § 944.11 	Indecent behavior with a child (prior statute) 
Wis. Stats. § 944.12 	Enticing child for immoral purposes (prior statute) 
Wis. Stats. § 948.02(1) 	First degree sexual assault of a child 
Wis. Stats. § 948.02(2) 	Second degree sexual assault of a child 
Wis. Stats. § 948.025 	Engaging in repeated acts of sexual assault of the same child 
Wis. Stats. § 948.05 	Sexual exploitation of a child 
Wis. Stats. § 948.055 	Causing a child to view or listen to sexual activity 
Wis. Stats. § 948.06 	Incest with a child 
Wis. Stats. § 948.07 	Child enticement 
Wis. Stats. § 948.075 	Use of a computer to facilitate a child sex crime 
Wis. Stats. § 948.08 	Soliciting a child for prostitution 
Wis. Stats. § 948.095 	Sexual assault of a student by school instructional staff 
Wis. Stats. § 948.11(2)(a) or (am) 	Exposing child to harmful material-felony sections 
Wis. Stats. § 948.12 	Possession of child pornography 
Wis. Stats. § 948.13 	Convicted child sex offender working with children 
Wis. Stats. § 948.30 	Abduction of another's child 
Wis. Stats. § 971.17 	Not guilty by reason of mental disease of an included offense 
Wis. Stats. § 975.06 	Sex Crimes Law, commitment 
 
Domicile means an individual's fixed and permanent residence where the individual intends to remain permanently and indefinitely and to which whenever absent the individual intends to return; provided, however, that no individual may have more than one domicile at any time. A residence being used for any special or temporary purpose is not considered a domicile. 
Facility for children means a public or private school, a group home, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(7), a residential care center for children and youth, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(15d), a shelter care facility, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(17), a daycare center licensed under Wis. Stats. § 48.65, a daycare program established under Wis. Stats. § 120.13(14), a daycare provider certified under Wis. Stats. § 48.651, or a youth center, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 961.01(22). 
Governing body means the town board. 
Minor means a person under the age of 17. 
Municipality means the town. 
Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Sex offender or sexual predator means a person who has been convicted of, found delinquent of, or found not guilty by reason of disease or mental defect of a sexually violent offense and/or a crime against a child or children. 
Sexually violent offense has the meaning set forth in Wis. Stats. § 980.01(6), as amended from time to time. 
Special or temporary purpose means a situation that is out of the ordinary, such as, but not limited to, an immediate family member who requires extra care due to severe health issues from a stroke, Alzheimer's disease, etc. 
Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month and which is not the person's domicile. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-20, § 1(2), 7-16-2014)  
Sec. 42-53. - Residency restrictions for sex offenders; exceptions. 
(a)  Child safety zone restriction. Subject to the exceptions in subsection (c) of this section, no sex offender shall establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within the town that is within a child safety zone, as determined by following a straight line from the outer property line of the domicile or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of any child safety location. 
(b)  Original domicile restriction. In addition to subsection (a) of this section, but subject to the exceptions in subsection (c) of this section, no sex offender, shall establish a permanent or temporary residence within the town and no supervised release of a sex offender shall be established in the town unless such person was domiciled in the town at the time of the offense resulting in the person's most recent conviction for committing the sexually violent offense and/or crime against a child or children. This section shall not apply if the sex offender establishes a domicile outside of the town prior to returning to the town. 
(c)  Exceptions. A sex offender may not be found to be in violation of the residency restrictions in subsection (a) of this section if the sex offender establishes that any of the following apply: 
(1)  The sex offender was domiciled in the town prior to July 16, 2014; provided, however, that if the sex offender was then subject to Wis. Stats. § 301.45, the sex offender must have also reported and registered the residence pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 301.45 prior to such date to take advantage of the exception. 
(2)  The sex offender is a minor and is not required to register under Wis. Stats. §§ 301.45 and 301.46. 
(3)  The child safety location began after the sex offender had established the domicile or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence if required pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 301.45. 
(4)  The sex offender is subject to an active court order to serve a sentence or is otherwise involuntarily required to reside in a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution or mental facility within the child safety zone. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-20, § 1(3), 7-16-2014)  
Sec. 42-54. - Renting real property to sex offenders; restricted. 
No person shall let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a domicile or temporary residence by a sex offender contrary to the provisions of section 42-53. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-20, § 1(4), 7-16-2014)  
Sec. 42-55. - Prohibited activities by sex offenders; exception. 
(a)  Prohibited activities by sex offenders. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no sex offender shall participate in any event in the town involving a child or children by means of distributing candy or other items to such child or children. Examples of such events would include, but not be limited to, Halloween, wearing a Santa Claus costume in a public place in relationship to Christmas, wearing an Easter Bunny costume in a public place in relationship to Easter, or other activities that may, under the circumstances then present, tend to entice a child or children to have contact with a sex offender. 
(b)  Exception. Events in which the sex offender is a parent or legal guardian of the child or children involved are exempt from the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, provided that no child or children other than a child or children of the sex offender are present at the event, and that the sex offender's participation in such event complies with any restrictions set by the court or any other governing authority with legal jurisdiction, i.e., probation, parole, department of corrections, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-20, § 1(5), 7-16-2014)  
Sec. 42-56. - Loitering by sex offender prohibited; exception. 
(a)  Loitering by sex offender. No sex offender shall loiter or prowl on or within 200 feet of any child safety location, at a time, or a manner not usual for law abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of the persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself or explain his presence and conduct at the aforementioned locations. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true, and, if believed by the law enforcement officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(b)  Exception. The prohibitions set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where the sex offender is a minor who is with one or both of his parents or guardian at the time of the offense or the sex offender was exercising First Amendment rights produced by the United States Constitution, including freedom of speech, free exercise of religion and the right of assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-20, § 1(6), 7-16-2014)  
Sec. 42-57. - Child safety zone map. 
The town clerk's office shall maintain an official map showing child safety zones within the town. The town clerk's office shall update the map, at a minimum, annually to reflect any changes in the location of child safety zones. The map will be available in the town clerk's office. In the event of a conflict, the terms of this article shall control. In no event shall a failure to update the map in compliance with this article preclude the prosecution or conviction of any sex offender under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-20, § 1(7), 7-16-2014)  
Sec. 42-58. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates provisions of sections of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $500.00 and no more than $2,000.00 for each violation. Each day a person is in violation of this article constitutes a separate violation. The town may also seek equitable relief to gain compliance. 
(b)  In addition and not to the exclusion or prejudice of such other penalties and remedies as may apply, violation of section 42-53 or 42-54 shall also constitute a public nuisance, which the town may enforce by action or proceeding to enjoin or abate such public nuisance. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any order, rule or regulation made herein shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-20, § 1(8), 7-16-2014)  
Sec. 42-59. - Child protection zones. 
Maps of the Rolling Hills Elementary School Child Protection Zone and the Section Elementary School Child Protection Zone are file in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-20, § 1, 7-16-2014)  
Chapter 46 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Recreation committee, § 2-161 et seq.; streets, highways and other public places, ch. 62; waterways, ch. 78. 
 
Sec. 46-1. - General rules and regulations. 
(a)  Individual conduct. 
(1)  There shall be no activities by any person or organization for which a charge is made without the recreation director's or designee's approval. 
(2)  There shall be no willful disfigurements of buildings or equipment. Wis. Stats. §§ 943.01 through 943.05, exclusive of penalties, are incorporated herein by reference. 
(3)  Restroom facilities shall be used only for their intended purpose and no person shall urinate or defecate in the park except within designated facilities. 
(4)  There shall be no littering in any form. 
(5)  No person or organization will be permitted private or exclusive use of any areas or buildings without permission of the recreation director or designee. 
(6)  No domestic animals, including, without limitation, dogs, cats or horses of any kind, are to be in the park. 
(7)  The consumption of beer and/or wine shall be permitted only by town permit. 
(8)  There shall be no hawking, merchandising or selling of any articles without prior permit from town board. 
(9)  There shall be no advertising of any nature permitted in the park without town board approval. 
(10)  There shall be no placing or posting of signs, placards or advertisements whatsoever, except official town signs, without town board approval. 
(11)  No person may carry a weapon openly in the park with malicious and criminal intent. 
(12)  No person shall make or kindle a fire for any purpose except in places provided therefor, and then subject to such regulations as may be prescribed. The use of grills in designated picnic areas shall be permitted, provided lawns and other vegetation are not damaged, and provided further that all unburned coals or ash are disposed of in such manner as to prevent fire or damage to any park property. 
(13)  Glass bottles are prohibited in all town parks. 
(14)  There shall be no camping in any town park. 
(b)  Vehicles. 
(1)  Rate of speed is limited to five mph. 
(2)  There shall be no overnight parking within any town park. 
(3)  There shall be no parking of vehicles in other than designated lots and roadways. 
(4)  There shall be no operating of motorized vehicles in other than designated lots and roadways. 
(c)  Hours. 
(1)  Park hours are from sunrise to 10:00 p.m. No person shall remain therein during said hours, provided that the town board may, from time to time, in all or any of the parks, publish or post a closing time different from the above stated time. 
(2)  In the case of any emergency, or when in the judgment of the town board the public interest demands it, any portion of the parks or buildings therein may be closed to the public or to the designated persons until permission is given to return. 
(Ord. No. 2002-19, § 1, 12-11-2002; Ord. No. 2011-3, § 1, 10-19-2011)  
Sec. 46-2. - Private use. 
Individuals may use town park facilities for private purposes in full compliance with all the following conditions: 
(1)  The responsible party must be a town resident or a village resident and must be present at all times through the private use, unless in the case of an emergency. In the case of an emergency, the town recreation director, at his discretion, can authorize another town resident to be the responsible party, provided that the other town resident accepts the same. 
(2)  Town park facilities available for private use are limited to the park pavilions, baseball diamonds, soccer fields and volleyball courts as specified in the facility use rental agreement. 
(3)  Town park facilities for private use shall be available on a "first come, first served" basis with reservations for any calendar year being first accepted at 8:30 a.m. on the first working day in January. 
(4)  Town functions will take priority. Private use of the facilities shall not be to the exclusion of the town uses. Town officials and employees may enter the premises at any time, even during the private use for any purpose. 
(5)  Reservations for use of the town park facilities shall be made with the town recreation department by executing the approved facility use rental agreement and paying the fees and security deposit in advance. 
(6)  The town board shall set the reservation fees and security deposit. The security deposit will be held to cover damage and improper care and necessary cleaning, if any. Any portion of the deposit that remains after all of the town costs to fully correct any such damage and cleaning are deducted shall be returned to the responsible party as authorized by the town recreation director. The responsible party shall reimburse the town for any costs of repair or cleaning that exceed the amount of the deposit within 30 days of being invoiced by the town. 
(7)  The reservation must be canceled at least 72 hours prior to the event. The security deposit shall be refunded and the town will withhold a processing fee, as specified in the fee schedule in the clerk's office. There will be no refund of the reservation fee if the cancelation is less than 72 hours prior to the event. 
(8)  In the event the reservation is canceled prior to the event, the security deposit shall be refunded. The reservation shall not be refunded, however, unless the reservation is canceled at least 72 hours prior to the event. 
(9)  The town shall not be responsible for anything left, lost or stolen on the premises. 
(10)  Private use of the town park facilities is subject to all rules, regulations and ordinances of the town, and subject to strict compliance with the terms of the facility use agreement. 
(11)  The town recreation director is authorized to refuse facility usage when, based on past use, experience or usage has been unfavorable as determined by the town recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 2002-19, § 2, 12-11-2002; Ord. No. 2011-3, § 2, 10-19-2011)  
Sec. 46-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  For any adult adjudged to have violated the provisions of this chapter, the municipal court is authorized to impose a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 plus allowable statutory costs per each offense. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject such violator to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(b)  Any adult found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter who previously had been convicted of a violation of the same chapter within one year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each such offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject each violator to be sentenced to the county jail and/or revocation or suspension of driving privileges. 
(c)  For any juvenile adjudged to have violated this chapter, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 938.17(2), 938.343 and 938.344, in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and said statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated herein. The court is also authorized to require payment for alcohol and other drug abuse services in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 938.361, and said statute is hereby adopted and incorporated herein. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(d)  For any juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a condition of a dispositional order of the court imposed under Wis. Stats. § 938.343 or 938.344, the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in Wis. Stats. §§ 938.355(6)(d) and 895.035, in accordance with the provisions of those statutes, and said statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated herein. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the current or future statues incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of peace and good order of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2002-19, § 3, 12-11-2002; Ord. No. 2011-3, § 3, 10-19-2011)  
Chapter 50 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; streets, highways and other public places, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, political or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be such. 
Direct seller means any individual who, for himself, or for a partnership, association or corporation, sells goods, or takes sales orders for the later delivery of goods or solicits monies or contributions, at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of such individual, partnership, association or corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
Goods means personal property of any kind, and shall include goods provided incidental to services offered or sold. 
Permanent merchant means a direct seller who, for at least one year prior to the consideration of the application of this chapter to such merchant: 
(1)  Has continuously operated an established place of business in this town; or 
(2)  Has continuously resided in this town and now does business from his residence. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(2), 8-11-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-2. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to forfeit $500.00 for each violation plus costs of prosecution. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(10), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 50-3. - Registration. 
It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in direct sales within the town without being registered for that purpose as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(1), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 50-4. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter except section 50-8: 
(1)  Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes; 
(2)  Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods; 
(3)  Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown in the state; 
(4)  Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their regular course of business; 
(5)  Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home visit by, such person; 
(6)  Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer; 
(7)  Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of goods; 
(8)  Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law; 
(9)  Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of such organization, provided that there is submitted to the clerk proof that such charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.42. Any charitable organization not registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.42, or which is exempt from that statute's registration requirements, shall be required to register under this chapter; 
(10)  Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom complaint has been made to the town that such person is a transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the town proof that such person has leased for at least one year, or purchased, the premises from which he is conducting business, or proof that such person has conducted such business in this town for at least one year prior to the date complaint was made. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(3), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 50-5. - Registration. 
(a)  Applicants for registration must complete and return to the clerk a registration form furnished by the clerk which shall require the following information: 
(1)  Name, permanent address and telephone number and temporary address, if any; 
(2)  Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold; 
(4)  Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any; 
(5)  Nature of the business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered, and any services offered; 
(6)  Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable; 
(7)  Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant in the conduct of his business; 
(8)  Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where applicant conducted similar business; 
(9)  Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving this town; 
(10)  Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant business within the last five years; the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(b)  Applicants shall present to the clerk for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required; 
(2)  A state certificate of examination and approval from the seller of weights and measures where the applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities; 
(3)  A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law; such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for a license is made. 
(c)  At the time the registration is returned, a fee set by town board resolution from time to time shall be paid to the clerk to cover the cost of processing such registration. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the clerk or his agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally. Upon payment of such fee and the signing of such statement, the clerk shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry, unless investigation warrants refusal to register the applicant, as described in section 50-6. Such registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent revocation as provided in section 50-10. 
(d)  Direct sellers are required to register individually, and not as a partnership, association or corporation. Each person intending to be a direct seller shall, individually, comply with the registration procedures described in this section, including, but not limited to, payment of the registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(4), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 50-6. - Investigation. 
(a)  Investigation of applicants. Upon receipt of each application, the clerk may refer it immediately to the police who shall make and complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration. 
(b)  Refusal to register applicants. The clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation provided in subsection (a) of this section, that: 
(1)  The application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; 
(2)  Complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business; 
(3)  The applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or 
(4)  The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of section 50-5(b). 
(c)  Investigation upon complaints. Upon receipt of a complaint by the town, the police shall make and complete an investigation of the statements and shall proceed, under the terms and conditions of this chapter, other applicable ordinances or law. Any person who fails to cooperate with the police in the course of his investigation of a complaint shall be deemed, upon conviction, to have violated this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(5), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 50-7. - Appeal. 
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the town board, or, if none has been adopted, under the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 68.07—68.16. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(6), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 50-8. - Regulation of direct sellers. 
(a)  Prohibited practices. 
(1)  A direct seller shall be prohibited from: calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(2)  A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the identity of the organization he represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the sales price of goods being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of goods. 
(3)  No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(4)  No direct seller shall make any loud noises, or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(5)  No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he is conducting business. 
(b)  Disclosure requirements. 
(1)  After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he offers to sell. 
(2)  If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel such transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.00. In accordance with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 423.203; the seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 423.203(1)(a)—(c), (2) and (3). 
(3)  If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(7), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 50-9. - Records. 
The police shall report to the clerk all convictions for violation of this chapter and the clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(8), 8-11-1999)  
Sec. 50-10. - Revocation of registration. 
(a)  Registration may be revoked by the town board after notice and hearing, if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this chapter or was convicted of any crime, ordinance, or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in direct selling. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing; such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § II(9), 8-11-1999)  
Chapter 54 - PUBLIC NUISANCES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Public nuisance defined. 
(a)  A public nuisance is a thing, action, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; 
(3)  To be so unsightly in appearance as to substantially annoy or interfere with the comfort, value of adjoining property owners and their property; 
(4)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use of private or public property. 
(b)  The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically determined to be public nuisances but such enumeration shall not exclude other nuisances of like or similar nature: 
(1)  Accumulation of junk and debris. Accumulation of decayed animals or vegetation matter, trash, rubbish, junk, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal, household equipment, furniture and appliances or any other material which by its nature causes an unsightly condition upon the property and in which flies, mosquitoes, disease carrying insects, rats or other vermin may inhabit. 
(2)  Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Adulterated food. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(4)  Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(5)  Privy vaults and garbage cans. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight. 
(6)  Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances. 
(7)  Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the town emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the town. 
(8)  Street pollution. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or substances to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the town. 
(9)  Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the town limits in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property in the town. 
(10)  Storage of refrigerators, etc., deemed a nuisance per se. No person shall store any refrigerator, freezer or other similar appliance that is capable of being used by children and on which the door or lid can be closed without the ability of being opened from the inside. Any appliance violating this subsection is deemed a nuisance per se and shall be immediately dismantled to render any closing of the door or lid to be ineffectual. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, § 2, 5-13-1985) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00, nor more than $200.00, together with the cost of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid for a period not exceeding 90 days. 
(b)  Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, § 5, 5-13-1985)  
Sec. 54-3. - Public nuisance prohibited. 
No person shall create, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the town limits. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, § 1, 5-13-1985)  
Sec. 54-4. - Abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  Inspection of premises. Whenever a complaint is made to the town chair or town board that a public nuisance exists within the town the complaint shall promptly be forwarded to the health department, the chief of police, the chief of the fire department, or the building inspector who shall forthwith cause to be inspected the premises and shall make a written report of his findings to the town board. 
(b)  Summary abatement. If the inspection officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists within the town and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the town chair may direct the proper officer to cause the public nuisance to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(c)  Abatement after notice. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall serve notice on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove the nuisance within ten days. If such nuisance is not removed within such ten days, the proper officer shall cause the nuisances to be removed as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the town board or its officials in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, § 3, 5-13-1985)  
Secs. 54-5—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOXIOUS WEEDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Noxious weeds generally, Wis. Stats. § 66.0407. 
 
Sec. 54-31. - "Destroy" defined. 
The term "destroy" means the complete killing of weeds or the killing of weed plants above the surface of the ground by the use of chemicals, cutting, tillage, cropping system, pasturing livestock or any or all of these in effective combination, at such time and in such manner as will effectually prevent such plants from maturing to the bloom or flower stage or spreading to adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § III, 4-27-1983) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-32. - Noxious weed defined. 
(a)  The term "noxious weeds" as used in this article includes the following: 
(1)  Canada thistle. 
(2)  Leafy spurge. 
(3)  Field bindweed (creeping jenny). 
(4)  All other thistles. 
(5)  Wild mustard. 
(6)  Yellow rocket. 
(7)  Yellow dock. 
(8)  Giant foxtail. 
(9)  Velvet leaf. 
(10)  Quack or quitchgrass. 
(11)  Wild hemp (marijuana that is not grown for lawful commercial purposes). 
(12)  Wild radish. 
(13)  Buckhorn plantain. 
(14)  Goatsbeard. 
(15)  Harmful barberry. 
(16)  Burdock. 
(b)  The weeds listed in subsection (a) of this section are hereby declared to be "noxious" within the boundaries of the town. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § I, 4-27-1983) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-33. - Owner or person in control of land to destroy. 
Every person shall destroy all noxious weeds as described in section 54-32 on all lands they own, occupy or control. Further, every person, corporation or organization shall destroy all noxious weeds out to the center of any federal, state, county, or town highways within the town which is adjacent to any lands they shall own, occupy or control. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § II, 4-27-1983)  
Sec. 54-34. - Notice to destroy. 
The town chair shall, each year on or before May 15, publish a Class 2 notice, under Wis. Stats. ch. 985, that every person is required by law to destroy all noxious weeds, as defined and required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § IV, 4-27-1983)  
Sec. 54-35. - Weed commissioner; appointment. 
The town chair, shall, on or before May 15 in each year, appoint one or more commissioners of noxious weeds. Upon appointment such weed commissioner or commissioners shall take and file in the office of the clerk the official oath. The weed commissioner or commissioners shall serve a term of one year and until a successor has qualified. The weed commissioner or commissioners shall receive such salary as may from time to time be set by the town board. If the town chair determines that more than one weed commissioner shall be appointed, the town shall be divided into districts by the town chair and each weed commissioner shall be assigned a different district. The weed commissioners need not be residents of the district to which they are assigned. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § V, 4-27-1983) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-31 et seq.  
Sec. 54-36. - Duties of weed commissioner. 
(a)  After May 15 of each year and after the town chair has published the notice as provided in section 54-34, the weed commissioner shall investigate concerning the existence of noxious weeds in the town and if any person, corporation or organization has neglected to destroy any weeds as defined herein, the weed commissioner shall, after giving five days' written notice by certified mail to the owner or occupant, destroy or cause to be destroyed all such noxious weeds, in the manner deemed to be the most economical method. The town shall keep accurate records of time and expenses incurred to be charged to each parcel of real estate upon which such weeds were destroyed. 
(b)  The clerk shall enter upon the tax roll to each tract of land the amount chargeable to that tract for the weed destruction under a column entitled "For the Destruction of Weeds," as a tax, which tax shall be collected as other taxes, except those lands which are exempt from taxation. Those lands such as railroads or other lands not taxed the usual way, the amount chargeable thereto shall be certified to the state treasurer by the clerk pursuant to law, and the town treasurer shall collect such charges pursuant to subch. 1 of ch. 76, Wis. Stats. (Wis. Stats. § 76.01 et seq.), and once collected shall return the funds to the town. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § VI, 4-27-1983)  
Sec. 54-37. - Liability of weed commissioner. 
The weed commissioner or commissioners may, after the written five day notice, enter upon any lands upon which any of the weeds described in section 54-32 are growing and cut or otherwise destroy them, without being liable to an action for trespass or any action for damages resulting from such entry and destruction. The weed commissioner or commissioners shall exercise reasonable care in the performance of the duties imposed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, § VII, 4-27-1983)  
Sec. 54-38. - Form of notice to cut or destroy noxious weeds. 
The form of notice to cut or destroy noxious weeds shall be as follows: 
TOWN OF MUKWONAGO NOTICE TO CUT OR DESTROY NOXIOUS WEEDS 
Notice is hereby given to each and every person who owns, occupies or controls land in the town to cut or destroy the following noxious weeds: 
Canada thistle; 
Leafy spurge; 
Field bindweed (creeping jenny); 
All other thistles; 
Wild mustard; 
Yellow rocket; 
Yellow dock; 
Giant foxtail; 
Velvet leaf; 
Quack or quitchgrass; 
Wild hemp (marijuana that is not grown for lawful commercial purposes); 
Wild radish; 
Buckhorn plantain; 
Goatsbeard; 
Harmful barberry; 
Burdock; 
of all lands owned, occupied or controlled by such owner in the town and out to the center of any highway on which such lands may abut. You are hereby ordered to cut or destroy the weeds in such manner as shall effectively prevent them from bearing seed or spreading to adjoining property, at your own expense, for the entire season as required by Wis. Stats. § 66.0407 and Ordinance No. 83-3. 
Failure to comply could result in the town removing such weeds and the expense of such removal charged to the applicable real estate pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.92(1). 
Doris Morse, Weed Commissioner 392-2861 
Peter Gardner, Chairman 
Esther S. Christenson, Clerk 
(Ord. No. 83-3, 4-27-1983)  
Secs. 54-39—54-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNK 
 
Sec. 54-51. - Purpose. 
This article is intended to regulate the accumulation of junk to promote public health, safety, and welfare in the town. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-30, § 1(16-21), 10-7-2015)  
Sec. 54-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junk. 
(1)  The term "junk" means: 
a.  Garbage, waste, refuse, trash, or similar material; 
b.  Scrap material such as metal, lumber, furniture, appliances, paper, cans, or bottles; 
c.  Any used tire or used motor vehicle part; 
d.  Any motor vehicle upon which no current license plate is displayed, or any inoperable or abandoned motor vehicle; and 
e.  Any trailer which is required to be licensed by the state, but which is unlicensed, or any trailer which is abandoned or inoperable. 
(2)  The term "junk" does not include any of the following: 
a.  Any property properly zoned junk yard, salvage dealer, or other junk, waste disposal or storage activity for which a valid license from the state or other necessary municipal issuing authority is required and proper permits have been issued and all such licenses and permits are in full force and effect and the operation is in full compliance therewith; 
b.  The storage of idle, but operable farm equipment; 
c.  The storage of idle but operative snow removal vehicles or equipment, or lawn mowing equipment; 
d.  The orderly storage of firewood for fuel; or 
e.  The temporary storage of construction materials which are for use on the site for a project authorized by a valid building permit and which are stacked, stored, and secured on the site in an orderly fashion. 
Person shall have the meaning set forth in section 1-2. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-30, § 1(16-22), 10-7-2015)  
Sec. 54-53. - Accumulation of junk. 
Junk shall at all times be stored in an enclosed building thereby securing it from the view of the public and adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-30, § 1(16-23), 10-7-2015)  
Sec. 54-54. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Investigation of an alleged violation. After receiving a written complaint of an alleged violation, the building inspector and/or town police department shall investigate to determine if a violation exist. If the property owner does not allow the building inspector or the police department the right to enter the subject property for the purpose of determining whether a violation exists or not, he or she may request a special inspection warrant pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. 
(b)  Determination of compliance. If the building inspector conducts the investigation and determines that there is no violation, he or she shall notify the property owner and the complainant explaining his determination. If the police department conducts the investigation and determines that there is no violation, the department shall notify the property owner and the complainant explaining their determination. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-30, § 1(16-24), 10-7-2015)  
Sec. 54-55. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be subject, upon conviction, to a forfeiture as set forth in section 1-8, together with the cost of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid for a period not exceeding 90 days. 
(b)  Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-30, § 1(16-25), 10-7-2015)  
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; refuse, garbage and rubbish storage requirements for property maintenance, § 14-160; utilities, ch. 74. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Town contract for garbage/recyclables pickup. 
The town board shall contract for the weekly removal of garbage, refuse and recyclables from single-family and two-family to four-family dwellings. There is established a fee for the removal of garbage/refuse/recyclables from single-family and two- to four-family properties. Such fee shall be the per unit charge made to the town by the firm providing such removal to the town by contract and shall be paid monthly by the town. The cost of such contract shall be a budgetary item included in the town's general tax levy. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.01), 5-9-1994)  
Secs. 58-2—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RECYCLING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bimetal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
Container board means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products. 
Foam polystyrene packaging means packaging made primarily from foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is designed for serving food or beverages. 
(2)  Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container. 
(3)  Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container. 
HDPE means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2. 
LDPE means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4. 
Magazines means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper. 
Major appliance means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, stove or hot water heater. 
Multiple-family dwelling means a property containing five or more residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally. 
Newspaper means newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint. 
Nonresidential facilities and properties means commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. The term "nonresidential facilities and properties" does not include multiple-family dwellings. 
Office paper means high grade printing and writing papers from offices in nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. The term "office paper" does not include industrial process waste. 
Other resins or multiple resins means plastic resins labeled by the SPI code #7. 
Person includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, local governmental unit, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0131(1)(a), state agency or authority or federal agency. 
PETE means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1. 
Plastic container means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale. 
Postconsumer waste means solid waste other than solid waste generated in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 241.01(7), waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(17). 
PP means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5. 
PS means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6. 
PVC means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3. 
Recyclable materials means lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers, waste tires and bimetal containers. 
Solid waste has the meaning specified in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(33). 
Solid waste facility has the meaning specified in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(35). 
Solid waste treatment means any method, technique or process which is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of solid waste. The term "solid waste treatment" includes incineration. 
Waste tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than four inches in diameter. The term "yard waste" does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.10), 5-9-1994) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-32. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law, other than Ordinance No. 92-3. However, whenever this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.04), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-33. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the statute. Where any terms or requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. Where a provision of this article is required by statute, or by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 544, and where the ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the statute and the Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.05), 5-9-1994)  
Secs. 58-34—58-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 58-51. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Refusal to separate recyclables in compliance with the terms of this article shall be cause for the town's refuse collector to refuse to pick up such garbage or refuse. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to properly dispose of any garbage or refuse not collected by the town's refuse collector due to failure to separate recyclables. 
(b)  For purposes of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this article, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the town may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, postconsumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative of the town who requests access for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper or interfere with such an inspection. 
(c)  Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a citation by local law enforcement officers or other designated person to collect forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this subsection. 
(d)  Penalties for violating this article may be assessed as follows: 
(1)  Any person who violates section 58-63 or 58-66 may be required to forfeit $50.00 for a first violation, $200.00 for a second violation and not more than $2,000.00 for a third or subsequent violation, plus the costs of prosecution. 
(2)  Any person who violates a provision of this article, except section 58-63 or 58-66, may be required to forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation, plus costs of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.22), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-52. - Administration. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the town board. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.08), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-53. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote recycling, composting and resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program as provided in Wis. Stats. § 287.11 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 544. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.02), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-54. - Statutory authority. 
This article is adopted as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 287.09(1)(a). 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.03), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-55. - Applicability. 
The requirements of this article apply to all persons within the town. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.07), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-56. - Separation of recyclable materials. 
Occupants of single-family and two-unit to four-unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the following materials from postconsumer waste: 
(1)  Lead acid batteries. 
(2)  Major appliances. 
(3)  Waste oil. 
(4)  Yard waste. 
(5)  Aluminum containers. 
(6)  Bimetal containers. 
(7)  Corrugated paper or other container board. 
(8)  Foam polystyrene packaging. 
(9)  Glass containers. 
(10)  Magazines. 
(11)  Newspaper. 
(12)  Office paper. 
(13)  Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins 
(14)  Steel containers. 
(15)  Waste tires. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.11), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-57. - Separation requirements exempted. 
The separation requirements of section 58-56 do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Occupants of single-family and two-unit to four-unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send their postconsumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the state department of natural resources that recovers the materials specified in section 58-56 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible. 
(2)  Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than 30 percent of the heat input to the facility is derived from solid waste burned as supplemental fuel. 
(3)  A recyclable material specified in section 58-56(5) through (15) for which a variance has been granted by the state department of natural resources under Wis. Stats. § 287.11(2m), or Wis. Admin. Code NR § 544.14. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.12), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-58. - Care of separated recyclable materials. 
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in accordance with section 58-56 shall be clean and kept free of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil, grease or other nonrecyclable materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical waste and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain and other inclement weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.13), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-59. - Management of lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil and yard waste. 
Occupants of single-family and two-unit to four-unit residences shall manage these items as follows: 
(1)  Lead acid batteries shall be placed curbside or taken to a retail store which accepts batteries for recycling. 
(2)  Major appliances shall be placed curbside. Doors should be removed from refrigerators, freezers and ovens. 
(3)  Waste oil shall be placed curbside in plastic containers with a screw-on top. 
(4)  Yard waste shall be placed curbside periodically upon notice to occupants by the town. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.14), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-60. - Preparation and collection of recyclable materials. 
(a)  Except as otherwise directed by the town, occupants of single-family and two-unit to four-unit residences shall do the following for the preparation and collection of the separated materials specified in section 58-56(5) through (15): 
(1)  Aluminum containers, bimetal containers, glass containers, plastic containers made of PTE and HDPE, and steel containers shall be cleaned of debris and placed in clear plastic bags or other town approved container, separate from paper recyclable materials provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Dry paper shall be placed in clear plastic bags or other town approved container. Dry paper includes magazines, office paper, newspapers, phone books, cardboard boxes and mixed paper. 
(3)  Waste tires shall be set curbside, each household is limited to disposal of two tires per week. Tires must be removed from rims. 
(4)  Large corrugated cardboard boxes and sections (appliance, furniture boxes, etc.) shall be set out empty and free of wood, Styrofoam and plastic packing materials. Other corrugated cardboard boxes shall be flattened and tied. 
(5)  Foam polystyrene packaging and plastic containers made of PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins shall not be included with recyclable materials until such time as the variance on recycling those materials is lifted by the state department of natural resources and the town gives notice that those materials are to be included with recyclable materials. 
(b)  All recyclables are to be set curbside separated from other refuse, by 6:00 a.m. of the day designated by the town for collection, but no earlier than 24 hours prior to the scheduled pickup. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.15), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-61. - Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings. 
(a)  Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in section 58-56(5) through (15): 
(1)  Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials. 
(2)  Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at least semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling program. 
(3)  Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility. 
(4)  Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number. 
(b)  The requirements specified in subsection (a) of this section do not apply to the owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the postconsumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility licensed by the state department of natural resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in section 58-56(5) through (15) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.16), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-62. - Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties. 
(a)  Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in section 58-56(5) through (15): 
(1)  Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials. 
(2)  Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and occupants of the properties about the established recycling program. 
(3)  Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility. 
(4)  Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number. 
(b)  The requirements specified in subsection (a) of this section do not apply to the owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties if the postconsumer waste generated within the facility or property is treated at a processing facility licensed by the state department of natural resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in section 58-56(5) through (15) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.17), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-63. - Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated for recycling. 
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in section 58-56(5) through (15) which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.18), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-64. - Nonrecyclable materials. 
All nonrecyclable materials shall be grouped together and placed in one or more plastic garbage bags or covered garbage cans weighing not more than 70 pounds for garbage collection purposes. Nonrecyclable materials shall include the following: 
(1)  Glass. All Pyrex glass, window glass, light bulb glass, mirrors, broken glass and china shall be considered nonrecyclable glass. 
(2)  Paper. All waxed paper, waxed cardboard, envelopes with gummed labels and envelopes with plastic windows shall be considered nonrecyclable paper. 
(3)  Other garbage and refuse. All other garbage and refuse not qualifying as recyclable material. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.19), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-65. - Items not accepted. 
Items which will not be collected are as follows: 
(1)  Earth, rocks, concrete, construction and demolition materials, and trees or parts thereof, except as stated in section 58-59(4). 
(2)  Hazardous, toxic or infectious materials, including any items recognized as special waste by the state. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.20), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-66. - Collection by unauthorized person. 
From the time of placement at the curb by anyone of the categories described in this article for collection by the town in accordance with the terms hereof, items shall be and become the property of the town or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized by the town to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such items during the 24-hour period commencing at 6:00 p.m. on any day preceding a day designated for collection. Any and each such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1(1.21), 5-9-1994)  
Sec. 58-67. - Placement of bulk items for collection. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to place material for bulk collection more than five working days before the scheduled pickup date for the same. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-7, § 1, 12-27-2012)  
Secs. 58-68—58-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LITTERING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, highways and other public places, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 58-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any materials that are not commonly found upon the property on which they are deposited. Examples of litter regulated under this article are, but are not limited by this list, as follows: Garbage, refrigerators, stoves and other household appliances, furniture, rags, rubbish, brush, stumps, logs, leaves, automobile parts or bodies, carcasses, parts of carcasses, kitchen refuse, human refuse, papers, newspapers, magazines, cardboard and any other materials of like nature and substance. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, § 1(2), 6-10-1985) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-102. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates this article shall be subject, upon conviction, to section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, § 6, 6-10-1985)  
Sec. 58-103. - Littering prohibited. 
No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or rights-of-way of the town or upon any private property or upon the surface of any body of water within the town. Further any matter that is foreign to such areas is considered litter. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, § 1(1), 6-10-1985)  
Sec. 58-104. - Drive-in stands, etc., waste. 
Any person owning or leasing lands abutting on any state, county or town highway in the town and operating thereon ice cream or custard stands, drive-in restaurants or any other similar type business that results in waste materials, shall take all steps as may be necessary to prevent any waste materials to clutter or strew the highways. Waste is included in litter defined in section 58-101 and specifically includes paper napkins, soda cups, paper plates and like materials. The person owning or leasing such lands shall keep such business location clear of any such waste as described in this article on the public highways within 250 feet of the land upon which such business is located if such waste appears to have resulted from the customer use of such lands. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, § 2, 6-10-1985)  
Sec. 58-105. - Rubbish on highways. 
No person shall throw, leave or deposit any weeds, sod, brush or other waste or rubbish in any public highway right-of-way in the town. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, § 3, 6-10-1985)  
Sec. 58-106. - Foreign substances on highways. 
No person shall place or cause to be placed upon any private or public highways in the town any foreign substances or material which is or may be injurious to any vehicle or to any part thereof. No operator of any vehicle shall throw, deposit or permit to be thrown or deposited from such vehicle any type of debris or waste type material. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, § 4, 6-10-1985)  
Sec. 58-107. - Spilling loads. 
No operator of any vehicle transporting waste or foreign materials on the private or public highways in the town shall permit any waste or foreign materials to be spilled from such vehicles on or along the highways. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, § 5, 6-10-1985)  
Chapter 62 - STREETS, HIGHWAYS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(10); any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(11); any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; moving buildings, § 14-231 et seq.; land division and development, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 46; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, ch. 50; littering, § 58-101 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 78. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The introductory language of Ordinance No. 92-2, adopted May 11, 1992, and codified in this section, provided as follows: 
An Ordinance to Prohibit All Signage from Town Rights-of-Way in the Town of Mukwonago, County of Waukesha, Wisconsin. 
Preamble 
Whereas, there have been numerous complaints raised regarding the use of town highway rights-of-way for political, real estate and rummage sales and other signs; and 
Whereas , the installation of signs, whether temporary or permanent, within the town rights-of-way can create a hazard to traffic; and 
Whereas , it is not legal for anyone to place any objects in the town rights-of-way with the exception of those structures and objects that have been consented to by the town board of the Town of Mukwonago, such as driveway culverts, United States mailboxes and newspaper boxes, but it appears necessary that a definitive ordinance be adopted which will allow town highway crews to physically remove any and all signage placed in the town rights-of-way without permission of the town board. 
Now, therefore, the Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago do ordain as follows: 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Signs and other objects in town rights-of-way prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited signs generally. 
(1)  Permanent signs. There will be no permanent signs or objects placed within the rights-of-way of the town highways in the town without the express permission of the town board. 
(2)  Temporary signs. 
a.  No temporary signs or other objects will be placed upon any town owned property. 
b.  Temporary signs of proper legal size may be placed upon the town rights-of-way of privately owned property if the property owner who owns the real estate under the right-of-way grants permission. 
c.  All temporary signs shall be removed within one week after the election, sale of the premises advertised or the completion of the event that was advertised by such sign. 
d.  No temporary signs shall be placed in any location that will obstruct traffic, pedestrians or in any way adversely affect the clear vision of traffic. 
(b)  Exempted items permitted. Exempted from the provisions of this section are United States mailboxes, newspaper delivery boxes and address signs, the face of which is not to be more than four inches high and 25 inches long. 
(c)  Right to remove. If signs are found to be in violation of this section they will be removed by the town road crews under the direction of the town roads committee chair. The signs will be held in the town garage for 30 days and if they are not picked up by the owner, they will be disposed of. 
(d)  Penalty. In addition to the right of the town highway crews to remove such offending objects, any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $10.00 per day nor more than $50.00 per day. Failure to pay any forfeiture hereunder shall subject any violator over the age of 17 years to be sentenced to the county jail until such forfeiture is paid but not to exceed 90 days. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this section shall preclude the town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 92-2, § IV, 5-11-1992)  
Secs. 62-2—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION MINIMUMS 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall attempt to commence any activity in a town street, highway or other public lands without a permit, or who shall violate any other provisions of this article, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each day that the party is deemed to be in violation of this article. Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct offense under the terms of this article. Failure to pay any penalty imposed by a court of law under this article shall subject the defendant to commitment in the county jail or other remedy as provided under law. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(15), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-32. - Public policy. 
It is declared necessary in the interest of public health, safety and welfare that the town regulate the use of town streets, highways and other public land in the town. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(1), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-33. - Regulation. 
All town streets, highways and public lands are subject to the regulations of this article. The term "streets and highways" as used in this article shall include the entire public right-of-way from property line to property line. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(2), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-34. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall open any public street, highway or other public land within the town (other than for the installation of driveway culverts) or erect, install, alter, relocate or modify any cables, wires, pole attachments, poles, conduits or other facilities in the right-of-way of town streets and highways or in public land owned by the town for the purpose of facilitating the transmission of energy, fluids, gases or any other matter in whatsoever form or cause such work to be done without first obtaining a permit. 
(b)  Town board approved blank application forms shall be obtained from the clerk. All permit applications shall be made in writing and shall be filed with the clerk. Satisfactory applications will then be forwarded to the town chair for signature. Applications shall include a description of the street, highway or other public land upon which the proposed work activity will occur, and shall locate the proposed activity on such street, highway or public land. The application shall further show the length, width and depth of the proposed installation in the town street, highway or other public land, and shall state the purpose for which such operation is undertaken. 
(c)  A fee in an amount as established, from time to time, by resolution of the town board shall be charged for such permit and shall be deposited by the applicant with the clerk at the time the application for such permit is made. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(3), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-35. - Permit at work site. 
A copy of the permit and associated application documents shall be available at the work site for review by the permitting authority. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(4), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-36. - Notification of commencement of work activities and restoration review. 
A minimum of 24 hours prior to commencing any permitted work in a town street, highway or other public land the applicant shall notify the clerk, police and fire departments. The town may review restoration work or cause others to review such restoration work either during the time such work is in progress or on a periodic basis. The town will invoice the applicant for restoration review services based upon the actual hourly cost incurred by the town for such services. The applicant shall pay restoration review fees within 30 days of the date of the invoice. In the event that the applicant does not make payment within 30 days of the invoice date the town shall have the right to draw on the applicants letter of credit. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(5), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-37. - Operations within the limits of pavements. 
(a)  Operations within the limits of pavements shall include any material activity that takes place in an area encompassed between the two edges of a pavement. All underground installations within the limits of any paved town street or highway shall be completed by boring such that the existing pavement shall not be disturbed. Underground cavities or voids shall be filled with cellular concrete. All disturbed areas shall be restored to the satisfaction of the permitting authority. Any damage to the pavement shall be immediately repaired by the applicant and shall conform to the requirements of this article. 
(b)  After all reasonable efforts to complete the installation by boring have failed, and upon notification to the clerk, the town may grant permission to complete the permitted work by open cut methods. Where the operations of an applicant in any way damage or disturb the pavement surface the following requirements shall apply: The pavement shall be full-depth sawcut along lines parallel and transverse to the edge of street pavement. The sawcut shall be made one foot outside the wall of the trench at the widest point of the trench such that the pavement shall be supported by a minimum of one foot of undisturbed earth. In the event that the sawed pavement edges are damaged during construction operations the pavement edges shall be sawed again. Within the limits of the pavement and five feet beyond the edge of pavement the trench shall be backfilled to the appropriate elevation with aggregate slurry. A three-inch depth asphaltic concrete pavement patch shall be placed in two 1½-inch depth lifts. The asphaltic concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of the State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (current edition) for surface course (gradation No. 3). Roadway shoulders shall be restored with four-inch depth compacted limestone T.B. (gradation No. 3). 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(6), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-38. - Operations outside of the limits of pavements. 
All disturbed areas shall be restored to existing or better condition, subject to the satisfaction of the permitting authority, using "like-kind" materials (sod for sod, black dirt for black dirt, etc.), except that a minimum of four inches of topsoil shall be provided, and within five feet of the edge of pavement backfill shall be compacted limestone T.B. (gradation No. 2) with four-inch depth compacted limestone T.B. (gradation No. 3) roadway shoulders. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(7), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-39. - Notification of completion of restoration work. 
Upon completion of the restoration the applicant shall file a written notice with the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(8), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-40. - Correction of unsatisfactory restoration work. 
In the event that the permitting authority finds the restoration to be unsatisfactory or that the restoration is not being completed in a timely manner the town may order that corrections be made within a specified five-day period. The town shall have the right to complete emergency repairs without giving prior notice to the applicant. If the town board causes the work to be completed, the cost of such work shall be charged to the applicant. In the event that the applicant does not make payment within 30 days of the invoice date the town shall have the right to draw on the applicants letter of credit. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(9), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-41. - Protection of the public. 
The applicant shall take all reasonable precautions necessary to protect persons and property. A minimum of one lane of through traffic shall be maintained at all times. By the end of each and every work day restoration shall be completed such that a minimum of two traffic lanes shall be available for safe passage, and all driveways shall be available for safe passage. The applicant shall provide all necessary signs, flagmen and lights conforming with the standards set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(10), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-42. - Indemnification. 
The applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the permitting authority, its employees, agents, and assigns, from any cost, claim, suit, liability and/or award which might come, be brought, or be assessed, because of the issuance or exercise of a permit, or because of any adverse effect upon any person or property which is attributed to the partially or entirely completed works of the applicant. Accomplishment of the permitted work, or any part thereof, by or on behalf of the applicant shall bind such applicant to abide by the permit and all its conditions and provisions. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(11), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-43. - Letter of credit. 
(a)  Before a permit is granted, the permit applicant shall file with the town a letter of credit or cash deposit setting forth terms and conditions in a form approved by the municipal attorney in the amount of $10,000.00 as a guarantee that the required restoration and repair will be completed by the applicant. The letter of credit or cash deposit shall continue until released by resolution of the town board. If at any time the applicant is in default of any aspect of this section, or there is less than 60 days' time remaining on the letter of credit or cash deposit on file with the town prior to the expiration date of the same and the same has not been extended, renewed, or replaced, the applicant shall be deemed in violation of the permit and the town board shall have the authority to draw upon the letter of credit or cash deposit. 
(b)  The amount of the letter of credit or cash deposit may be reduced by resolution of the town board as improvements are completed by the applicant; provided, that the remaining amount of the letter of credit or cash deposit is sufficient to secure completion of any remaining work. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(12), 3-29-1995; Ord. No. 2005-3, § 1, 4-13-2005)  
Sec. 62-44. - Telephone, electric and gas utilities. 
In the event the utility itself is performing the work, the letter of credit required in section 62-43 shall be waived. In the event that the utility has contracted the work to a private contractor the letter of credit shall then be required before such contractor shall be permitted to commence work operations. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(13), 3-29-1995)  
Sec. 62-45. - Emergency utility repairs. 
In the event of an emergency a permit shall be obtained retroactive to the work activity, however, the permit application and the work shall in all other respects conform with the requirements of this article. If it is deemed by the town board that the applicant has misrepresented ordinary work activities as an emergency the town board may for each occurrence increase the required amount of the letter of credit by $10,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 95-2, § 1(14), 3-29-1995) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 74.  
Secs. 62-46—62-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNIFORM ADDRESS SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 62-81. - Uniform building address required. 
All existing buildings and all new buildings located within the town shall have placed upon and within easy view of the public highway serving such building an address as provided in this article. The owner of such building shall be responsible for complying with this article. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 1, 7-13-1987)  
Sec. 62-82. - Penalties. 
Any owner of property who fails to duly attach and/or maintain the proper number in such location that such number is clearly visible from the public street serving such property shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $20.00 and not more than $200.00. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Failure to pay such penalty may result in a jail sentence of not to exceed 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 3, 7-13-1987)  
Sec. 62-83. - Uniform address system established. 
(a)  The uniform address system of the town shall be based on and become a part of a uniform address system for the county, as recommended by the county board on March 12, 1957. All provisions of this article relating to the establishment of a uniform address system for the county are hereby approved, and such provisions as are applicable to the town, as more specifically set forth in the following provisions of this article, are hereby adopted by the town board. 
(b)  There is established a uniform system of numbering properties fronting on all streets, highways and rights-of-way in the town, and all existing residences and places of business and all residences and places of business which are hereafter constructed shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)(1)  (2)  Each property south of the east-west base line and facing a street running in a southerly direction shall carry an address indicating its position west of the north-south base line and its position south of the east-west base line. 
(3)  Each property west of the north-south base line and facing a street running in a westerly direction shall carry an address indicating its position either north or south of the east-west base line and its position west of the north-south base line. 
(4)  Properties on diagonal or curvilinear streets shall be numbered the same as or similarly to, properties on northerly or southerly streets if the diagonal or curvilinear streets run more from the north to the south. The same shall hold for diagonal or curvilinear streets which run more from the east to the west in that properties on such streets shall be numbered the same as, or similarly to, properties on westerly streets. 
(5)  Where the general direction of a diagonal or curvilinear street has a deviation of exactly 45 degrees the direction of the street shall be considered as being northerly or southerly. 
(d)  A system of invisible rectangular blocks shall be established as a control grid in the following manner in conformity with the recommended uniform county address system. 
(1)  The established section lines shall form a basis for the block system and in a westerly direction from the eastern boundary of the county the first six sections, extending through the Towns of Menomonee, Brookfield, New Berlin and Muskego, shall be divided into 16 blocks each. These invisible block lines shall have numerical designations of from "124" at the county line, to "220" at the western town lines of Muskego, New Berlin, Brookfield and Menomonee. Westward through the remaining towns the sections shall be divided into ten blocks each and the block lines shall have numerical designations of from "220" to "400," the latter being at the west edge of the county. 
(2)  In a northerly direction from the east-west base line the first and second rows of section shall be divided into 11 blocks each, the third row into eight blocks, and the fourth row into nine blocks. From and including the fifth row northward to the north county line the sections shall be divided into eight blocks each. These invisible block lines shall have numerical designations of from "1," the base line, to "96" at the north county line. 
(3)  In a southerly direction from the east-west base line the first row of sections shall be divided into 13 blocks and the second row into nine blocks. From and including the third row southward to the south county line the sections shall be divided into eight blocks each. These invisible block lines shall have the numerical designations of from "1," the base line, to "111" at the south county line. 
(e)(1)  (2)  The number assigned to each property shall be composed of two parts. The first part, or street designation, shall be composed of a directional letter, "N," "S," or "W" followed by the number of the appropriate block line. 
(3)  The second part of the property number, the block and house designation, shall be composed of a directional letter followed by the number of the appropriate block line plus two additional digits indicting the relative position of the property in the block. 
(4)  For a block which lies south of the east-west base line, the designation of the block shall be by the block line numbers of its north and its east boundaries. For a block which lies north of the east-west base line, the designation of the block shall be by the block line numbers of its south and its east boundaries. 
(5)  Properties and street intersections contained within any block shall bear numbers and directional letters related to the point of intersection of the block boundary lines stipulated in subsection (e)(4) of this section. 
(f)  The point from which any property shall be assigned its proper number shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Where land has been subdivided or platted into lots the center point of the frontage line of each parcel shall be the point of determination. 
(2)  In cases of farm residences or other residences or business places situated on large acreage or away from other development, the point of determination shall be the intersection of the centerline of the principal driveway with the street or highway right-of-way line. 
(3)  The proper number shall be determined and assigned by the clerk who will have the right to request assistance from the building inspector, town engineer or the firm selected by the town board to assist the clerk. 
(g)  Plat book; records. 
(1)  For the purpose of facilitating the establishment and continuing workability of a uniform address system in the town there shall be prepared and kept on file in the office of the clerk a plat book showing the proper addresses of all residences and places of business within the town. The clerk shall inform any person applying therefor of the number or numbers and approved street names belonging to a lot or property. In case of doubt as to the proper address belonging to any property the clerk shall make the final determination utilizing the advice of the building inspector, town engineer or firm retained by the town board for that purpose. 
(2)  Within 30 days after the final approval of any new subdivision or other division of land the clerk shall assign addresses to each new building site. Records shall be kept of the assignments and a copy shall be provided to the developer at his request. 
(h)  When the necessary survey has been completed and each residence and place of business has been assigned its respective number, the owner, occupant or agent shall install or cause to be installed in a conspicuous place upon the premises occupied by each house or place of business controlled by him the number and numbers assigned under the uniform address system provided for by this article. Such number shall be so located on the premises so that it is clearly visible from the public street serving such property. In the event the property involved is served for its access by a private driveway which serves two or more residences, then in that event, the property owner shall install a duplicate of numbers, one of which shall be located at the access off the private driveway to the residence involved, and the other set installed at the location where the private road enters upon the public street or highway. 
(i)  Whenever any residence or place of business shall be erected in the town after the work of establishing a uniform address system has been completed, the owner shall at the time of obtaining a building permit procure the correct number and street name from the building inspector and within 30 days thereafter install the number on the building or premises as provided in subsection (h) of this section. 
(j)  If the owner of any residence or place of business shall neglect for the period of 30 days to duly attach and maintain the proper number on such premises, the building inspector shall serve upon him a notice requiring such owner to properly number the premises. If the owner neglects to do so after service of such notice and a period of ten days elapses, he shall be deemed to have violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 2, 7-13-1987)  
Secs. 62-84—62-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 62-111. - Establishment of standards. 
The town board establishes the following provisions of this article as the minimum requirements for the construction and acceptance of town roads in the town. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-112. - Conformance with state standards. 
All road work shall conform to the requirements of the State of Wisconsin Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (Latest Edition) except as amended by these standards. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 1, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-113. - Submission of plans. 
The subdivider or owner desiring acceptance of a town road shall first submit plans prepared by a competent registered engineer or surveyor and obtain approval of the established grades on all of the proposed roads and site grading prior to proceeding with any grading. Culvert sizes and lengths shall be shown subject to approval by the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 2, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-114. - Grading; slope. 
(a)  The clerk shall be notified three days in advance of the proposed commencement of any subdivision construction related activities. All roads shall be graded from lot line to lot line according to the typical section shown in section 62-129. In no event shall the inslope (from ditch line to road surface) be steeper than a 4:1 slope. If a deeper ditch is required, then the ditch line shall be moved outwardly far enough to maintain an inslope of 4:1. In the event the ditch line is extended outwardly farther than normal, the back slope shall be extended beyond the adjacent property line if necessary. The right-of-way of all town roads shall be a minimum of 66 feet in width. 
(b)  The alternative typical section with concrete curb and gutter may be utilized with town board approval. All storm sewer work shall conform to the requirements of the Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin (latest edition). 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 3, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-115. - Removal of unstable materials; fill. 
Topsoil, mucky soil, peat and unstable material shall be removed below the subgrade of roads and replaced with suitable, sound fill materials satisfactory to the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 4, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-116. - Seeding and sodding of side slopes. 
Side slopes shall be covered with a minimum of four inches of topsoil, prepared, seeded or sodded, fertilized, mulched, watered and maintained for a sufficient period to provide adequate grass cover, prior to acceptance by the town board. Unless otherwise provided by the town, all slopes steeper than three horizontal to one vertical shall be sodded. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 5, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-117. - Dead-end roads, turnarounds and cul-de-sacs. 
On dead-end roads a turnaround or cul-de-sac of not less than 120 feet in diameter shall be provided with a paved turnaround surface of not less than 90 feet in diameter. Standard width shoulders shall be constructed completely around the paved turnaround surface. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 6, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-118. - Certification of subgrade and base course. 
Prior to requests for inspection of the subgrade and base course, the owner shall furnish the town engineer a written certification from the owner's surveyor or engineer that the street conforms to the grades shown on the approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 7, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-119. - Inspection and subgrade roll test. 
When the subgrade preparation is near completion, and a minimum of three working days prior to placement of gravel, the town engineer shall be notified in order to inspect the site and make arrangements for a subgrade roll test. Following a satisfactory subgrade roll test the roads shall be surfaced with a ten inch base course consisting of five inches of compacted limestone T.B., conforming to the requirements of Gradation No. 1 of the Standard Specifications, and five inches of compacted limestone T.B., conforming to the requirements of Gradation No. 2 of the Standard Specifications. The costs of all sieve analysis tests that are required by the town shall be paid by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 8, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-120. - Culverts and guardrails. 
Corrugated metal end sections shall be constructed at each end of all culverts. Culvert posts shall be required at the ends of all culverts crossing road surfaces. The posts shall be marker posts prepared and installed as per the latest edition of the Standard Specifications. These posts shall be furnished and installed by the owner and located as directed by the town engineer. Guardrails, if required by the town engineer, shall be furnished and installed by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 9, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-121. - Specifications for asphalt binder course; shoulder requirements. 
When the placement of gravel base course is near completion, and a minimum of three working days prior to placement of any asphalt pavement, the town engineer shall be notified in order to arrange for a base course roll test. Following a satisfactory base course roll test the roads shall be surfaced with a two-inch asphalt binder course (Gradation No. 1 per the Standard Specifications). Along each side of this pavement, a temporary shoulder shall be installed immediately after the completion of this pavement application. The top or surface width of this shoulder shall be four feet and sloped at one-quarter inch per foot. This shoulder material shall be limestone T.B. conforming to the requirements of Gradation No. 3 of the Standard Specifications. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 10, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-122. - Specifications for final lift of asphalt and tack coat. 
A minimum of seven working days prior to the placement of the asphalt surface course, the town engineer shall be notified in order to make arrangements for review of the existing base course and final lift of asphalt. The 1½-inch thick bituminous surface course, Gradation No. 3 per the state specifications, shall be applied within one year but not before the first application has laid through one winter. A tack coat, as specified by the town, shall be applied at a rate of 0.10 gallons per square yard before the surface course pavement is applied. Immediately after this pavement has been installed, each side of the pavement shall be shouldered for a width of four feet, sloped at one-quarter inch per foot, with limestone T.B. conforming to the requirements of Gradation No. 3 of the Standard Specifications. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 11, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-123. - Street signs. 
All street signs shall be obtained and placed by the owner subject to the approval of the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 12, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-124. - Removal of dirt and debris. 
All public highways are to be cleaned of dirt and debris by those persons who are responsible for depositing this dirt or debris, within an elapsed time period 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 13, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-125. - Acceptance of roads; payment of costs. 
Before final acceptance of a town road, the owner must furnish sufficient proof to the town board, as the town may require, that all costs for road construction have been paid for by such owner. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 14, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-126. - When streets accepted. 
Streets will not be accepted before May 1 or after November 1 of any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 15, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-127. - Maintenance guarantee. 
The owner shall provide a maintenance guarantee in a form acceptable to the town attorney for a period of three years after the date of final acceptance of the streets by the town. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 16, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-128. - Modification of typical cross section for major, collector, commercial or industrial streets. 
The typical cross section shall be modified for all major, collector, commercial or industrial streets to provide for a five-inch asphalt pavement thickness (3½-inch, 1½-inch surface) and ten-foot wide limestone T.B., Gradation No. 3, shoulders. 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, § 17, 4-10-1996)  
Sec. 62-129. - Minimum construction standard cross sections and details. 
The following are the minimum standard cross sections and details for streets, intersections and driveways: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ord. No. 96-R-5, 4-10-1996)  
Chapter 66 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(6); any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(12); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-181 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Delinquent taxes, assessments and fees. 
No initial or renewal license, permit, variance, conditional use approval, special exception, zoning matter or any other discretionary action of the town or any of its boards, commissions, departments or employees shall be: 
(1)  Approved for any applicant who is: 
a.  Delinquent in the payment of any taxes, assessments, special assessments, sanitary sewer assessments, personal property taxes, engineering, legal, administrative or other claim owed to the town. 
b.  Delinquent in the payment of a forfeiture resulting from the violation of any ordinance. 
c.  Delinquent in the payment of any taxes or other claims due to the state or county. 
d.  Has any outstanding warrant or capias from any municipal, state or federal court. 
(2)  Issued for any premises or property for which taxes, assessments, special assessments, sanitary sewer assessments, personal property taxes, engineering, legal, administrative or other claims for the town are delinquent and unpaid. 
(Ord. No. 92-6, 10-12-1992)  
Sec. 66-2. - Penalty for delinquent taxes. 
There is imposed a penalty of one-half percent per month or fraction of a month, in addition to the interest provided for in Wis. Stats. § 74.47(2), on all personal property taxes that are overdue or delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 1, 11-9-1987)  
Secs. 66-3—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ASSESSOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Office created. 
Pursuant to a majority vote of the qualified electors present at the annual town meeting of the town on April 15, 1989, the office of elective assessor is repealed and the office of assessor as an appointive office is created. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, § 1, 5-8-1989)  
Sec. 66-32. - Appointment. 
The appointment to the office of assessor shall be by appointment by the town chair, subject to confirmation of a majority vote of the town board. The term of office for the appointive assessor shall be three years. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, § 3, 5-8-1989)  
Sec. 66-33. - Salary. 
The appointive assessor shall be paid at an annual rate and in such amounts as the town board may from time to time establish. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, § 2, 5-8-1989)  
Sec. 66-34. - Duties. 
The appointive assessor shall comply with all the duties and requirements of statute pertaining to assessors and specifically shall obtain a certification from the state as a certified assessor and will continue to do whatever necessary to maintain such certification. 
(Ord. No. 89-5, § 4, 5-8-1989)  
Sec. 66-35. - Confidentiality of information. 
Whenever the assessor, in the performance of the assessor's duties, requests or obtains income and expense information pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), or any successor statute thereof, then, such income and expenses information that is provided to the assessor shall be held by the assessor on a confidential basis, except, however, that such information may be revealed to and used by persons: in the discharging of duties imposed by law; in discharge duties imposed by office (including, but not limited to, use by the assessor in performance of official duties of the assessor's office and use by the board of review in performance of its official duties); or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided to the assessor under Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is, per Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1). 
(Ord. No. 2000-3, § 1, 5-8-2000)  
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Court, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 38; streets, highways and other public places, ch. 62; off-street parking, § 82-27; off-street loading and unloading, § 82-28. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - State traffic laws adopted. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the current and future statutory provisions in Wis. Stats. § 23.33 (all-terrain vehicles and utility terrain vehicles), Wis. Stats. chs. 340—348, and 350 (snowmobiles), as well as the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code ch. Trans. 305, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a term of imprisonment, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any current or future statute or administrative code section incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future additions, amendments, revisions or modifications of the statute or administrative code sections incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of this state. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 2, 4-10-1996; Ord. No. 2014-O-14, § 1, 3-19-2014)  
Sec. 70-2. - Official traffic map; violations prohibited; signs and markings. 
(a)  Official traffic map established. There is established an official traffic map for the town upon which shall be indicated no parking areas, restricted parking areas, stop signs, arterial intersections, yield signs, one-way highways, school crossings, speed zones, and all other restrictions or limitations contained in this chapter, as from time to time amended or modified by the town board when the law requires the erection or use of official traffic control devices to enforce such restrictions and limitations. 
(b)  Violation prohibited. When official traffic control devices giving notice of the restrictions, prohibitions and limitations shown in the official traffic map are erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any violation of the restrictions, prohibitions or limitations shown on the official traffic map shall be a violation of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Map to be maintained. A copy of the official traffic map shall be maintained and displayed in the office in the town police department. 
(d)  Additions to map. The town board may from time to time make additions to or deletions from the official traffic map by resolution. The chief of police or his designated representative should keep such official traffic map current. 
(e)  Prohibited signs and markers in highways. No person, other than an officer authorized by this chapter to erect and maintain official traffic control devices or his designee, shall place within the limits of any street or highway maintained by the community any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument unless permission is first obtained from the town board. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument placed or maintained in violation of this subsection shall be subject to removal as provided in subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Removal of unofficial signs, markers, signals and traffic control devices. The police department may remove any sign, signal, marking or other device which is placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or law. Any charge imposed against premises for removal of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal, marking or device shall be reported by the police chief to the town board for review and certification at its next regular meeting following the imposition of the charge. Any charge not paid on or before the next succeeding November 15 shall be placed upon the tax roll for collection as other special municipal charges. 
(g)  Vehicle must stop. It shall be unlawful in the town for the operator of any vehicle, and every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, to fail to come to a full and complete stop within 30 feet of the main limits of the intersection, at which has been erected an "official stop sign" or traffic signal, designating an artery for through traffic. 
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2(1.03), 12-14-1989)  
Sec. 70-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  State traffic laws and all other violations as set forth in sections 70-1 and 70-2. Any forfeiture for violation of the state statutes adopted by reference in section 70-1 shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of such statutes as set forth in the Uniform Deposit and Misdemeanor Bail Schedule of the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, including any variations of increases for subsequent offenses, which schedule is adopted by reference. 
(b)  Local traffic laws as set forth in section 70-6 and articles II and IV of this chapter. Any person over the age of 17 years violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. Any person between the ages of 14 and 17 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00 plus costs per each offense or referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. Failure to pay any forfeiture under this subsection shall subject the violator to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 48.17(2). Any person under the age of 14 shall be referred to the proper authorities as provided in Wis. Stats. ch. 48. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.08), 8-12-1985)  
Sec. 70-4. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement procedure. The statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0109, 66.0113, 66.0114, 345.20—345.53, and Wis. Stats. ch. 799 are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications or the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation and enforcement of traffic and municipal ordinance violations. Further the town specifically elects to use the citation method of enforcement. 
(b)  Deposits. 
(1)  Schedule of deposits. The schedule of cash deposits shall be as established from time to time by the town board. Also included in the cash deposit will be a current penalty assessment fee and the current court costs if applicable. 
(2)  Depository. Deposits should be made in cash, money orders or certified check to the clerk of circuit court for the county who shall issue a receipt therefor as required by statute. If the deposit is mailed, the signed statement required by statute shall be mailed with the deposit. 
(3)  Issuance of citations. All sections of this chapter shall be enforced by the town police officer or by the town board or the town board's duly appointed representatives. 
(c)  Nonexclusivity. 
(1)  Other ordinances. Adoption of this section does not preclude the town board from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or other matter. 
(2)  Other remedies. The issuance of a citation under this chapter shall not preclude the town board or any authorized office from proceedings under any other ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.09), 8-12-1985)  
Sec. 70-5. - Erection of official traffic signs and signals. 
The town board is authorized and directed to procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of the state highway division giving such notice of the provisions of sections 70-1, 70-2 and article IV of this chapter as required by law. Signs shall also be erected in such locations and manner authorized by the town board to give adequate warning to users of the street, alley or highway in question. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.05), 8-12-1985)  
Sec. 70-6. - Unsafe driving. 
It shall be unlawful in the town for the owner or operator of any vehicle and every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway to cause by excessive and unnecessary acceleration of the tires unnecessarily to throw stones or ground, nor cause such a vehicle or device to make any loud noise such as would be a disturbance to the public peace or unsafe. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.06), 8-12-1985)  
Sec. 70-7. - Advertising. 
No person shall park in any street any vehicle for the primary purpose of advertising. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 3, 1-9-1984)  
Sec. 70-8. - All night parking prohibited. 
Except in those areas where no parking is permitted at any time, no person shall park on public ways any vehicle for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day between November 1 and March 31 of every winter. Physicians and emergency equipment on emergency calls are excluded from the provisions of this section. The chief of police may give permission to anyone, if the situation requires it, to temporarily park overnight for a period of time not to exceed three nights. The registered owner of the vehicle shall be the responsible party under this section. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 1, 1-9-1984)  
Sec. 70-9. - Snow emergency, parking, etc. 
(a)  Declaration of emergency. The town chair, or in his absence, any member of the town board, may declare a snow emergency during the period of a severe snow storm or immediately thereafter, whenever traffic is impeded by reason of such snowfall, and emergency vehicles, including snow removal equipment and machinery, is impeded. 
(b)  Duration of emergency. Such emergency shall exist so long as traffic remains impeded by the snow and the operation of emergency vehicles is affected thereby, or likely to be affected thereby and the congestion of the traffic upon the streets, alleys or public parking lots of the town. 
(c)  Notice of emergency. The town chair, or other authorized officials, may proclaim the state of emergency through the press, radio or other public means of communication, and may designate and authorize police officers and snow removal personnel to inform the citizenry of the existence of the emergency. 
(d)  Parking prohibited during emergency. No person shall park any vehicle on a street, alley, public parking lot or the rights-of-way thereof during the period of a snow emergency or immediately thereafter until such street, alley or public parking lot has been cleared of snow. Wherever in this section the term "street" or "highway," "alley" or "parking lot" is used, the terms shall include the rights-of-way thereof. 
(e)  Removal of vehicles. The chief of police or member of the town board may remove or cause to be removed, any vehicle which may interfere with the operation of the snow removal equipment or any snow emergency vehicle. The town may charge the costs of removing such vehicle to the owner or the operator thereof. Such vehicle may be removed to a garage within the town or other designated location. 
(f)  Negligent parking on side streets. No person shall permit any vehicle to park or stop upon any uncleared street, alley or parking lot, either during a severe snowstorm, immediately thereafter, or during a state of declared emergency in such manner as to interfere with snow removal equipment, unless with reasonable diligence they could not avoid it. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 2, 1-9-1984)  
Sec. 70-10. - Signs designating parking. 
The town board shall cause to be procured, erected and maintained approved notice of sections 70-8 and 70-9, and such signs shall be placed at all streets, alleys or highways as they enter the town limits. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 4, 1-9-1984)  
Sec. 70-11. - Penalty for sections 70-7 through 70-10. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of sections 70-7 through 70-10 shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution and all costs incurred by the town in removing such vehicle, and in default of payment of the forfeiture and costs of prosecution and removal, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 5, 1-9-1984)  
Sec. 70-12. - Enforcement of sections 70-7 through 70-10. 
(a)  Stipulation of guilt or nolo contendere. The chief of police or officer designated by him, upon request of any person charged with a violation of any provision of sections 70-7 through 70-10 may accept a written stipulation of guilt or nolo contendere and required penalty from such person. Such stipulation shall be as contained in the Uniform Traffic Citation and Complaint provided pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 345.11. 
(b)  Forfeited penalty. The sum to be forfeited pursuant to the stipulation for violation of sections 70-7 through 70-10 shall be in accordance with the Approved Bail Bond Schedule for Traffic Violations, prescribed and in force by the circuit court of the county. In the event that any violation of sections 70-7 through 70-10 is not covered by the bail bond schedule then the forfeited penalty shall be $25.00 plus costs. 
(c)  Bail bonds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the right of the proper authorities to accept bail bonds, deposits, or certificates of money deposits as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.0111. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 6, 1-9-1984)  
Secs. 70-13—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 70-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved vehicle parks means those areas within the town limits which are specifically approved by the town board for operation of off the road vehicles. 
Off the road vehicles means any mini-bikes, trail bikes, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts or other similar self-propelled vehicles (expressly excluding snowmobiles which are regulated by separate ordinance and statute) which are commonly operated off the traveled portion of the public thoroughfare, whether currently being used on or off the road and whether registered or nonregistered. 
Operator means a person who drives or is in actual physical control of the vehicle regulated in this article. 
Public thoroughfare means any public road, street, alley, highway, freeway, interstate, county trunk highway or public right-of-way. 
Traveled portion means the paved or otherwise surfaced portion of the roadway and the prepared shoulder, but shall include the grass area within the statutory limits of the highways and contiguous to the traveled portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.07(4)), 8-12-1985; Ord. No. 2014-O-14, § 2, 3-19-2014) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-32. - Regulations; prohibited operation of off the road vehicles. 
Subject to conflicting provisions of the statutes and Wisconsin Administrative Code, if any, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the town limits any off the road vehicle on any property unless authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.07(1)), 8-12-1985)  
Sec. 70-33. - Authorized operation of off the road vehicles. 
Off the road vehicles may be operated: 
(1)  On the premises owned by the operator or member of the family of the operator if such operator resides on the premises where such vehicle is being operated. Operation of such vehicle shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and be such that the noise from such vehicle does not cause a nuisance and annoyance to other persons. 
(2)  In those areas designated by the town board as "approved vehicle parks" pursuant to the terms and conditions set by the town board. 
(3)  On the premises owned by someone other than the operator if the operator possesses a specific permission slip signed by all the adult owners, adult occupants, adult renters and adult residents of the proposed premises authorizing use, operation of such vehicle shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and be such that the noise from such vehicle does not cause a nuisance or annoyance to other persons. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.07(2)), 8-12-1985)  
Sec. 70-34. - Violations by minors. 
No parent or guardian of any child under the age of 18 years shall authorize, allow or permit such child to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.07(3)), 8-12-1985)  
Secs. 70-35—70-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Junked vehicles, § 82-14. 
 
Sec. 70-61. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be subject, upon conviction, to a forfeiture of not less than $25.00, nor more than $100.00, together with the cost of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid for a period not exceeding 90 days. 
(b)  Each violation and each day a violation of this article continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 2, 5-13-1985)  
Sec. 70-62. - Vehicles not to be abandoned. 
(a)  Determination of abandonment. No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public highway or private or public property, for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. Except as otherwise provided in this article whenever any vehicle has been left unattended without the permission of the property owner for more than 48 hours, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance. A motor vehicle shall not be considered an abandoned vehicle when it is out of ordinary public view or when it is currently registered or designated as not abandoned by a duly authorized town official. 
(b)  Vehicles on public highways. No person may cause a motor vehicle to be abandoned within the meaning of subsection (a) of this section on or along any state, county or town highway or on any public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 1(1), 5-13-1985)  
Sec. 70-63. - Sale of junked or abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Generally. Any vehicle in violation of section 70-62 shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of under section 70-34. 
(b)  Storage and sale. 
(1)  Notice to owner. Any vehicle which is deemed abandoned shall be retained in a convenient place of storage for a minimum of ten days after certified mail notice has been sent to the owner and to the lienholder of record to permit reclamation of the vehicle upon payment of accrued charges. Such notice shall set forth the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, the place where the vehicle is being held and shall inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle. The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their rights to reclaim the vehicle under this article shall be deemed a waiver of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle. Further, such notice shall state that a due process hearing as established by the town may be requested within five days of receipt of the notice in writing to the clerk. Each stored vehicle not reclaimed by its owner within the time listed in this subsection may be sold. The town may dispose of the vehicle by sealed bid or auction sale. At such public sale, the highest bid for any such motor vehicle shall be accepted unless the highest bid is deemed inadequate by the town, in which event all bids may be rejected. If all bids are rejected or no bid is received, the town may either readvertise the sale, adjourn the sale to a definite date, sell the motor vehicle at a private sale or junk the vehicle. Any interested person may offer bids on each abandoned vehicle to be sold. 
(2)  Procedure for bidding. Public notice of the sale, whether it is by auction or sealed bid, shall be posted in accordance with local procedures. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the last owner of record and lienholder of record. 
(3)  Procedure after sale. Upon the sale of the abandoned vehicle the town shall supply the purchaser with a completed Form MVD 2419-77 which will enable such purchaser to obtain a registration certificate of title for the vehicle. Purchaser shall have ten days to remove the vehicle from the storage area but shall pay a reasonable storage fee if established by the town for each day the vehicle remains in storage after the second business day subsequent to the sale date. Ten days after the sale, if the vehicle has not as yet been claimed by the purchaser, the purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be deemed to again be abandoned and may be sold again. Any list of vehicles to be sold by the town shall be made available to any interested person or organization which makes a written request for such list. The clerk may charge a fee for the preparation of such list. 
(4)  Notice to motor vehicle department. Within five days after the sale or disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the clerk shall advise the motor vehicle department of the sale or disposition on the appropriate form supplied by the motor vehicle department. 
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 1(2), (3), 5-13-1985)  
Sec. 70-64. - Form of letter notification regarding junked or abandoned vehicles. 
The following shall be the form of letter notification regarding junked or abandoned vehicles: 
RE: Junked and Abandoned Vehicles 
Dear ____________ : 
The Police of the Town of Mukwonago have inspected your property at ____________ , Town of Mukwonago, Waukesha County, Wisconsin. 
The Police has determined that the following vehicle (or vehicles) is an abandoned or junked vehicle in violation of town ordinance and Wis. Stats. § 342.40:   
____________   
____________   
____________ 
You are hereby notified that you are to legally dispose of the vehicle(s) within ten days of the date of receipt of this letter. 
In the event the vehicle(s) remain(s) after such ten days, the Police will impound such vehicle(s) for a period of ten days after which the vehicle(s) will be legally disposed of by the Town. All costs incurred shall be charged first against the value received for the vehicle(s) and if insufficient, the costs shall be assessed against your property. It is possible that the Town may issue a citation and/or a civil action against you if this order is not complied with. 
Thank you for your cooperation. 
Very truly yours, 
____________ 
RE: Accumulation of Junk 
Dear ____________ : 
On the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , the Building Inspector of the Town of Mukwonago inspected your property located at ____________ , Town of Mukwonago, Waukesha County, Wisconsin. The Building Inspector observed the accumulation of junk in violation of the Town ordinances as follows:   
____________   
____________   
____________   
____________   
You are hereby notified that you must take whatever steps are necessary to clean up your property and dispose of the accumulation of junk within ____________ days of the receipt of this letter. 
To allow the unsightly accumulation of junk to remain is in violation of the Town Ordinances. If this condition is not corrected within the time ordered above, the following could result: 
1. The Town entering upon your property and removing such accumulation and assessing the cost thereof to your property if you do not pay it, and/or; 
2. The issuance of a citation against you for the violation of the Town Ordinance. 
If you want to be heard on this matter, you may appear before the Plan Commission of the Town of Mukwonago on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
Thank you for your cooperation. 
Very truly yours, 
____________ 
(Ord. No. 85-3, 5-13-1985)  
Sec. 70-65. - Enforcement procedures. 
The following procedure shall regulate junk and abandoned vehicles in the town: 
(1)  On a semiannual basis, the police department shall conduct a visual inspection within the town. Any violations observed shall be brought to the building inspector for review. 
(2)  The building inspector shall review the complaint to determine if it falls into noncompliance. 
(3)  If noncompliance is determined, a written ten-day notice to comply shall be given at the site by the building inspector (Example 1). 
(4)  Within the ten days, the building inspector shall send a standard form letter to the owner, along with a copy of the original ten-day notice to comply, explaining the law and fines that could incur (Example 2). 
(5)  After ten days, if not found to be compliant, the building inspector will forward a copy of Examples 1 and 2 to the police department. The police department shall begin the issuance of daily fines until the vehicle has been removed. 
 
 
(Ord. of 6-9-1999)  
Secs. 70-66—70-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 70-91. - Parking limitations. 
It shall be unlawful in the town for the owner or operator of any vehicle and every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway to park, stop or leave standing any such vehicle or device at the curb, shoulder, or edge or any highway area, school entrance area, roadway or fire land in the town upon which or upon a portion of which has been erected a "No Parking" sign, designating the limits or area within which there is to be no such parking. It shall further be unlawful for the owner and operator of any such vehicle or device to park, stop or leave such vehicle on such a highway, not at the curb, shoulder or edge thereof, or alongside any other vehicle already properly parked along such highway. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.04), 8-12-1985)  
Sec. 70-92. - Miscellaneous no parking zones. 
No owner or operator of any vehicle and every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway may park, stop or leave standing any such vehicle or device at the curb, shoulder, or edge of the following streets located in the town: 
(1)  North side of Section Road between Beulah Road and Whitmore Road. 
(2)  Both sides of Phantom Woods Road from Circle Drive northwesterly to a point 525 feet from Circle Drive. 
(3)  Both sides of Beulah Road within 300 feet of either end of the Mukwonago River Bridge between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 94-6, § 1, 6-13-1994)  
Sec. 70-93. - Specific parking restrictions. 
(a)  Fire station and hydrants. No operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle within 30 feet of the driveway entrance to the local fire station or within 15 feet from any fire hydrant or in any space marked "NO PARKING." 
(b)  Street storage prohibited. The parking limits for any vehicle shall be 24 hours and no person shall park his vehicle exceeding this time limit on any street or highway or town parking lot. 
(c)  Parked trucks; unloading. No person shall park a truck on town streets in a manner to block the free flow of traffic or endanger safety. 
(d)  Manner of parking. All vehicles shall park within those lines marked by paint on town streets whether for the purpose of angular parking or parallel parking to the curb. No person shall obstruct a driveway when parking a vehicle on a town street. 
(e)  Blocking a driveway. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on or blocking the entrance to any private driveway or garage without the consent of the owner of such driveway or garage so as to prevent the free passage of vehicles. Such vehicle may, at the direction of a town police officer, be removed as provided in this Code. 
(f)  Blocking traffic. Whenever a vehicle is found to be parked or left standing on a highway in such a manner as to obstruct traffic, such obstruction constitutes an emergency condition detrimental to the health, safety, welfare and good order of the general public in that the movement of food, fuel supplies, medical care, fire, health and police protection is impaired, Wis. Stats. § 166.23, and such vehicle may, at the direction of a police officer for the town, be removed as provided in this article or statutes and Misdemeanor Bail Schedule of the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses, which schedule is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § 1(1.04), 8-12-1985; Ord. No. 94-6, § 2, 6-13-1994)  
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; CATV, ch. 22; land division and development, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, highways and other public places, ch. 62; emergency utility repairs on streets and highways, § 62-45. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Outhouses and privies. 
No outside toilets shall be erected within the town after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Portable toilets shall be allowed during construction only and for special events as approved by the town board. Portable toilets shall be removed from construction sites when permanent toilets are functional. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.11), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 74-2. - Appeals and variances for holding tanks. 
(a)  In that the town prohibits the installation of holding tanks for new residential construction, any person denied permission to install and operate a residential holding tank for new construction by the town, may petition the town board for reconsideration of the town's denial and seek a variance to the prohibition. 
(b)  The town board shall upon receipt of any such petition as soon as practical call a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given pursuant to the open meeting law. 
(c)  As soon as possible after such public hearing, the town board shall act on such petition either granting, denying, or conditionally granting the variance. In determining whether to grant, deny or conditionally grant the variance, the town board shall look to the standards as set forth in the Wisconsin Administrative Code and to the guidelines and past practice of the county. 
(d)  The town shall inform the state department of commerce in writing of each variance granted. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.08(5)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 74-3. - Permit and conditions for holding of sewage waste. 
No person shall install, operate, repair, maintain or reconstruct any device designed for the holding of sewage wastes in the town unless a permit therefor has been obtained under the conditions set out in sections 74-4 through 74-6. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.08(1)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 74-4. - Holding tank agreement. 
An agreement form will be provided by the town and shall be executed by the applicant for a holding tank. Such agreement shall provide as follows: 
(1)  The applicant (owner) shall agree with the town to install a holding tank of adequate size for the use proposed as approved by the town engineer or plumbing inspector. 
(2)  The applicant (owner) shall agree to conform to all rules and regulations, ordinances and codes of the town, as well as all regulations and statutes of the state or the county, both in the installation and the maintenance of such holding tank. 
(3)  The applicant (owner) shall agree to the periodic pumping of such holding tank whenever necessary at his expense by a state approved or licensed tank pumping firm. 
(4)  The applicant (owner) shall agree that at any time such holding tank is not pumped as necessary, the town or any designated officer thereof shall have the right on 24 hours' written notice to hire or otherwise accomplish the emptying of such tank at the expense of the owner. The town shall add to such cost a 15 percent additional charge for the administration of this section. The total amount owed to the town if such amount remains unpaid for 30 days shall be charged against the cash bond deposited by the owner which the owner shall thereupon replenish such cash bond by the same amount. In addition to all other methods of collecting the expenses incurred herein, the town treasurer may place such charge as a special charge against the real estate taxes of the owner and may be collected as such according to statute, including the right by the town to replenish such cash bond if owner refuses. 
(5)  The owner will agree in such agreement to grant to the town full right, license and authority to enter upon their property for inspection, pumping and transportation from such holding tank. 
(6)  As a further condition for the granting of such holding tank permit, owners agree that they will pay all special assessments due if and when a sanitary sewer becomes available, that they will grant all necessary easements for the installation of the holding tank. The agreement signed by such owners shall constitute a waiver of all special assessment procedures and amounts. Owners further shall agree that they will connect up to the town's sanitary sewer within 60 days of the date the town's sanitary sewer becomes available. In addition, when the town's sanitary sewer is available, owners agree to properly abandon the holding tank and appurtenances as required by law, the town engineer or plumbing inspector. 
(7)  Owners shall simultaneously with the agreement referred to herein deposit with the town a cash bond in an amount as determined by the town board from time to time to guarantee to the town reimbursement for any and all expenses incurred by the town in alleviating any nuisance occurring as a result of this holding tank. The cash bond shall at all times be maintained constantly at the amount originally deposited. Such bond shall be returned to the owner upon proper connection to the public sewer and abandonment of such holding tank. Interest earned, if any, by such cash deposit shall be the property of the town as an administrative charge by the town for administering such cash bond. 
(8)  The agreement referred to in this section shall be made a part of this section and shall be executed in recordable form, shall contain the legal description of the owner's property benefited, and shall be recorded with the register of deeds for the county. All parties in interest to the owner's property shall execute and be parties to the agreement. 
(9)  The agreement shall continue so long as the holding tank is maintained and shall terminate upon connection to public sewer and abandonment of such holding tank. 
(10)  The agreement, upon execution by the owner, shall thereupon become a part of this section and enforceable as a part of this section as if it were contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.08(2)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 74-5. - Inspection of holding tanks. 
In the event a violation ever occurs causing a nuisance, the town may inspect such holding tank on a monthly basis to ensure that future violations do not occur. The fee for these inspections shall be the responsibility of the owner and in the event the owner does not pay such inspection fees, the costs may then be added to the tax roll as a special real estate charge. The amount of the inspection fee shall be as determined from time to time by the town board. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.08(3)), 10-9-1996)  
Sec. 74-6. - Penalties for violation of holding tank agreement. 
Any violation of the holding tank agreement will subject the owner not only to the remedies provided in this article, but also to any applicable penalties in section 1-8 for violations of this article or of any other applicable ordinance, statute or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, § 2(2.08(4)), 10-9-1996)  
Secs. 74-7—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SLUDGE 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Site and property site mean the property on which the applicant intends to apply sludge. Each real estate tax parcel as found on the tax rolls of the town shall constitute a separate "site" or "property site," or as defined by the town board. 
Sludge means the accumulated residual solids (usually in liquid form) resulting from the treatment of municipal or private wastewaters. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(A), 12-12-1983) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-32. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates this article shall be subject, upon conviction to a forfeiture of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $5,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, for a period not exceeding 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(K), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-33. - Separate violations. 
Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(L), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-34. - Cause for withdrawal of permit. 
Any violation of this article by any permittee will be cause for the town board to withdraw permits already issued and suspend them for 12 months from the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(M), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-35. - Permit required. 
No person shall apply or allow to be applied to lands under their ownership, lease or control, sludge to any land located within the limits of the town without first having obtained a permit from the town board. This section shall apply to both existing and proposed sludge disposal operations. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(B), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-36. - Application. 
Written application for a permit to apply sludge on any lands located within the town shall be made to the clerk. The application shall state: 
(1)  The applicant shall be the owner of the treatment facility generating the sludge. 
(2)  The name and address of the applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation, the name, address and registered agent of the corporation. 
(3)  The post office and legal description of the site to be used. 
(4)  The names and addresses of the landowners and haulers involved with the proposed disposal of the sludge. A copy of any contract related to the proposed disposal shall be appended to the application. 
(5)  The length of time the applicant intends to apply sludge on the site or sites described in the application. 
(6)  The name or names and address of the owners of any other site or sites upon which the applicant is presently applying sludge, whether or not such site or sites are within or without the corporate limits of the town. The requirements of this subsection may be waived by the town board. 
(7)  Names and addresses of all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the proposed application site. Each property owner will be given a copy of this article by the applicant. 
(8)  The volume and content of sludge that is proposed to be applied. In addition to the nutritional content of sludge, applicant will supply exact and detailed analysis of the sludge metal content. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(C), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-37. - Referral to plan commission. 
The clerk shall refer all applications for a permit under this article to the plan commission for their recommendation to the town board. The recommendation of the plan commission shall be presented to the town board within 60 days after such application for a permit is referred to the plan commission by the clerk. Upon receipt of such recommendation from the plan commission, the town board shall set a date for hearing on the application for such permit and the clerk shall notify the applicant of the date of such hearing. The applicant may present such evidence as it deems necessary to the town board at such hearing in support of its application for a permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(D), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-38. - Permit fee. 
The applicant shall accompany his application with a nonrefundable annual permit fee as set by town board resolution from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(E), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-39. - Granting of permit. 
The town board shall, after receiving the recommendations of the plan commission and after a hearing thereon as provided in this article, issue a permit under this article if it finds that all the provisions of this article are complied with, including the following: 
(1)  That the sludge will be immediately incorporated with the soil, by injection only. (Absolutely no spreading.) This subsection applies only to sludge applicants. 
(2)  That the sludge will be applied in accordance with the appropriate regulations of the state department of natural resources and that approval has been obtained by the applicant from the state department of natural resources to apply sludge to the real estate described in the application. 
(3)  That no sludge will be applied at a distance less than 500 feet from the nearest residence not located on an actual application site. 
(4)  That the sludge will not be applied at a distance less than 500 feet from the nearest private water supply well and that the application of the sludge shall not constitute a possible contamination source for any water supply, irrespective of the location of the water supply from the disposal site. 
(5)  That the sludge will not be applied at a distance less than 500 feet from any stream, lake, pond or other channelized waterway. 
(6)  That the sludge will not be applied to any soil which, because of its composition, would tend to create a health hazard. 
(7)  That the applicant has applied for and received all appropriate licenses from county or state licensing authorities. 
(8)  That a copy of all reports required by the county or state be sent to the clerk at the same time as sent to the county or state. 
(9)  That the application of sludge will not constitute a nuisance in any manner. 
(10)  That the application of sludge will only take place during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. and will not be applied to any site on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday. 
(11)  Absolutely no town roads will be used for transporting sludge without prior approval of the town board. The applicant must agree that all road damage or cleanups caused by applicant will be paid for by applicant and that monies can be taken from the cash bond if not paid within 30 days of billing. 
(12)  The term "wastewater sludge" shall be applied only to state department of natural resources approved farm fields in accord with the current state and federal guidelines. The amount of sludge which can be applied to a parcel of land in any one given year shall be based on nutritional requirements and the allowable sludge metals as established by the most recent state department of natural resources and Environmental Protection Agency regulations. In no case shall more than two percent of the permitted total allowable amount of any one or more metals be applied to the land per year. The total allowable amount of metals shall be determined using the soil exchange capacity as analyzed by an approved laboratory for that specific parcel. 
(13)  In the event the plan commission or the town board requests an independent sample and test of any proposed sludge, applicant agrees to allow the taking of a sample and such independent test at any time or place requested so that the integrity of the sample is preserved. In the event that independent test results are found to vary significantly from the content of the sludge as presented by the applicant, applicant shall be prohibited from releasing such sludge, and shall submit to a complete revaluation of future sludge applications in the town. Test results showing that more than two percent of the total soil capacity has been applied in any given calendar year shall constitute a significant variance under this subsection. Costs of any and all such independent tests shall be the responsibility of applicant. 
(14)  If the town board does not find affirmatively with reference to any of the provisions in subsections (1) through (13) of this section, the application for such permit shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(F), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-40. - Term of permit. 
A permit issued under this article shall be for a period commencing on April 1 in the year of application and ending on December 1 in the year of application. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(G), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-41. - Testing. 
The town board may require the applicant to conduct soil testing to determine the ability of the soil upon the premises described in the application to absorb sludge. The town board may also require a sludge analysis every time sludge is used. The manner and type of such soil test and sludge analysis shall be determined by the town board and all costs and expenses for such soil test and sludge analysis shall be paid by the applicant. All test results must be presented to the planning board with application; the cost of which will come out of the bond if not paid within 30 days of billing. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(H), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-42. - Bond. 
Before such permit shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the clerk a cash bond in the sum of $2,500.00 and a surety bond in the sum of $10,000.00 and proof of liability insurance conditioned upon and as a guarantee that the applicant will fully abide by all of the terms and provisions of this article and any other ordinance applicable thereto and any rules and regulations imposed by the town board as conditions for granting of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(I), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-43. - Notification. 
At least 72 hours prior to sewerage sludge disposal, written notification must be made to the town board at Route 4, W320 S8315 Beulah Road, Mukwonago, Wisconsin 53149, and any resident within 1,500 feet of the site to be used. The notice will also include what roads will be used. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, § 1(J), 12-12-1983)  
Sec. 74-44. - Permit application form for disposal of sewerage sludge. 
The permit application form for disposal of sewerage sludge is available in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 83-10, 12-12-1983)  
Chapter 78 - WATERWAYS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The introductory language of Ordinance No. 88-4 adopted July 11, 1988, regarding Lower Phantom Lake, and Ordinance No. 92-5, adopted July 13, 1992, regarding Upper Phantom Lake, Spring Lake and Willow Spring Lake, and codified in this chapter, provided as follows: 
LOWER PHANTOM LAKE 
Whereas , the Town of Mukwonago has within its corporate boundaries a beautiful spring fed lake known as Lower Phantom Lake; and 
Whereas , Lower Phantom Lake is a 433 acre impoundment created and controlled by a mill dam on the Mukwonago River; and 
Whereas, Lower Phantom Lake consists largely of marsh land; and 
Whereas, Lower Phantom Lake is heavily used, mainly by the angler and wildlife enthusiast, and its greatest attribute is as a fishery; and 
Whereas, the Phantom Lakes Management District was given the power to protect and monitor the ecosystem, and it is their conclusion that there should be laws that govern the use of the lake. 
Therefore , the Town of Mukwonago, in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare, deems it necessary that special regulations be adopted to protect life, property, and environmental quality of Lower Phantom Lake. 
UPPER PHANTOM LAKE 
Whereas, the Town of Mukwonago has within its corporate boundaries a beautiful spring fed lake known as Upper Phantom Lake; and 
Whereas , Upper Phantom Lake is surrounded by year round homes whose occupants enjoy the aesthetic beauty and serenity provided by the view; and 
Whereas, Upper Phantom Lake is heavily used by anglers, canoers, sail boaters, sail boarders, boaters, campers, picnickers, and water skiers to such an extent that the watershed suffers from over-use; and 
Whereas, the Phantom Lakes Management District was given the power to protect and monitor the ecosystem, and it is their conclusion that there should be laws that govern the use of the lake. 
Therefore, the Town of Mukwonago, in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare, deems it necessary that special regulations be adopted to protect life, property, and environmental quality of Upper Phantom Lake. 
SPRING LAKE 
Whereas , the Town of Mukwonago has within its corporate boundaries a beautiful spring fed lake known as Spring Lake; and 
Whereas, Spring Lake is a shallow body of water abundant with aquatic vegetation and supporting fish life; and 
Whereas, Spring Lake is heavily used, mainly by the angler and wildlife enthusiast, and its greatest attribute is as a fishery; and 
Whereas, the Department of Natural Resources has stated that large portions of Spring Lake are not suited for motor powered boats; and 
Whereas , Spring Lake's water quality is suited for swimming: the gradual slope of the basin with a gravel and sandy bottom enhances the swimming potential. Due to the shallowness of Spring Lake at the shoreline, swimmers must travel a substantial distance from the shoreline in order to be able to swim; and 
Whereas , the marsh frontage contiguous with the open water of Spring Lake is a prime pheasant and muskrat habitat; and 
Whereas, wildlife observation opportunities are ideal as the aesthetic features are rated highly by the department of natural resources. 
Therefore , the Town of Mukwonago, in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare deems it necessary that special regulations be adopted to protect life, property, and environmental quality of Spring Lake. 
WILLOW SPRING LAKE 
Whereas, the Town of Mukwonago has within its corporate boundaries a beautiful spring fed lake known as Willow Spring Lake; and 
Whereas, Willow Spring Lake is an impoundment of approximately 43 acres situated in an environmentally sensitive area; and 
Whereas , the majority of lands adjacent to Willow Spring Lake have Houghton muck soils which exhibit a high erosion potential and wakes created by outboard motors could accelerate the erosion problem; and 
Whereas, the most prevalent macrophyte in Willow Spring Lake is myriophyllum sp. (Parrot's Feather). This plant reproduces through fragmentation. Any broken pieces of this plant will sprout and start a new plant. Operation of motor boats through these weed beds will increase weed growth in Willow Spring Lake decreasing the quality of the lake for sailing, swimming, and other open-water activities; and 
Whereas , the wetlands surrounding Willow Spring Lake have been classified by the Waukesha County Naturalist, and the survey indicated that the environmental quality of the wetlands around Willow Spring Lake were of exceptional quality and included observations of plant and animal species which would be disturbed by operation of outboard motors. Observation of ospreys, great blue herons, rookeries of little green herons, and pied-billed grebes indicate the importance of maintaining Willow Spring Lake in as natural a state as possible, including minimizing wildlife disturbance by outboard motors; and 
Whereas, Willow Spring Lake ice conditions are treacherous throughout the winter as numerous springs, Spring Creek, and the Spring Creek outlet modify ice conditions resulting in weakened ice cover and hazardous conditions for vehicular travel. 
Therefore, the Town of Mukwonago, in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare, deems it necessary that special regulations be adopted to protect life, property, and environmental quality of Willow Spring Lake. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; land division and development, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 46; streets, highways and other public places, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to provide safe and healthful conditions for the enjoyment of aquatic recreation consistent with public rights and interests and the capability of the water resources. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 1(2.11), 6-8-1992)  
Sec. 78-2. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the waters of Lower Phantom Lake, Spring Lake, Willow Spring Lake, Upper Phantom Lake, Rainbow Spring Lakes, Mukwonago County Park Lakes, the Fox River, the Mukwonago River, Spring Creek, and Jericho Creek within the jurisdiction of the town. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the officers of the water safety patrol unit and police of the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 1(2.12), 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.01), 7-13-1992)  
Sec. 78-3. - State boating and water safety laws adopted. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the current and future statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to water traffic, boats, boating and related water activities in Wis. Stats. §§ 30.29, 30.50—30.71, 30.81, 23.33(3)(h) and 350.10(1)(i), exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any current or future statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future additions, amendments, revisions, or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of the waterways of the state. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.02), 7-13-1992)  
Sec. 78-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Boat and vessel mean every description of watercraft other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water including sailboards and inflatables. 
Designated anchorages means an area of water established and marked as an anchorage by lawful authority. 
Motorboat means any boat equipped with propulsion machinery whether in use or not. 
Motor vehicle means any kind of device or thing designed or utilized for propulsion or movement using a motor, whether internal combustion design or not, and includes all vehicles which are of any type or kind in any way self-propelled, but is not limited to any automobile, minibike, go-cart, trail bike, all-terrain vehicle, motorcycle, moped, jeep, motor truck or snowmobile. 
Operate and use mean: 
(1)  When used in reference to a motorboat or vessel, to navigate or employ. 
(2)  When used in reference to a motor vehicle, to drive or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
Public access means any access to the water by means of public property. 
Shore zone means all surface water within 100 feet of any shore. 
Slow-no-wake means that speed at which a boat moves as slowly as possible while still maintaining steerage control. 
Swimming zone means an authorized area marked by regulatory markers to designate a swimming area. 
Waterskiing means the use of waterskis, aquaplane, surfboards, innertubes or any similar device while being towed. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 1(2.14), 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.03), 7-13-1992) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-5. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement procedure. The statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0109, 66.0113, 66.0114, 30.29, 30.50—30.71 and ch. 799, are adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation and enforcement of boating ordinance violations. Further, the town specifically elects to use the citation method of enforcement. 
(b)  Issuance of citations. All sections of this chapter shall be enforced by a town police officer, lake patrol officer, or by the town board or the town board's duly appointed representatives. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.10), 7-13-1992)  
Sec. 78-6. - Penalty. 
(a)  State boating and water safety laws and all other violations as set forth in section 78-3. Any forfeiture for violation of the statutes adopted by reference in section 78-3 shall conform to the forfeiture permitted to be imposed for violation of such statutes as set forth in the Uniform Wisconsin Deposit and Bail Schedule for Conservation, Boating, Snowmobile, and ATV Violations, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses, which schedule is adopted by reference. 
(b)  Local boating laws as set forth in sections 78-7 through 78-12. Any person over the age of 16 years violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.09), 7-13-1992)  
Sec. 78-7. - General rules for all waters. 
(a)  Racing prohibited. No person shall operate a motorboat in a race or speed contest with any other motorboat except as provided in properly regulated races, regattas, sporting events and exhibitions authorized by the town board. 
(b)  Swimming regulations. 
(1)  Swimming from boats. No person shall swim from any unmanned boat unless such boat is anchored. 
(2)  Distance from shore or raft. Unless in a designated swimming zone no person shall swim more than 150 feet from shore or more than 50 feet from a diving raft unless accompanied by a boat for the protection of the swimmer and as an aid to other boats in determining the location of the swimmer, and such swimmer shall not be more than 50 feet from the accompanying boat. 
(3)  Hours limited. No person shall swim more than 150 feet from the shoreline between sunset and sunrise. 
(4)  Swimming zones. The town board may, by resolution, designate swimming areas and cause such areas to be appropriately marked. 
Editor's note— The introductory language of Ordinance No. 97-1, adopted July 9, 1997, and codified in subsection (b)(5) of this section, provided as follows: 
Whereas, the Town of Mukwonago has within its corporate boundaries a waterway (hereinafter "channel") that connects Upper and Lower Phantom Lake; and 
Whereas , said channel is heavily used by anglers, canoeists, and boaters; and 
Whereas, said channel is approximately 150 feet in length, and only about 40 feet in width; and 
Whereas , people who swim in said channel are at risk of injury from passing watercraft, and they obstruct and create a hazard for said watercraft; and 
Whereas , the Town of Mukwonago, in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare, deems it necessary that special regulations be adopted regarding the use of said channel, 
Now, therefore , the Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago, Waukesha County, State of Wisconsin, DO ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS: 
(5)  Swimming, wading, or otherwise loitering in a channel between Upper Phantom Lake and Lower Phantom Lake. No person shall swim, wade, or otherwise loiter in any way, in the channel between Upper Phantom Lake and Lower Phantom Lake, at any time except as expressly authorized in writing by the Town of Mukwonago Chief of Police. No parent shall allow or fail to prevent their minor child from, swimming, wading or otherwise loitering in any way in the channel between Upper Phantom Lake and Lower Phantom Lake, at any time. 
(c)  Waterskiing. All skiing shall be done in a counter-clockwise pattern. The town board may designate specific drop-off and pick-up areas. 
(d)  Littering prohibited. No person shall deposit, place or throw from any boat, raft, pier, platform, motorized vehicle or similar structure or from or on the adjoining shoreline any cans, papers, bottles, debris, refuse, garbage, solid or liquid waste into the waters or upon the frozen surface. 
(e)  Icebound waters. The following provisions shall apply to icebound waters: 
(1)  Speed of motor vehicles. At any time, no person shall operate a motor vehicle that is not a snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, or motorcycle, as these terms are defined in chapter 340 of the Wisconsin Statutes, in excess of 15 miles per hour. Snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, and motorcycles shall not exceed 40 miles per hour between sunrise and sunset unless pre-approval from the town board has been received. Snowmobile, all-terrain vehicles and motorcycles shall not exceed 20 miles per hour between sunset and sunrise. The current Wis. Stats. §§ 350.10(1)(i) and 23.33(3)(h) will supersede the above speed limit. 
(2)  Negligent operation. No person may operate or use a motor vehicle upon the icebound waters in a careless, negligent or reckless manner to endanger his life, property, or person or the life, property or person of another. 
(3)  Liability of local government. All traffic on the icebound inland waters shall be at the risk of the traveler. 
(4)  Operation of snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles. See Wis. Stats. §§ 350.10(1)(i) and 23.33(3)(h). 
(f)  Operation of motor vehicles in water prohibited. Any operation of motor vehicles in navigable waters is prohibited except as provided in Wis. Stats. § 30.29(3). 
(Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.04), 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 97-1, § 1(2.04(B)(5), 7-9-1997; Ord. No. 2005-5, § 1, 10-19-2005; Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1, 4-21-2010)  
Sec. 78-8. - Aquaplanes and parasailing. 
Aquaplaning and parasailing are not allowed at any time. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.05), 7-13-1992)  
Sec. 78-9. - Specific rules for Lower Phantom Lake. 
(a)  Channel ways. The town board designates the following channel ways to be slow-no-wake areas: The portion of the channel that specifically lies between the two points of land which connect Lower and Upper Phantom Lakes and which extends 100 feet into the lower lake in a northeasterly direction as marked by buoys. 
(b)  Water skiing. The town board prohibits water skiing or towing during the following hours: 
(1)  No waterskiing any day before 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  No waterskiing after 7:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday. 
(3)  No waterskiing after 4:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday or holidays. 
(c)  Speed. 
(1)  Maximum speed restriction. A speed limit of 40 miles per hour is established on the waters of Lower Phantom Lake. No person shall operate a boat faster than the established speed limit unless pre-approval from the town board has been received and only in conjunction with authorization received under section 78-7(a). 
(2)  Additional restrictions for certain hours. No person shall operate a boat in excess of slow-no-wake between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and sunset on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday, and between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and sunset on Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 1(2.16), 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 2004-6, § 1, 5-27-2004; Ord. No. 2012-O-08, § 1, 8-15-2012)  
Sec. 78-10. - Specific rules for Upper Phantom Lake. 
(a)  Channel ways. The town board designates the following channel ways to be slow-no-wake areas: The portion of the channel that specifically lies between the two points of land which connect Lower and Upper Phantom Lakes and which extends 150 feet into the upper lake in a southwesterly direction as marked by buoys. 
(b)  Waterskiing. The town board prohibits waterskiing or towing a waterskier during the following hours: 
(1)  No waterskiing any day before 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  No waterskiing after 7:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday. 
(3)  No waterskiing after 4:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday or holidays. 
(c)  Speed. 
(1)  Maximum speed restriction. A speed limit of 40 miles per hour is established on the waters of Upper Phantom Lake. No person shall operate a boat faster than the established speed limit. 
(2)  Additional restrictions for certain hours. No person shall operate a boat in excess of slow-no-wake between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and sunset on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday, and between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and sunset on Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.06), 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 2004-7, § 1, 5-27-2004)  
Sec. 78-11. - Specific rules for Spring Lake. 
(a)  Speed restrictions. No person shall operate a motorboat at a speed in excess of slow-no-wake except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. 
(b)  Waterskiing. The town board designates that no person shall be permitted to waterski and no person shall be permitted to operate a boat while towing another person on waterskis, surfboard, or any similar device between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.07), 7-13-1992)  
Sec. 78-12. - Specific rules for Willow Spring Lake. 
(a)  Motor vehicle prohibited on icebound waters. No person shall operate or use a motor vehicle upon the icebound waters of Willow Spring Lake. 
(b)  Motorboats and/or motor vehicles propelled by an internal combustion engine prohibited. No person shall operate a motorboat and/or a motor vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine on the waters of Willow Spring Lake. 
(c)  Speed restrictions. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 30.635, no person shall operate a motorboat at a speed in excess of slow-no-wake. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, § 1(2.08), 7-13-1992) 

82-1
Chapter 82
ZONING*
*Cross references--Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; land division and
development, ch. 34; streets, highways and other public places, ch. 62; waterways, ch. 78.
Article I. In General
Sec. 82-1. Intent.
Sec. 82-2. Purpose.
Sec. 82-3. General information.
Sec. 82-4. Definitions.
Sec. 82-5. Compliance.
Sec. 82-6. Building and zoning permit.
Sec. 82-7. Use permit.
Article II. Bulk, Area, Height and Use Regulations
Sec. 82-8. Site regulations; building must be on a lot.
Sec. 82-9. Lot must abut public street for full required width; exceptions.
Sec. 82-10. No undesirable structures or uses.
Sec. 82-11. Street grade.
Sec. 82-12. Preservation of topography.
Sec. 82-13. Sedimentation control.
Sec. 82-14. Junked vehicles.
Sec. 82-15. Drainage regulations.
Sec. 82-16. Sanitation and water supply.
Secs. 82-17--82-19. Reserved.
Article III. Conditional and Special Use Regulations
Sec. 82-20. Use regulations.
Sec. 82-21. Conditional uses.
Sec. 82-22. Building location.
Sec. 82-23. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-24. Area regulations.
Sec. 82-25. Accessory buildings and structures.
Sec. 82-26. Utility cabinets.
Sec. 82-27. Off-street parking.
Sec. 82-28. Off-street loading and unloading.
Sec. 82-29. Signs.
Sec. 82-30. Airport safety zone.
Sec. 82-31. Mobile homes and recreational vehicles.
Sec. 82-32. Legal nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
Sec. 82-33. Prior permit.
Secs. 82-34--82-49. Reserved.
82-2
Article IV. Districts
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 82-50. Establishment of districts.
Sec. 82-51. Zoning map.
Secs. 82-52--82-59. Reserved.
Division 2. C-1 Conservancy District
Sec. 82-60. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-61. Specific prohibited activities.
Sec. 82-62. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-63. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-64--82-69. Reserved.
Division 3. EFO Existing Floodplain Overlay District
Sec. 82-70. Purpose and intent.
Sec. 82-71. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-72. Height regulations.
Secs. 82-73--82-79. Reserved.
Division 4. A-E Exclusive Agricultural Conservancy District
Sec. 82-80. Purpose.
Sec. 82-81. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-82. Conditional uses.
Sec. 82-83. Building location.
Sec. 82-84. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-85. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-86--82-89. Reserved.
Division 5. A-P Agricultural Land Preservation District
Sec. 82-90. Purposes.
Sec. 82-91. Lands to be included in district.
Sec. 82-92. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-93. Conditional uses.
Sec. 82-94. Building location.
Sec. 82-95. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-96. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-97--82-99. Reserved.
Division 6. A-T Agricultural Land Preservation Transition District
Sec. 82-100. Creation.
Sec. 82-101. Purpose and intent.
Sec. 82-102. Lands to be included in district.
Sec. 82-103. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-104. Building location.
Sec. 82-105. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-106. Floor area regulations.
Sec. 82-107. Lot size.
Secs. 82-108, 82-109. Reserved.
82-3
Division 7. R-H Rural Home District
Sec. 82-110. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-111. Conditional uses.
Sec. 82-112. Building location.
Sec. 82-113. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-114. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-115--82-120. Reserved.
Division 8. EC Environmental Corridor District
Sec. 82-121. Purpose and intent.
Sec. 82-122. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-123. Building location.
Sec. 82-124. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-125. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-126--82-129. Reserved.
Division 9. A-1 Agricultural District
Sec. 82-130. Purpose.
Sec. 82-131. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-132. Conditional uses.
Sec. 82-133. Building location.
Sec. 82-134. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-135. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-136--82-139. Reserved.
Division 10. S-E Suburban Estate District
Sec. 82-140. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-141. Conditional uses.
Sec. 82-142. Building location.
Sec. 82-143. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-144. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-145--82-149. Reserved.
Division 11. R-1 Residential District
Sec. 82-150. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-151. Building location.
Sec. 82-152. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-153. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-154--82-159. Reserved.
Division 12. R-2 Residential District
Sec. 82-160. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-161. Building location.
Sec. 82-162. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-163. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-164--82-169. Reserved.
82-4
Division 13. R-3 Residential District
Sec. 82-170. Statement of intent.
Sec. 82-171. Use regulations.
Sec. 82-172. Building location.
Sec. 82-173. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-174. Area regulations.
Sec. 82-175. Special exception.
Secs. 82-176--82-179. Reserved.
Division 14. B-1 Restricted Business District
Sec. 82-180. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-181. Building location.
Sec. 82-182. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-183. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-184--82-189. Reserved.
Division 15. B-2 Local Business District
Sec. 82-190. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-191. Building location.
Sec. 82-192. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-193. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-194--82-199. Reserved.
Division 16. B-3 General Business District
Sec. 82-200. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-201. Building location.
Sec. 82-202. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-203. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-204--82-229. Reserved.
Division 17. M-1 Limited Industrial District
Sec. 82-230. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-231. Building location.
Sec. 82-232. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-233. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-234--82-239. Reserved.
Division 18. M-2 General Industrial District
Sec. 82-240. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-241. Building location.
Sec. 82-242. Height regulations.
Sec. 82-243. Area regulations.
Secs. 82-244--82-249. Reserved.
82-5
Division 19. P-1 Public District
Sec. 82-250. Intent of district.
Sec. 82-251. Permitted uses.
Sec. 82-252. Conditional uses.
Sec. 82-253. Building location.
Sec. 82-254. Height regulations.
Secs. 82-255--82-259. Reserved.
Article V. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 82-260. Board of adjustment--Establishment.
Sec. 82-261. Same--Meetings.
Sec. 82-262. Same--Appeals.
Sec. 82-263. Same--Powers.
Sec. 82-264. Changes and amendments--Authority.
Sec. 82-265. Same--Procedure.
Sec. 82-266. Public hearing--Purpose.
Sec. 82-267. Same--Procedure.
Sec. 82-268. Enforcement officer.
Sec. 82-269. Violations.
Sec. 82-270. Validity.
82-6
82-7
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 82-1. Intent.
(a) This chapter is enacted to regulate the height, location and size of
buildings; to classify and regulate the use of buildings and lands according to their
specific characteristics; to regulate the density of population and the use of lot area; to
regulate and determine the areas of open space surrounding buildings; to divide the town
into districts of such number, shape and area to carry out the regulations of this chapter;
to provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter; and to prescribe
penalties for the violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(b) In order to amend and reenact, as hereinafter set forth, that Ordinance
known as the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Mukwonago adopted April 16, 1953, and
all amendments thereto, the Town Board of the Town of Mukwonago, Waukesha County,
Wisconsin, does ordain the repeal of said ordinance and in place thereof does ordain the
following:
(Ord. of 5-9-1983)
Sec. 82-2. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted
to promote the health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the
town. Among other purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for adequate light,
air, sanitation, drainage, convenience of access, conservation of wetlands, and safety
from fire and other dangers; to promote the safety and efficiency of the public streets and
highways; to aid in conserving and stabilizing the economic values of the community; to
preserve and promote the general attractiveness and character of the community
environment; to guide the proper distribution and location of populations and of the
various land uses; and otherwise provide for the healthy and prosperous growth of the
community.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 1.01)
Sec. 82-3. General information.
It is not intended by this chapter to: repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere
with any existing easement, covenants or agreements between parties, or with any rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law; provided, however,
that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of building or premises,
or upon the height, location, or size of a building, or upon the open space requirements,
the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 1.02)
82-8
Sec. 82-4. Definitions.
(a) General interpretation. For the purpose of this chapter and when not
inconsistent with the context; words used in this chapter, in the present tense include the
future, in the singular number include the plural, and in the plural number include the
singular. The term "structure" includes buildings, while the terms "occupy," "used," and
"inhabit" include design or intent to be occupied, used, or inhabited, and the term "shall"
is always mandatory, not merely permissive. The term "board" refers to the town board of
supervisors under the jurisdiction of this chapter. Reference to the "plan commission"
indicates the local town plan commission established under village powers pursuant to
Wis. Stats. § 62.23, the "town park commission" established pursuant to Wis. Stats. §
60.66, or any other agency created by the town board and authorized by statute to plan
planned land use. Any reference to an officer (such as "clerk," "building inspector,"
"engineer," or "attorney") means that officer appointed or otherwise officially designated
by the town board in such capacity, unless otherwise specifically designated.
(b) Specific words and phrases. The following words, terms and phrases,
when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adult cabaret means a cabaret which features topless dancers, strippers, male or
female impersonators, or similar entertainers.
Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion pictures, live
performance, display or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme, or is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, any actual or simulated specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section.
Adult-oriented establishments means, but is not limited to, adult bookstores, adult
motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture establishments or adult cabarets. The
term "adult-oriented establishments" further means any premises to which public patrons
or members are invited or admitted and which are physically arranged to provide booths,
cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises
for the purposes of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer
provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, whether or
not such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct
or indirect.
Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in trade, for sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing, books, films,
videocassettes, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or related to specified anatomical
areas as defined in this section, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to
the sale, rent and display of such material.
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or
more persons used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein.
82-9
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of
less than 50 persons used for presenting material having as its dominant theme, or
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, matters depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this
section, for observation by patrons therein.
Apartment means a suite of rooms or a room in a multiple dwelling which suite or
room is arranged, intended or designated to be occupied as a residence of a single family,
individual or group of individuals. Such a suite shall also generally define a dwelling unit
(DU).
Apartment house. See Dwelling, multiple.
Arcade means any premises containing three or more amusement devices for the
primary use and entertainment of the public. Premises for which a license to sell
fermented malt beverages and/or intoxicating liquors has been issued may be excluded
from this designation.
Area wide stormwater facilities means stormwater facilities designed to provide
peak flow reduction, water quality treatment, and/or groundwater recharge for entire
watersheds or drainage areas, which may extend across property lines. Area wide
stormwater facilities coordinate stormwater management for the watershed, including
existing and future land development activities and best management practices for
individual sites, and to provide for long-term maintenance and funding of the facilities.
Base setback line means the ultimate street line as established by section 82-22,
and from which all required setbacks shall be computed.
Basement means a story partly underground which, if occupied for living
purposes, shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement, but limited as
to meeting minimum floor area requirements per section 82-24.
Boardinghouse means a building or premises where meals or meals and lodging
are offered for compensation for five or more persons, but not more than 12 persons, and
having no more than five sleeping rooms for this purpose. An establishment where meals
are served for compensation for more than 12 persons shall be deemed a restaurant. An
establishment with more than five sleeping rooms shall be deemed a hotel.
Boathouse means a structure located close to the ordinary high water mark and
designed for the storage of boats. Normally used in the daily use activities of lakefront
property and has a large garage type door for primary access on the side of the building
facing the water. A boathouse may also be used for the storage of accessory marine and
other items used by the occupants of the lot. A boathouse shall be placed on a permanent
foundation extending below the frost line or on a concrete slab and contain at least 200
square feet in area. Under no circumstances may the boathouse be used for human
habitation.
Boat livery means a tract of land together with associated structures on land and in
the water where boat mooring, anchoring and/or dry land boat storage is provided for
boat owners for a fee. See Marina.
82-10
Building means any structure used designated or intended for the protection,
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
Building, accessory means a building or portion of a building subordinate to the
principal building and used for a purpose customarily incident to the permitted use of the
principal building.
Building, height of, means the vertical distance from the average established street
grade in front of the lot or the finished grade at the building line, whichever is higher, to
the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the
average height of the highest gable of a gambrel, hip or pitch roof.
Building, principal, means the main building on a lot, intended for primary use as
permitted by the regulations of the district in which it is located. Any building intended to
be used for human habitation shall constitute the principal building.
Deck means a structure characterized by a flat open horizontal surface or platform
suspended above the grade of the land it covers and which may be supported by posts,
beams, cantilevers and/or by other methods.
District means a section of the town for which the regulations governing the
height, area and the use of building and premises are the same.
Dog means a domestic mammal (Canis familiaris) closely related to the common
wolf, but not including coyotes, wolf mixes or hybrids of wolves or coyotes.
Dwelling, multiple, means a building or portion thereof designed for and occupied
by more than two families, including duplexes, row houses, condominiums, apartment
houses and apartment hotels. (two + DU).
Dwelling, one-family, means a detached building designed for and occupied
exclusively by one family (one DU).
Dwelling, two-family, means a detached or semi-detached building designed for
and occupied exclusively by two families (two DU).
Family means the body of persons who live together in one dwelling unit (DU) as
a single housekeeping entity.
Farm, fur, means a tract of land devoted in whole or part to the raising of fur
bearing animals for commercial purposes.
Farm, general, means a tract of land devoted principally to the raising of crops,
livestock and/or farm products not including commercial stables or private stables.
Farm, pig, means a tract of land devoted principally to the raising and feeding of
pigs and hogs.
82-11
Farm, poultry and/or egg production, means a tract of land devoted in whole or
part principally to the raising of poultry and/or egg production for commercial purposes.
Feed lot means a lot or facility used or proposed to be used for the confined
feeding and/or holding of animals where the number and kind of animals exceed 75 units
per acre of confined area. One animal unit shall be equivalent to 1,000 pounds of live
animal weight, and the acreage used to compute the density shall include all fenced areas,
pens, yards or similar uncovered structures and all covered enclosures where the animals
are enclosed for 30 or more continuous 24-hour days per year. Dairy farm operations
utilizing seasonal winter confinement of livestock shall be excluded from this definition
unless deemed contrary by the town board. The intent of this definition is to clearly
distinguish the feed lot type of farming situation which concentrates large numbers of
livestock on small acreage from the more general type of farm operation in which
cultivation and livestock grazing or feeding is conducted on a smaller scale. It is not the
intent of this definition to prohibit these kinds of operations, but to recognize the
potential as a pollution source and to effectively control it.
Flood means a temporary rise in the stream flow or change in lake level that
results in water over-topping the boundaries of its channel and inundating areas adjacent
to the stream channel or lake bed.
Floodplain means those lands, including the floodway subject to inundation by
the 100-year reoccurrence flood, or, where such data is not available, the maximum flood
of record.
Floodproofing means any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the purpose of
reducing or eliminating flood damage to the properties, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and contents of buildings in flood hazard areas. Any such measures shall be
certified by an architect or engineer as conforming to these requirements.
Flood protection elevation means the flood protection elevation shall correspond
to a point two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile associated with the
regional flood and the official floodway lines. Also see Freeboard.
Floodway means those floodplain areas including the channel required to carry
and discharge the 100-year reoccurrence interval flood.
Floor area means the maximum horizontal projected area within the perimeter of
the outside surface of walls or supports of the building or structure, and as further
described in section 82-24(a).
Floor area ratio (FAR) means an indication of the total floor area of buildings
allowed on a given lot, expressed as a percentage ratio to the total area of the lot; i.e., a
floor area ratio of 100 percent allows a floor area equal to the total area of the lot, a floor
area ratio of 50 percent allows a floor area of one-half the total area of the lot, etc. A floor
area ratio of 50 percent could be applied to a one-story building occupying 50 percent of
the lot, or a two-story building occupying 25 percent of the lot.
82-12
Freeboard means a factor of safety expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet
above a calculated floor level. Freeboard compensates for the many unknown factors that
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated, and include, but are not
limited to, ice jams, debris, accumulation, wave action, obstructed bridge openings and
the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed.
Garage, private, means a private garage is one where private vehicles are kept for
storage purposes only and wherein such use is accessory to the residential use of the
property on which it is stored.
Garage, public, means any building or premises, other than a private or a storage
garage, where motor-driven vehicles are equipped, repaired, serviced, hired, sold or
stored for monetary gain as a business.
Garage, storage, means any building or premises used for the storage only of
motor-driven vehicles, pursuant to previous arrangements and not to transients, and
where no equipment, parts, fuel, grease or oil is sold, and vehicles are not equipped,
serviced, repaired, hired or sold for monetary gain as a business.
Grade, established, means the elevation of the finished street at the centerline or
curb as fixed by the engineer or by such authority as shall be designated by law to
determine such an elevation.
Highwater elevation means the average annual highwater elevation of a pond,
stream, lake, flowage or wetland referred to an established datum; or where such
elevation is not available, the field elevation where the presence of water is so continuous
to leave a distinct mark due to erosion, change in or destruction of vegetation, or changes
in other easily recognizable topography, geological or vegetative characteristics.
Highway means a right-of-way designated by the county established street and
highway width map or any other comprehensive system for the principal purpose of
providing vehicular thoroughfare and not necessary affording direct access to abutting
property.
Home occupation means a gainful occupation conducted by a member or
members of the family within its place of residence, where the space used is incidental to
residential use and no article is sold or offered for sale except such as is produced by such
home occupation.
Horticulture means the culture of growing and cultivating fruits, flowers and
related plant material.
Hotel means a building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered for
compensation and which may have more than five sleeping rooms for this purpose.
Human habitation means utilizing a building or structure for overnight living or
longer periods of time, and including the aggregate of normal occupancy activities such
as lounging, cooking, eating, sleeping, bathing, sanitation, etc.
82-13
Infiltration swales means a shallow grassed or vegetated channel designated to
capture, detain and treat stormwater and convey larger flows. It takes surface flows from
adjacent paved surfaces and allows it to infiltrate through a soil bed into underlying soils.
The swale provides conveyance for larger storm events to the storm drain system.
Variations on designs include an underlying drain rock reservoir, with or without a
perforated underdrain.
Kennel, commercial, means an establishment, structure or premises where dogs or
other household pets are raised, sold, bred, boarded, trained or groomed for commercial
purposes. The raising and selling of three or more litters of animals per year shall
constitute a commercial kennel.
Kennel, hobby, means a noncommercial establishment, structure or premises,
accessory to the principal use of the property where more than the number of regulated
household pets, six months minimum of age as are permitted by right are kept for such
purposes as pets, field trials, shows or hobbies. The occasional raising of not more than
two litters of dogs per year on a premises for sale or disposal of such dogs, within six
months of such birth shall not be considered a hobby kennel.
Living area means the occupied or usable floor area in a building designed and
built with necessary ceiling, flooring, electrical, heating and plumbing facilities to
accommodate normal human habitation.
Lodginghouse means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation
and having not more than five sleeping rooms for this purpose.
Lot means a parcel of contiguous land with described boundaries and abutting or
having access via an approved easement to a public street or other approved way. Such
parcel shall be exclusive of any land lying in a public right-of-way, mil tax road, public
streams, or other public water body. Where such streams or public rights-of-way divide a
single described parcel into two or more parts, such severed portions shall be considered
separate individual lots provided they meet the use, building location and area regulations
of the zoning district in which they are located. Where such separate parcels do not meet
these requirements they, in combination, shall be considered to be a single lot for
regulatory purposes, computation of area requirements and other locational provisions of
this chapter.
Lot area means the area of a lot and bounded by lot lines exclusive of land
provided by public rights-of-way, mil tax road, public streams or other public bodies of
water.
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance measured between the street line
and the opposing rear line or lines of the lot.
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot.
Lot line, side, means a lot line extending from a street line towards the interior of
the lot block and separating adjoining lots.
82-14
Lot width, minimum average, means the mean horizontal distance measured
between side lot lines, perpendicular to the lot depth and at a point in relation to the depth
where the product of the two would produce the minimum required lot area.
Mobile home means that which is, or was as originally constructed, designed to be
transported by any motor vehicle upon a public highway and designed, equipped and
used primarily for sleeping, eating and living quarters, or as intended to be so used; and
includes any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and appurtenances. The term
"mobile home" does not include a recreational vehicle nor does it include a manufactured
home as defined in Wis. Admin. Code Comm. § 27.10(3).
Motel means a building or series of buildings in which lodging is offered only for
compensation, has more than five sleeping rooms or units, and is distinguished from a
hotel primarily by reason of providing direct, independent access and adjoining parking
for each rental unit.
Navigable river or stream means those rivers and streams shown as perennial on
the U.S. Geological Survey topographic maps of 1959 and 1960.
Offset means the horizontal distance measured from the side or rear lot line, not
along a street, to any roofed or enclosed portion of a building not including an overhang,
as defined herein, of 24 inches or less.
Overhang means that portion of a roof over a structure and designated as an
integral part of the structure, which extends from the outer wall of the structure to the
eave. Rain gutters are not included or considered part of the overhang.
Patio means a flat, open, horizontal surface or platform located on the grade of
the land and not considered to be a structure as defined and regulated in this chapter.
Planned unit development (PUD) means a method of developing a property
through design of all components as a planned unit which satisfies the use, access,
sanitation, building, and environmental regulations without the use of standardized
zoning restrictions.
Planting screen means an area landscaped with natural growing plant material
which effectively screens off from vision objects it is intending to hide from view.
Polystructure means an enclosure having a frame of steel or other materials which
is covered with plastic, polyurethane, vinyl, canvas or other flexible sheeting material.
Porous pavement means a special type of asphalt or concrete pavement that
allows rain and snowmelt to pass through it, thereby reducing the runoff from a site and
surrounding areas. The porous pavement surface is typically placed over a highly
permeable layer of open-graded gravel and crushed stone. A filter fabric is placed
beneath the gravel and stone layers to screen out fine soil particles. For the purpose of
this chapter, permeable pavers, which are blocks with gravel in between them, will also
be considered porous pavement.
82-15
Potbellied pig means a pig that is white, black or pinto in color, stands less than
14 inches at the shoulders and less than 30 inches in length when grown, weighs less than
220 pounds, that is distinguished by having erect ears, a straight tail with a plume at the
end, and hair on the back that does not part, and is kept by its owners as a household pet.
Private club or lodge means a building or grounds used for regular or periodic
meetings or gatherings of a group of persons organized for a nonprofit purpose, but not
groups organized to render a service customarily carried on as a business.
Professional office means the office of a doctor, practitioner, dentist, minister,
architect, landscape architect, professional engineer, lawyer, author, musician or other
similar recognized profession.
Public and semi-public structures and uses means structures and uses principally
of an institutional nature and serving a public need, such as hospitals, rest homes,
schools, including private, academic and nursery schools, libraries, post offices,
museums, police and fire stations, public and private utility facilities and other public
services, not including the operation of a public bar, restaurant or recreational facility as a
commercial enterprise.
Pyramiding means the act of obtaining or providing access to public bodies of
water across private lots or lands in a manner which increases the number of families
which have access to the water to a greater degree than would have occurred with
individual riparian owners having individual lots fronting on the water. Publicly owned
access points shall not fall within this definition.
Quarrying means the removal of rock, slate, gravel, sand, topsoil, or other natural
material from the earth by excavating, stripping, leveling, or any other such process for
commercial purposes and personal gain.
Rain gardens means a manmade depression in the ground that is used as a
landscape tool to improve water quality. The rain garden forms a bioretention area by
collecting water runoff and storing it temporarily, permitting it to be filtered and slowly
absorbed by the soil.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that includes a cabin for living
accommodations and is commonly used for recreational travel and touring. Vehicles
included in this category include travel trailers, tent trailers and camping trailers, all of
which must be towed by another vehicle, as well truck campers, motor homes and camper
vehicles, all of which have a motor within the body of the vehicle and are self-propelled.
Refuse disposal site means a tract of land operated, subject to restrictions of use
and under supervision, by a public or private agent where more than one family may take
all types of refuse, including organic and inorganic wastes (but excluding human
excretions and sewage and/or other liquid waste), for compacting and burial by sanitary
landfill methods. Hard or clean fill operations involving material such as foundry sand,
dirt, gravel, concrete, or other forms of clean fill material shall not be required to conform
to the provisions of section 82-21.
82-16
Regulated household pets. All dogs and potbellied pigs are regulated household
pets.
Remodeling means any structural alterations, additions, modifications, rebuilding
or lateral enlargements of any such existing structures, principal or accessory. The term
"remodeling" shall also refer to the conversion of living spaces of other floor areas into
space for living purposes; such as converting a part of the living into a bedroom or
bathroom regardless of whether such changes require structural alterations to the basic
structures. Ordinary maintenance repairs, including painting, decorating, panelling,
replacement of doors, windows, and other nonstructural components shall not be
considered remodeling.
Restaurant means any building, room or place wherein meals or lunches are
prepared, served, or sold to transients or the general public, and all places used in
connection therewith. Meals or lunches shall not include soft drinks, ice cream, milk,
milk drinks, ices, and confections. The serving in taverns of free lunches, consisting of
popcorn, cheese, crackers, pretzels, cold sausage, cured fish, or bread and butter shall not
constitute such taverns to be restaurants. The term "restaurant" shall not apply to
structures used by religious, social, fraternal, youth or patriotic organizations which
occasionally serve or sell meals to transients or the general public, nor shall it include any
private individual selling foods from a movable or temporary stand.
Road means a public or private right-of-way usually affording primary access to
abutting property.
Roadside stand means a farm building used or intended to be used solely by the
owner or tenant of the farm on which such building is located for the sale of the farm
products raised on such farm.
Rural Accessory Building: An existing building, which is: (1) set apart from other
buildings as being distinct, due to its construction technique, construction materials, age,
local historic significance, or design as determined by the Town Board; and (2) is
characteristic of past agricultural practices or rural life, whether presently utilized or not
for agricultural practice, as determined by the Town Board; and (3) which is sufficiently
structurally sound to meet minimum safety requirements for the proposed use, as
determined by the Town Building Inspector, provided that such determination shall not
relieve the property owner of any responsibility or liability as to the building and shall
not form a basis of liability against the Building Inspector or the Town.
(Ord. 2007-3 § 1 1/18/07)
Sand or gravel pits. See Quarrying.
Setback means the horizontal distance between the "base setback line" and the
nearest roofed or enclosed portion of a building, excluding the 24-inch roof overhang
defined herein.
Setback, shore, means the horizontal distance between the average annual high
water mark of a lake or stream, or the established floodplain location if available, and the
closest point of a principal or accessory building.
82-17
Sign means any structure or device displaying advertising in the form of lettering,
pictures, symbols or other media.
Sketch plans means an informal plan to scale indicating the salient existing
features of a tract of land and the adjacent land uses, with the general layout of the
proposal, including open space areas, lot lines, roads, and outlots designated for
stormwater facilities.
Special exception means a specific approval that may be granted by the town plan
commission as specifically set forth in subsection 82-22(a)(10), to allow a property
owner to deviate from otherwise applicable provisions of this chapter, in compliance with
such procedures, restrictions and conditions as may apply to the special exception as
described in subsection 82-22(a)(10).
Specified anatomical areas means:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, and female breasts below the point immediately above the top of
the areola;
(2) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
Specified sexual activities means simulated or actual:
(1) Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation of arousal;
(2) Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia,
sado-masochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus;
(3) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or
female breasts.
Stables means:
(1) Private stable. A tract of land on which horses or other livestock are kept
for noncommercial use of the persons residing on the tract of land.
(2) Commercial stable. A tract of land on which horses or other livestock are
kept for hire, board, training, sale or any other commercial use.
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of a floor and
the surface of the floor next above it; or, if there be no floor above it, then the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement or cellar having one-half or
more of its height above grade shall be deemed a story for purposes of height regulation.
Street. See Road.
Street frontage means a street contiguous and parallel to a traffic artery and
82-18
affording direct vehicular access to abutting property.
Street line means a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
Structure means any manmade object with form, shape and utility that is
constructed or otherwise erected, attached to or permanently or temporarily placed either
upon the ground or upon another structure. For the purpose of this chapter the term
"structure" includes swimming pools, hot tubs, patios, decks, gazebos, radio towers and
television towers, but does not include landscaping or earth work including graded areas,
filled areas, ditches, burms or earthen terraces. The term "structures" does not include
flag poles, mail boxes, fences, basketball hoops, satellite dishes of 18 inches or less in
diameter or small objects that are easily moved by hand, such as lawn chairs, portable
grills, portable picnic tables, temporary fences, bird feeders, birdhouses or birdbaths.
Structure, legal nonconforming, means a building, structure, or portion thereof,
lawfully existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is
derived, but which does not conform in one or more respects to the regulations of this
chapter.
Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building
or any substantial change in the roof structure or in the exterior walls.
Sustained yield forestry means the management of forested lands to provide
annual or periodic crops of forest products.
Swimming pool means a structure designed to hold water more than 18 inches
deep for the purpose of swimming.
Temporary structure means a movable structure not designed for human
habitation or occupancy, but for the temporary protection of goods or chattels during a
period of construction, but not to exceed one year; for the enclosure or screening of goods
or property; or for the display of signs and advertising.
Trailer park and mobile home park mean any tract or parcel of land upon which
two or more trailers, camp cabins, house car, or other mobile homes are located, or trailer
camp sites are provided, for the purpose of either temporary or permanent habitation.
Tourist home means a building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered
to transient guests for compensation, and having no more than five sleeping rooms for
this purpose with no cooking facilities in any such individual room or apartment.
Traffic artery. See Highway.
Use, accessory, means a use subordinate to and customarily incident to the
permitted principal use of the property or buildings, and located upon the same lot as the
principal use.
Use, legal nonconforming, means the use of a building or land lawfully carried on
at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived or
amendments thereto, but which does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter.
82-19
Use, principal, means the main or primary use of property or buildings as
specified and permitted by the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Vegetative buffer plan means a plan designating native shoreland vegetation
which is intended to treat stormwater runoff down slope of impervious surfaces or
disturbed areas which is designed to remove sediment, nutrients and other particular
pollutants, provide screening and privacy from neighbors and recreational waterbody
users, as well as nesting places and travel corridors for wildlife.
Vision setback means an unoccupied triangular space at the street corner of a
corner lot, as established by section 82-28(a)(2).
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, §§ 2.01, 2.02; Ord. No. 95-1; Ord. No. 95-3B, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-1996; Ord.
No. 98-4, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-1998; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. 2001-6, §§ 1--4,
10-29-2001; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1, 1-15-2003; Ord. No. 2004-4, § 1, 3-11-2004; Ord. No.
2004-9, § 1, 6-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1, 8-11-2004; Ord. No. 2005-4, §§ 1--3, 7-
28-2005; Ord. No. 2006-1, §§ 1--7, 1-3-2006)
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
82-20
Sec. 82-5. Compliance.
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided, the use, size, height and
location of buildings now existing or hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, or
structurally altered, the provisions of open spaces, and the use of land, shall be in
compliance with the regulations established herein for the district in which such land or
building is located, and the adopted subdivision control ordinance.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.01)
Sec. 82-6. Building and zoning permit.
(a) Required. No building shall be erected, structurally altered, or relocated
until a building and zoning permit has been issued by the building inspector, certifying
that such building, as proposed, would be in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and with the chapter 14, regarding buildings and building regulations.
(b) Application. An application for a building and zoning permit shall be
made to the building inspector. Such application shall be in accordance with section 82-
7(b).
(c) Issuance. Building and zoning permits shall be issued by the building
inspector and conform to the provision of section 82-7(c).
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.02)
Sec. 82-7. Use permit.
(a) Required. No vacant land shall be occupied or used except for agricultural
purposes, and no building shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered, relocated, used,
or occupied until a use permit has been issued certifying that any such building, use, or
occupancy complies with the provisions of this chapter. This permit shall be obtained
before any change is made in the type of use or before any nonconforming use is
resumed, changed, extended or granted conditional use status pursuant to section 82-
32(c).
(b) Application. All permits shall be applied for from the building inspector.
Application for a use permit shall be made prior to or at the same time as the application
for a building and zoning permit. All necessary permits shall be prepared in triplicate and
shall include for the purpose of proper enforcement of this chapter the following data:
(1) A statement by the applicant as to the intended use of the premises and of
any existing or proposed buildings thereon.
(2) An accurate map of the property drawn to a reasonable scale and properly
dimensioned showing:
a. The boundaries of the property involved.
b. The location of the centerline of any abutting streets.
82-21
c. The location on the lot of any existing buildings, proposed
additions or new buildings, including the measured distances
between buildings, lot lines and street lines measured to the nearest
portion of such buildings.
d. The proposed floor elevation of any proposed buildings in relation
to the existing and/or established grade of any abutting streets.
e. The high water line of any stream or lake on which the property
abuts.
f. The proposed locations of the septic systems and private wells.
(3) Where the use involves human occupancy, a plan of the proposed sewage
disposal system approved by the county through issuance of a county
sanitary disposal permit when a private system is proposed.
(4) Fees shall accompany each application for a permit in accordance with the
established township fee schedule, and such payment shall be made to the
building inspector.
(c) Issuance. Building and zoning and use permits shall be issued by the
building inspector after adequate investigation as to compliance.
(1) Building and zoning permit. Provided the application is in order and any
building, occupancy, or use as proposed would be in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, a certification that such permit has been issued
shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises during the period of
any construction involved in readying the land or buildings for occupancy.
(2) Use permit. Within ten days after the notification of the completion of the
erection, alteration, or relocation of a building, or of intent to commence a
use, the building inspector or his deputy shall make an inspection of the
premises and any buildings thereon, and if such building, use, or
occupancy comply with the requirements of this chapter and chapter 14,
regarding buildings and building regulations, a use permit shall be issued.
(d) Expiration. If, within six months of the date of issuance of a building and
zoning permit, the proposed construction has not commenced, or if within
24 months a use permit has not been issued, such building and zoning
permit shall expire, except that, upon showing of valid cause, the town
board may grant an extension of such permit for a period not to exceed six
months.
(e) Temporary use permit. Pending the issuance of a regular permit, a
temporary permit may be issued for a period not exceeding six months
during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a
building pending its permanent occupation. Such temporary permit shall
not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will
82-22
adequately ensure the safety of the occupants. A temporary permit shall be
voided if the building fails to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.03)
82-23
ARTICLE II.
BULK, AREA, HEIGHT AND USE REGULATIONS
Sec. 82-8. Site regulations; building must be on a lot.
Every building hereafter erected, structurally altered, or relocated shall be located
on a lot and in no case, except in general business, limited industrial, general industrial,
and agricultural districts, and planned unit developments, shall there by more than one
principle building on a lot, except as provided below. The principal building, as herein
described, shall be built first in all districts. In any district where a building other than a
residence is considered principal, such construction shall be subject to the prior approval
of the town board. The town board may allow the issuance of a new residential home
building permit and the occupancy of an existing residential structure on a parcel for one
continuous two-year period, subject to specific town board approval and the following
conditions:
(1) Subject to the occupancy of the existing single-family residential structure
being made by the same person who will occupy the new single-family
residential structure for which the new residential home building permit is
issued.
(2) Subject to the applicant submitting to and receiving approval from the
town board written proof that the waste disposal system for the property
upon which the current residence exists conforms to the applicable
sanitary ordinances of the county environmental health division or is
otherwise allowed to be used by the county environmental health division.
(3) Subject to the applicant submitting to the town board and receiving
approval as to form from the town attorney and as to amount from the
town engineer, a letter of credit or cash in the amount of 115 percent of the
removal and restoration costs as determined by the town engineer; and
also submitting to and receiving approval from the town attorney and the
town engineer, an agreement which would allow the town to access the
property and remove the existing structure at the applicant's expense if the
new applicant fails to do so within sixty days of issuance of an occupancy
permit for the new residence; upon either of the following occurrences:
a. Prior to the issuance of a new residential home building permit for
any lot on which an existing residential home is occupied; or
b. Prior to occupancy of any existing residential home on any lot for
which a new residential home building permit has been issued.
(4) Subject to such additional conditions as the town board may require in the
interest of the health, safety and welfare of the town.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.04(1); Ord. No 2002-8, § 1, 2-13-2002; Ord. No. 2003-8, § 1, 12-
10-2003)
82-24
Sec. 82-9. Lot must abut public street for full required width; exceptions.
(a) Generally. A principal building shall not be permitted on a tract of land,
which does not abut on a public street unless authorized by subsection (b) of this section.
A lot shall only be considered to be abutting on a public street if:
(1) The lot abuts a public street for at least 60 feet; and
(2) Either of the following is true:
a. The lot meets the minimum average width requirement of the
zoning district in which it is located at the building setback line; or
b. One-half the depth of the lot is at least the minimum average width
of the zoning district in which it is located; and
(3) Provided that a lot which has a narrow strip as part of the lot extending to
the public street from the main part of the lot where the building could
lawfully be placed, shall only be considered to be abutting on the public
street if the narrow portion of the lot is as wide as the required minimum
average width for the district in which it is located.
(b) Exceptions; flag lots, Private Streets and Easements. While the town will
generally not permit the creation of flag lots, or the utilization of private
streets or easements to access tracts of land, there are situations where the
Town may allow the creation of flag lots, and there are situations existing
as of December 1, 1990, in the town that the town may treat as exceptions
for the prohibition against the use of private streets and there are situations
existing as of January 1, 2002, in the Town of Mukwonago, or in order to
implement the Town’s Park and Open Space Plan or the Waukesha
County County Development Plan Park and Open Space Element, may be
treated by the Town as exceptions from the prohibition against the use of
easements or flag lots.
(1) Flag lots. Subject to the approval of the Plan Commission and Town
Board, a principal building may be permitted on a tract of land which does
not abut a public street, if the tract of land abuts the public street by a
narrow strip of land which is an ownership strip and a part of the lot as
long as, at a minimum, all of the following requirements are satisfied:
a) Provided such tract of land excluding the narrow portion of the
same tract providing access to the public street conforms to the
minimum lot area of the district in which it is located.
b) Provided such tract of land which has a narrow strip of land is at
least 33 feet wide where it abuts the public street and for its entire
length;
c) Provided such tract of land is recorded as a certified survey map or
plat, in accordance with the Town Subdivision Control Ordinance.
82-25
d) Provided such tract of land has or will have a paved or graveled
driveway for a width of 12 feet from the road right-of-way to the
area of the proposed residence and said driveway is in compliance
with all applicable laws, including with regard to the grade
requirements of the Town of Mukwonago Building Code, and it
does not impact the natural flow of surface water, or if the narrow
strip of land is to be used to access a parcel which is designated for
public ownership or to be owned by a Private Conservation
Organization in order to implement the Town of Mukwonago’s
Park and Open Space Plan or the Waukesha County Development
Plan Park and Open Space Element.
e) Provided such tract of land does not conflict with the plans for the
future development of streets in the area or the "Official Map for
the Town of Mukwonago."
f) In the case of the access provided to implement the Town of
Mukwonago’s Park and Open Space Plan or the Waukesha County
County Development Plan Park and Open Space Element, the
Town may lace certain restrictions so as to prohibit a conflict with
adjacent neighborhoods.
g) In order to determine if there is a conflict with plans or future
development in the area, the Applicant may be required by the
Town of Mukwonago Plan Commission to provide a neighborhood
development plan showing street extensions and street patterns as
they relate to topography, environmental features, drainage
patterns, existing structures and parcels, and soils suitable for
development for review by the Plan Commission. In no case, shall
there be more than one residence allowed on such tract of land.
(2) Private streets. In situations where there is as of December 1, 1990, an
existing private street right-of-way of sufficient width as provided below
and there are in existence separate recorded tracts of land already created
fronting upon said private right-of-way, in that situation the Town may
permit the private right-of-way to become legal access for these existing
separate recorded tracts of land to be served by said right-of-way on the
following terms and conditions:
a) The Plan Commission determines that the subject tract of land
existed as a tax key number prior to December 1, 1990.
b) The Plan Commission finds that it is in the best interest of the
Town to certify the tract of land as a legal parcel.
c) The Plan Commission finds that the subject tract of land conforms
to the minimum lot area, lot dimensions, lot width, lot sizes,
building locations and building sizes of the district in which it is
located.
82-26
d) The Plan Commission finds that the subject tract of land has access
by a permanent easement on said private street of at least 33 feet in
width to a public street, or where more than one principal residence
or lot is proposed, the easement for such access shall be at least 66
feet in width.
e) The Plan Commission has determined that the property owner has
placed a deed restriction on the property in a form as approved by
the Town Attorney giving notice that access is by way of a private
street or way. Said deed restriction must be legally recorded with
the Register of Deeds.
f) The Plan Commission has determined that the ownership of the
private street is clearly determined, that the private street or way
will be maintained, that a written property maintenance agreement
in a form satisfactory to the Plan Commission is on file with the
Town, and that all property owners are advised as to their
responsibilities for maintenance of the private street or way. Said
agreement must be legally recorded with the Register of Deeds.
g) The Town Board approves a certified survey map for the subject
land, which is then recorded in the office of the Waukesha County
County Register of Deeds, unless the land division was previously
made by CSM or plat, which was approved by the Town Board in
accordance with the Land Division and Development Control
Ordinance and recorded. (Ord. 2006-5 § 1 11-1-06)
(3) Easements. In situations where there is as of January 1, 2002, an existing
easement of sufficient width as provided below and there is in existence a
separate recorded tract of land served by such easement, or where a land
division is to occur in order to implement the Town of Mukwonago’s Park
and Open Space Plan or the Waukesha County County Development Plan
Park and Open Space element, the Town may permit the easement to
become legal access for such tract of land to be served by said easement
on the following terms and conditions:
a. The Plan Commission determines that the subject tract of land
existed prior to January 1, 2002, as a legally created parcel in
accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and
Land Division & Development Control Ordinance in effect at the
time it was created, and was a parcel having a separate tax key
number prior to January 1, 2002 or is a parcel which is to be
created in order to implement the Town of Mukwonago’s Park and
Open space Plan or the Waukesha County County Development
Plan Park and Open Space Element.
b. The Plan Commission finds that it is in the best interest of the
Town to certify the tract of land as a legal parcel.
82-27
c. The Plan Commission finds that the subject tract of land conforms
to the minimum lot area, lot dimensions, lot width, lot sizes,
building locations and building sizes of the district in which it is
located or implements of the Town of Mukwonago’s Park and
Open Space Plan or the Waukesha County County Development
Plan Park and Open Space Element.
d. The Plan Commission finds that the subject tract of land has access
by a permanent easement of at least thirty-three (33’) feet in width
to a public street, or where more than one principal building or lot
is proposed, the easement for such access shall be at least sixty-six
(66’) feet in width or has adequate width in order to accommodate
access to the public or for maintenance equipment on parcels
which are created in order to implement the Town of
Mukwonago’s Park and Open Space Plan or the Waukesha County
County Development Plan Park and Open Space Element.
e. The Plan Commission determined that the property owner has
placed a deed restriction on the property in a form as approved by
the Town Attorney giving notice that access is by way of an
easement. Said deed restriction must be legally recorded with the
Register of Deeds.
f. The Plan Commission has determined that ownership of the
easement is clearly determined, that the easement will be
maintained, that a written property maintenance agreement in a
form satisfactory to the Plan Commission is on file with the Town,
and that all property owners are advised as to their responsibilities
for maintenance of the easement. Said agreement must be legally
recorded with the Register of Deeds.
g. The Town Board approves a certified survey map for the subject
land, which is then recorded in the office of the Waukesha County
Register of Deeds, unless the land division was previously made
by CSM or plat, which was approved by the Town Board in
accordance with the Land Division and Development Control
Ordinance and recorded.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.04(2); Ord. No 2002-10, § 1, 2-22-2002) (Ord. 2006-7, § 2.03,
6/21/06)
82-28
Sec. 82-10. No undesirable structures or uses.
No building or structure shall be erected, structurally altered or relocated, and no
lumber, materials, furniture or other equipment shall be stacked, piled or stored in a
manner which shall be of such character as to have a substantial adverse effect on the
property values or general desirability of neighborhood.
(1) The building inspector shall submit any such case in question to the plan
commission for its determination.
(2) The plan commission shall base its determination upon the following
considerations:
a. Design or appearance of such unorthodox or abnormal character in
relation to the surroundings as to be considered unsightly or
offensive to the degree that would have a substantial adverse effect
on the property values and general desirability of the
neighborhood.
b. Identical design and appearance with proximate buildings to the
degree that monotony and commonness would have a substantial
adverse effect on the property values and general desirability of the
neighborhood.
(3) The decision of the plan commission shall be stated in writing, including
the reason for refusing a permit or any conditions of approval.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.04(3); Ord. No. 2000-1, § 1, 1-12-2000)
Sec. 82-11. Street grade.
Every building erected, structurally altered or relocated shall be at a grade
approved by the building inspector as being in satisfactory relationship with the
established street grades, or with the existing street grade where one is established, with
particular consideration for proper drainage and safe vehicular access.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.04(4))
Sec. 82-12. Preservation of topography.
In order to protect the property owner from possible damage due to change in the
existing grade of adjoining lands, and to aid in preserving the natural beauty of the
landscape, no change in the existing topography shall be made which would affect
drainage or increase the slope to a ratio greater than three horizontal to one vertical,
within a distance of 20 feet from the property line. Exceptions to this requirement,
including retaining walls, may be permitted with the written consent of the abutting
property owner and the approval of the plan commission. In no case shall any slope
exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved, and all slopes shall be
protected against erosion.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.04(5))
82-29
Sec. 82-13. Sedimentation control.
Any plans for site alterations which disturb the natural cover vegetation must
include provision for adequate protection to adjacent properties from sedimentation.
Disturbed areas must be seeded or vegetated within one year of commencement of
construction.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.04(6))
Sec. 82-14. Junked vehicles.
A motor vehicle which is no longer licensed, which has been abandoned,
disassembled, is nonoperable, disabled, junked, or wrecked shall not be stored anywhere
on any premises except in an authorized salvage yard, or is completely enclosed in a
structure.
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § 2(3.04(7)), 1-12-2000)
Cross References: Junked and abandoned vehicles, § 70-61 et seq.
Sec. 82-15. Drainage regulations.
(a) Adequate drainage required. No principal building shall be erected,
structurally altered or relocated on land which is not adequately drained; subject to
periodic flooding; or subject to a seasonable high groundwater where the lowest floor
level will be less than one foot above the highest groundwater level. The determination of
the seasonable high groundwater level shall be made by the building inspector based
upon data furnished by the owner. Disagreements between the owner or his agent and the
building inspector shall be sent to the board of adjustment.
(b) Obstruction to drainage prohibited. The damming, filling or relocating of
any surface water drainage channel or natural watercourse shall not be permitted except
with approval of the town board and the state department of natural resources, when
applicable.
(c) Building restricted adjacent to drainage channels or watercourses. No
building other than a bridge, dam, boathouse, or revetment, subject to approval, shall be
erected, structurally altered, or relocated within 75 feet of the 100-year flood level or
conservancy line.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.05)
Sec. 82-16. Sanitation and water supply.
(a) Safe sewage disposal possible. No principal building shall be erected,
structurally altered or relocated unless it has been certified by the building inspector or
plumbing inspector that it conforms to all town ordinances and other governmental laws
or regulations then applicable to sewage disposal systems, and that satisfactory evidence
has been submitted to show that suitable provisions for disposal of sewage is possible. A
county septic system permit shall be required for all new private systems. Certification
from the county health department verifying the soil's suitability to meet standards shall
be furnished when a specific system is not being proposed. (Explanatory note: While
every attempt has been made, through control of minimum lot size, building location and
82-30
plumbing standards to ensure that proper disposal of sewage will be provided on any lot,
it is recognized that no such standard will completely ensure adequate disposal in every
situation. This section has been written for the purpose of giving the community the
authority to require whatever additional provisions are necessary to prevent a sanitary
problem from developing in a situation where the normal requirement will not ensure
proper sewage disposal.)
(b) Outhouses prohibited. No outhouse or privy shall be hereafter erected.
(c) Water supply required. No occupancy permit shall be issued for a building
used for residence purposes unless provision is made for a safe and adequate supply of
water, or connection is to be made to an approved municipal or community water system.
(d) Reduction in lot size, width, open space, floor area ratio and offset
requirements. In the case of any lot proposed to be served by a municipal or municipally
approved communal sewerage system or water system, and where such service would be
provided prior to any occupancy of such lot, the town board may reduce the lot size,
width, open space, floor area ratio and offset requirements applicable to such lot, upon
recommendation of the plan commission following public hearing. Notice of such
hearing shall be given by official publication and by direct notice to owners of any
contiguous property as listed on the previous tax roll, at least ten and not more than 30
days before such hearing. In making such recommendations the plan commission shall
give particular consideration to the following and shall make written finding of facts
relative thereto:
(1) The suitability of soil, terrain and water level conditions with regard to
effective provision of individual sewage disposal or water supply, with
careful consideration of economic and practical engineering aspects
involved in the future probability or necessity of providing municipal
sewerage or water service in the area.
(2) The effect of any reduction in the lot size, width, open space, floor area
ratio and offset requirements on the character and value of surrounding
development.
(3) The effect of any such reduction on the overall density pattern and the
economic balance of land use in the community.
In the case of reductions involving two or more lots, different provisions
may be established for individual lots to meet special circumstances and to
carry out the intent of the considerations listed in this section. In no case,
however, shall the lot size, width, open space, floor area ratio and offset
requirements be reduced by more than one-third.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.06)
Secs. 82-17--82-19. Reserved.
82-31
ARTICLE III.
CONDITIONAL AND SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS
Sec. 82-20. Use regulations.
(a) Uses restricted. In any district, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected, structurally altered, or relocated except for one or more of the
uses as stated for that district, or as permitted as a conditional use per section 82-21.
(b) Accessory uses. In any district, accessory buildings, structures, and uses
customarily incident to the permitted uses in that district shall be permitted subject to
such requirements as may be designated for that district in which they are located, or as
further regulated in this chapter.
(c) Pyramiding. No pyramiding as defined in this chapter shall be permitted
on any lands fronting on a lake except as may be specifically permitted accessory to a
marina or resort and which may be allowed under the terms of a conditional use permit
for a planned unit development.
(d) Unclassified uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use shall
be considered to be prohibited except as may be otherwise specifically provided per
section 82-21(d)(34). In case of question as to the classification of a use, the question
shall be submitted to the plan commission for determination.
(e) Additional requirements. Any use, in any district, which becomes
hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood
may require correction or improvement by such measures as are directed by the town
board consistent with reasonable technological and economic practicality.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.07)
82-32
Sec. 82-21. Conditional Uses.
(a) Approval required. Certain uses, which are of such a special nature, or are
so dependent on the actual contemporary circumstances as to make impractical the
predetermination of permissibility or the detailing in this Ordinance of the specific
standards, regulations, or conditions which would permit such determination in each
individual situation, may be permitted as conditional uses, subject to such requirements
as determined by the Town Board or specified in this Section.
(1) Application
Application for Conditional Use Permits may be made by an individual property
owner or group of owners or by a municipality, lake management district,
sanitary district or similar agency on behalf of a larger property area where said
proposal may benefit a larger group or entire community. Application shall be
made in triplicate to the Town Clerk and shall include:
a. A map (preferably a topographic map) in triplicate, drawn to a scale of not
less than two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch, showing: the land in
question; its legal description and location; location and use of all existing
buildings, sanitary systems and private water supplies on such land; the high
water elevation of any navigable waters within one hundred (100) feet of the
boundaries of the land in question; the 100-year floodplain or any wetlands or
environmental corridors; the proposed location and use of any buildings;
sanitary systems and water supplies on such land and within one hundred
(100) feet of the land in question.
b. Names and complete mailing addresses, including zip codes, or the owners of
all properties within three hundred (300) feet of any part of the land included
in the proposed application unless waived in writing by the Plan Commission
per Section 3.
c. Additional information as may be required by the Town Planner, Town
Engineer or the Town Plan Commission.
d. A fee, as may be established by the Town Board and periodically modified,
shall accompany each application. Such fees shall be paid to the Town of
Mukwonago to defray the cost of official notification and posting of the public
hearing. Cost incurred by the Town in obtaining legal, planning, engineering,
publication, and notice requirements, and other technical and professional
advice in connection with review of the Conditional Use applications and
preparation of conditions to be imposed on such uses shall be charged to the
applicant, and if required by the Town, a pre-payment deposit covering the
costs shall accompany the application.
e. Where necessary, to comply with certain regulations established by applicable
laws, applications shall be required to be submitted to the other governmental
bodies having jurisdiction which may include the State Department of
Natural Resources and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
82-33
(2) Public Hearing
Upon receipt of the application, the foregoing data and fees, the Town Planner
shall establish a date for a joint public hearing by the Plan Commission and Town
Board, or its designee, and shall publish notice of said hearing once each week for
two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the
proposed Conditional Use. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by
certified mail to the owners of all lands within three hundred (300) feet of any
part of the land included in such Conditional Use at least seven (7) days before
such public hearing unless waived by the Plan Commission as follows. If the
applicant is a governmental entity or group of property owners and the area
affected by the proposed Conditional Use is so large such that the Plan
Commission finds the certified mail notice to the owners within three hundred
(300) feet to be unnecessarily burdensome, the Plan Commission may waive the
certified mail notice requirement.
A copy of the notice of public hearing along with pertinent information relative to
the specific nature of the matter (copy of application and map) shall be
transmitted without delay to any other governmental agencies having jurisdiction
by certified mail not less than then (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
Testimony of all interested parties will be received at the public hearing and the
Plan Commission shall take action within a reasonable time to either recommend
approval or denial of the application along with any recommended conditions of
approval or reasons for recommending denial. The action of the Plan
Commission, and any conditions made applicable thereto, shall then be sent in
writing to the Town Board.
(3) Final review and approval
The Town Board shall review the proposal as submitted along with requirements
as may be established or recommended by other governing bodies having
jurisdiction and the recommendation of the Plan Commission. The Town Board
shall approve or deny the application. If the Town Board approves the
Conditional Use, any conditions as may be deemed necessary by the Town Board
shall be made an integral part of the permit. The applicant shall comply with
these conditions, and any failure to comply with the conditions set forth in the
permit shall constitute a violation of the terms of the Conditional Use Permit.
Such violation shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and will be subject to
prosecution and penalties under the terms of this Ordinance.
(4) Basis of approval.
The determination of whether to approve or deny or conditionally approve
such Conditional Use shall be made by the Town Board, and shall be based on
the consideration of whether or not the proposed use will:
(1) Violate the spirit or intent of the adopted Town of Mukwonago Land Use
Plan or this Ordinance;
(2) Be contrary to the public health, safety or general welfare;
(3) Be hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance by reason of
appearance, noise, dust, smoke, odor or other similar factors.
82-34
Except as may be specifically otherwise provided, any such use shall conform to
any building location, height, and area regulations of the district in which it is
located. The Town Board may also require compliance with such other conditions
as may be deemed necessary by the specific situation. Where it is required that
building plans, site plans and plan of operation be submitted to the Town Plan
Commission or Town Board, such plans shall include such detail as the Town
Board and Plan Commission may require, to enable the Town Board and Plan
Commission to make their determination.
(5) Determination
The action of the Town Board shall include reasons for approval or denial. Any
approval shall include: an accurate description of the use permitted, the property
on which permitted, and any conditions made applicable thereto. If a Conditional
Use Permit is approved, it shall be issued upon compliance with all conditions of
approval and the recording of the Conditional Use Agreement in the Waukesha
County Register of Deeds Office. The Conditional Use Agreement must be
signed by the owner and applicant, and the Town Clerk and Town Chair. The
grant of such status shall be applicable solely to the structures, use and property
so described. Indication shall also be made on the Zoning Map by the appropriate
code number or symbol.
(6) Application for change or extension of Conditional Use Permits
Any change, addition, modification, alteration and/or amendment of any aspect
of a Conditional Use granted by the Town Board, including but not limited to an
addition, modification, alteration, and/or amendment to the use, premises,
structures, lands or owners, other than as specifically authorized by the
Conditional Use permit conditions, shall require a new permit and all procedures
in place at the time must be followed. Unless the Conditional Use permit
conditions expressly state otherwise, plans that are specifically required by the
Conditional Use order may be amended upon the prior approval of the Plan
Commission if the Plan Commission finds the plan amendment to be minor and
consistent with the Conditional Use permit. Any change in any plan that the
Plan Commission finds in its sole discretion to be substantial shall require a
permit, and all procedures in place must be followed.
(7) Termination of Conditional Use status
Conditional Use status may be terminated as follows
(1). The Conditional Use Permit may be terminated on request when
the applicant or holder of the Conditional Use and the property
owner make a request in writing to the Town Board that the
Conditional Use be terminated and the Town Board agrees to
terminate said Conditional Use Permit and notice of said
termination of the Conditional Use Permit is recorded in the
Waukesha County Register of Deeds office; or
82-35
(2). The Conditional Use Permit may be terminated after public
hearing and a class 2 notice is published, and notice is provided to
the applicant or holder of the Conditional Use Permit and the
owner of the subject property, upon the Town Board determining
any of the following:
a. The Conditional Use has not continued in conformity with the
conditions of the permit.
b. A change in the character of the surrounding area or if the
Conditional Use itself causes it to be no longer compatible with
surrounding uses.
c. The Conditional Use has been discontinued for a period of twelve
(12) consecutive or eighteen (18) cumulative months during a
three-year period. A business of seasonal nature shall not be
deemed discontinued during periods in which it is normally
inactive (i.e., summer camps, ski hills, quarries, marinas, etc.).
Upon determination or finding by the Town Board that the use must be
terminated the owner of the premises shall be required to bring all lands
and structures into conformity with the permitted use regulation of the
Zoning District in which the property is located within sixty (60) days
from such determination, unless such time is extended by mutual
agreement of the Town Board and the owner. Upon determination or
finding by the Town Board that changes in use or conditions of use are
found to be more appropriate by the Town, any changes or required
improvements or changes to use or operation as set forth by the Town
Board, shall be made within sixty (60) days unless such time is
specifically extended by mutual agreement of the Town and owner.
(Ord. 2006-6 § 1 2-23-09)
82-36
(d) Conditional uses permitted. Subject to the foregoing, in addition to such uses
enumerated in the district regulations, the following may be permitted as
conditional uses in the districts specified, provided that a public hearing per
section 82-267, shall be held by the town board before approval for any such
conditional use is granted. All references, in this section, to residential districts
shall include the rural home and suburban estate districts, unless otherwise noted.
(1) Adult-oriented establishments. In the B-3 general business district, subject
to the following:
a. The building, site plan and plan of operation have been submitted
to and approved by the plan commission.
b. A license to operate an adult-oriented establishment has been
issued for the subject property.
c. No adult-oriented establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet
of any public or private school, church, religious institution,
daycare center or Public Park. No adult-oriented establishment
shall be located within 500 feet of any residential district or any
other adult-oriented establishment. The distances noted in this
subsection shall be measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures or objects from the closest point of the
structure or portion of the structure occupied or proposed for
occupancy by the adult-oriented establishment to the nearest point
of the parcel of property or land use district boundary from which
the proposed land use is to be separated.
(2) Agricultural businesses including fur farms, pea vineries, creameries, food
mills, egg production facilities, commercial greenhouses and
condenseries. In agriculture, business or industrial districts subject to the
following:
a. The building plans, site plans and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No such use shall be permitted on a lot less than five acres in area.
c. No building other than one used only for residence purposes shall
be closer than 50 feet to the lot line of an adjoining lot in a district
permitting residential use.
(3) Airports, landing field, and take-off strips. In all agricultural districts,
provided the location, building, site plans, and plan of operation have been
submitted to and approved by the town board. This use shall be permitted
in the A-P and A-T districts only when agricultural in character.
(4) Animal hospitals and commercial kennels. In any district other than
residential, restricted business, E-C environmental corridor district, A-E
exclusive agricultural district and C-1 conservancy districts.
82-37
a. The building plans, site plans and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No such use shall be permitted on a lot of less than three acres.
c. No building other than one used only for residence purposes shall
be closer than 100 feet to the lot line of an adjoining lot in a district
permitting residential use.
(5) Antique shops, gift shops, arts and craft studios and similar uses. Such
uses are permitted by right in any business district and may be allowed as
conditional uses in all agricultural and residential Districts except for A-E,
A-P, A-T and C-1 and E-C districts, subject to the following:
a. The site plan, building plans, and plan of operation have been
approved by the plan commission.
b. The planning commission shall make a finding that such use is
compatible with surrounding and nearby residential land uses
which may be affected by the proposed use.
(6) Arcades and other amusement places. Such uses are permitted uses by
right in B-3 business districts, and may be allowed as conditional uses in
B-1 and B-2 districts, subject to the following:
a. The site plan, building plans and plan of operation have been
approved by the plan commission.
b. The plan commission shall make a finding that such use is
compatible with surrounding and nearby residential land uses
which may be affected by the proposed use.
(7) Automobile service stations. In local business or less restrictive districts,
subject to the following:
a. The building plans, site plans and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No gasoline pump or other accessory equipment shall be closer
than 15 feet to the base setback line.
c. No lighting installation shall be permitted which creates a hazard
to traffic or a nuisance to surrounding property.
(8) Cemeteries and mausoleums for the burial of human remains only. In any
district except E-C, C-1 and A-E districts, subject to approval of the town
board, follow the recommendations of the plan commission.
82-38
(9) Churches, synagogues, and other buildings for religious assembly. In any
district except E-C, C-1 and A-E, A-P, A-T or industrial districts, subject
to the following requirements:
a. The location building, site plan and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. A floor area ratio of no more than 50 percent is allowed.
(Ord. 2007-2 § 1 12-01-06)
c. Off-street parking be provided for one automobile for each four
seats providing the main assembly of the building.
d. Such use shall conform to the setback, height and double the offset
requirements of the district in which it is located.
e. The height limitation may be extended to a maximum of 50 feet
provided the minimum required setback and offset shall be
increased two for each additional foot of height in excess of the
permitted maximum in the district. The height regulation shall not
apply to the spire or belfry of a church except where airport safety
zoned regulations specifically limit the maximum height.
(10) Commercial fish, bait, ponds or hatcheries. In any district other than an
environmental corridor district subject to the following:
a. The building plans, site plans, and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No such use shall be permitted on a lot less than five acres in area.
c. No building other than one used only for residence purposes shall
be closer than 50 feet to the lot line of an adjoining lot in a district
permitting residential use.
(11) Commercial stables. Such uses are permitted uses by right in the EFO, AE,
A-P, A-T and A-1 districts on parcels 20 acres or greater in size, such
uses are not permitted uses and may not be allowed as conditional uses on
any size parcel in the C-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts, such uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the EFO, A-E, A-P, A-T and A-1 districts
on parcels of less than 20 acres, such uses may be allowed as conditional
uses in the R-H, S-E, B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1 and M-2 districts subject to the
following:
a. The building plans, site plans, plan of operation and refuse disposal
plan shall be submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No buildings other than one used only for residential purposes
shall be closer than 100 feet to the lot line of any adjoining lot in a
district permitting residential use.
82-39
c. The plan commission shall make a finding that such use is
compatible with surrounding and nearby residential land uses
which may be affected by the proposed use.
d. Generally, not more than one horse or other head of livestock
should be kept for each full open acre over two acres of open lot
area, unless the plan commission makes a specific finding that the
subject parcel can maintain a greater number of livestock based on
the proposed building plans, site plans, plan of operation and
refuse disposal plan.
e. The keeping of hogs, pigs of any type (except potbellied pigs as
defined in this chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has
been issued), male goats or fur-bearing animals shall not be
permitted on less than 20 acres.
(12) Commercial truck parking. In all residential, agricultural, B-1 and B-2
business districts, subject to the recommendation of the plan commission
following an informal hearing per section 82-27(c)(3) and the following
conditions:
a. The parking and storage of commercial type vehicles (dump
trucks, school buses, construction vehicles, semi trailers and
tractors) may be allowed as long as the vehicle is owned or leased
and operated by the owner or occupant of the premises. No such
use shall be allowed on any parcel except as may front directly
upon and have access to, an arterial or major collector street, as
defined in the county established street and highway width map.
b. No more than one such vehicle shall be allowed to be parked or
stored on the occupant's property and no more than two additional
construction vehicles (backhoes, front end loaders, grading
equipment, etc.) shall be allowed. Such vehicles shall be fully
operative and in active use. Where considered appropriate, one
trailer may be allowed but in no case may there be more than one
semi-tractor or cab unit.
c. No such vehicles shall be allowed to be parked or stored closer
than 50 feet to any adjacent lot line and not closer than 100 feet
from the base setback line. In the case of a refrigerator truck, the
refrigeration unit may not be operated in the open if such truck is
parked closer than 500 feet to the nearest neighboring property
line.
d. The conditional use permit shall be reviewed every two years by
the planning commission in order to determine conformance with
the terms of the permit and its compatibility with the adjacent land
uses. If it is determined that the conditional use permit is no longer
82-40
compatible, or that the provisions of the permit have not been
complied with, the conditional use permit may be revoked or
amended in accordance with the procedures outlined in this
chapter.
82-41
(13) Conservation design developments.
a. The conservation design development shall allow residential
development the flexibility of design to preserve in perpetuity
unique or sensitive natural areas such as:
1. Groundwater recharge areas;
2. Floodplains;
3. Wetlands;
4. Streams;
5. Steep slopes;
6. Woodlands;
7. Wildlife habitat; and
8. Environmental corridors.
b. Further the design of the development shall endeavor to:
1. Preserve historic and archeological sites;
2. Reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved
surfaces and utility easements;
3. Reduce soil erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land
disturbance;
4. Limit the amount of vegetation removal;
5. Interconnect greenways and corridors;
6. Promote contiguous green space with adjacent
developments;
7. Promote the construction of walking trails and bike paths;
8. Conserve scenic views;
9. Protect agricultural land; and
10. Preserve farming as an economic activity.
c. The two types of conservation design developments allowed under
the provisions of this subsection are as follows:
82-42
1. A unified and planned development of a site, in single
ownership, in a partnership, in corporate ownership, or in
common ownership under the Condominium Ownership
Act (Wis. Stats. § 703.01 et seq.) at the time of
development, without the customary division into
individual lots; and
2. The development of the parcel into individual lots with
common, corporate or public open space.
d. The number of dwelling units, amount of open space and open
space uses in a conservation design development shall be
determined by a detailed analysis of the physical features of the
site and surrounding land uses.
e. Conservation design developments are not allowed in the AT, EFO,
R-3, B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, or M-2 zoning districts. In all other
districts the lot size, lot width, offset, setback, open space, and
floor area requirements may be modified according to the
following conditions:
1. All sanitary and water provisions are in conformance with
the requirements of the Waukesha County Code Regulating
On-site Sewage Disposal Systems or the local sanitary
district. Community septic systems are not allowed which
require the town to own them or be responsible for them;
and
2. The proposed development is:
i. In conformity with the master plan and any local
comprehensive plans component;
ii. In conformity with the general welfare and
economic balance of the community; and
iii. The proposed development is such that the benefits
and amenities of the resultant development justify
the variation from the normal requirements of the
district in which it is located.
f. Specific project factors; residential density factors.
1. The ultimate allowable density shall be determined by the
town board based upon recommendations of the plan
commission and consultations with the developer and shall
not be more than the density allowed in the residential
density factor chart with consideration of the following
factors:
82-43
i. Traffic and capacity of public roads in the area;
ii. The terrain of the site and the adjacent properties;
iii. The adjacent land uses and their densities;
iv. Soil suitability of the site;
v. Drainage patterns and the need for area wide
stormwater facilities; and
vi. Compliance with the town's official map.
2. The maximum allowable densities shall not be greater than
those permitted in the underlying zoning district and the
maximum allowable density shall be computed by dividing
the total area allowable for density computations by the
appropriate residential density factor. Existing public rightof-
way or existing public open space easements may not be
included in the area for density computation.
3. The following residential density factors shall be utilized to
compute the maximum number of dwelling units in
accordance with the following table:
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY FACTOR CHART
Zoning
Classification
Maximum Residence
Density Factor
Minimum Lot
Size
A-P 35 acres/dwelling
unit
3/4 Acre
R-H 5 acres/dwelling unit 3/4 Acre
EC 5 acres/dwelling unit 3/4 Acre
A-1 3.2 acres/dwelling
unit
3/4 Acre
S-E 3.2 acres/dwelling
unit
3/4 Acre
R-1 1 acre/dwelling unit 3/4 Acre
R-2 1 acre/dwelling unit 3/4 Acre
4. Other zoning districts not listed above shall not be used to
increase the calculation of density of a conservation design
development other than the conservancy and A-E exclusive
agricultural district which may be used to augment the
otherwise applicable density of a conservation design
development in one of the two following ways, whichever
allows the least additional density:
82-44
i. Twenty percent of the area of lands which are zoned
conservancy or A-E exclusive agricultural district
within the project may be used to augment the
conservancy design development; or
ii. Five percent of that part of the total project area,
which is zoned other than conservancy or A-E
exclusive agricultural district, may be used to
augment the conservation design development
project density.
Example:
Existing conditions:
Total area of project
("Total Area"): 180 acres
Total conservancy and exclusive agriculture lands
("Total Protected Area"): 60 acres
Total area minus total protected area
("Developable Area"): 120 acres
Conservancy and exclusive agriculture zoned lands
comparison:
Twenty percent of the total protected area (60 acres)
= 12 acres
Five percent of the developable area (120 acres) =
Six acres
Analysis:
Six is less than 12, so six acres can be added to the
developable area.
One hundred and twenty acres developable area +
six acres = 126 acres. Assuming the developable
area is zoned A-1 and A-1 allows one dwelling unit
per 3.2 acres, then 126 ÷ 3.2 = 39 units.
5. Required standards as established by the town relative to
road design, drainage or other engineering parameters may
be modified as part of conditions of approval as long as
modifications are consistent with good practice and
approval of the town board.
6. A conservation design development, in the judgment of the
town board after recommendation by the plan commission,
shall meet the following standards:
82-45
i. Provide valuable and important open space;
ii. Assure attractive and appropriate building
improvements and configurations;
iii. Allow improvements and facilities necessary to
serve the residents and/or users of the development;
iv. Have adequate area for on-site sewage disposal and
water facilities for each dwelling unit;
v. Provide adequate area for on-site drainage systems
such as porous pavement, rain gardens and
infiltration swales and area wide stormwater
facilities;
vi. Are compatible with adjacent land uses; and
vii. Preserve groundwater recharge areas designated by
the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission or the state department of natural
resources by promoting on-site sustainable land use
and integrated water resource management
practices.
g. Open space in conservation design developments. Conservation
design developments shall have a minimum of 40 percent of the
site in common or public open space. The open space may be in
public ownership, private conservation organization ownership or
an undividable interest acceptable to the town board, or private
ownership with an open space easement to assure that the open
space will be permanent. The open space area shall be
conveniently accessible to all residential dwelling units within the
conservation design development, and be a meaningful and useful
area for such intended open use. It is the intent of this subsection to
ensure that all lot owners are in close proximity to the open space,
and to maintain a maximum amount of open space.
1. In a conservation design development the open space must
include all the following physical features of the site:
i. 100-year floodplain;
ii. Wetlands;
iii. A minimum 75-foot buffer along all perennial or
intermittent streams or public bodies of waters;
iv. All slopes over 20 percent in at least 5,000 square
feet of contiguous area;
82-46
v. Known populations of endangered or threatened
species and habitat;
vi. Archeological sites; and
vii. Environmental areas as designated on the town
master plan and park and open space plan.
2. While every attempt is being made to protect the
environmental characteristics of the site, a maximum of
two percent of such open space areas may be impervious,
which may be used for limited construction of
recreationally related structures, roads, parking areas and
trails. The town plan commission and the town board may
modify this maximum requirement in conformance with the
overall intent of these provisions while also protecting the
public interest.
3. The open space areas may be used for:
i. Conservation type uses;
ii. Passive recreational activities;
iii. Trails;
iv. Preservation of archeological and historical sites;
v. Agricultural, horticultural and other pasture uses,
which follow all applicable best management
practices to minimize environmental impact, subject
to approval of the town board as part of the
conditional use grant;
vi. Dedication to a public entity or nonprofit
conservation organization in accordance with the
adopted town park and open space plan; and
vii. Community facilities such as swimming pools,
tennis courts, play structures or equestrian facilities.
4. Leasing of common open space may require restrictions on
the access of the residents. It relieves the homeowners of
the responsibility of maintenance of the green space and
may generate income. The open space may be leased to a
farmer for agricultural activities conducted according to
acceptable terms. A conservation easement or restrictive
covenants must detail the operation and maintenance
responsibilities associated with the ownership and
82-47
enforcement responsibilities of holders of said easement or
restrictions.
5. No more than 20 percent of the required open space may be
C-1 or A-E zoned lands.
6. Adequate guarantees shall be provided for permanent
retention of the open space resulting from these regulations
either by private reservation for the use of the residents of
the development or others as may be specifically provided
for (i.e., farmer's use of open space, dedication to a public
entity or transfer to a conservation organization). Buildings
or uses for noncommercial, recreational or accessory
facilities may be permitted in such open space, subject to a
conditional use permit. Perpetual care and maintenance of
such open space and structures shall be provided for, and an
operational plan shall be submitted for specific approval
and inclusion in the terms of the permit. Ownership and tax
liability of the open space shall be established in a manner
acceptable to the town board and town attorney, and shall
be made a part of the conditions of approval.
7. The developer shall enter into a developer's agreement with
the town to guarantee the implementation of the
developments of the open space according to the terms or
the conditions established as part of the development plan
approval.
8. Perpetual care and maintenance of the open space shall be
provided for by an agreement recorded with the county
register of deeds office. The agreement shall include an
operation plan, which shall preserve the natural qualities of
the environmentally sensitive lands. Agreements shall be
submitted to and approved by the town plan commission,
the town board and the town attorney.
h. Application procedures.
1. Filing procedure to initiate projects and preapplication
conference. The following information shall be submitted
prior to any requests for approval of any type of
conservation design development. The applicants are
required to submit a site analysis map at the time they
submit an application for a preapplication conference. The
purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the
important site features have been adequately surveyed and
identified and this information has been or will be
incorporated into the site design. This will give the town
plan commission, town board, town planner and the town
engineer the necessary information to understand the
82-48
physical features of the site in their review of the sketch
plan and make recommendations for changes before the
applicant has invested in the final site design. The site
analysis map should show:
i. Property boundaries;
ii. All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other
hydrological features;
iii. Topographic contours with intervals of two feet or
less;
iv. Each primary and secondary environmental corridor
labeled by type;
v. General vegetation characteristics;
vi. General soils types by group;
vii. The planned boundaries of protected open space, in
compliance with subsection (d)(13)g.1 of this
section;
viii. Existing roads and streets;
ix. Open space and trails traversing, or adjacent to the
site, whether existing or planned. Any other site
information reasonably necessary for the town plan
commission or the town board to make a
determination;
x. All class I and II soils for agricultural uses;
xi. Aerial photographs with a scale of one inch equals
100 feet; and
xii. Any groundwater recharge area designated by the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission or the state department of natural
resources.
2. Site visit. The applicant is encouraged to hold a site visit on
the subject property, prior to filing an application, as part of
the preapplication process. The applicant can make
arrangements for a site visit by contacting the town planner.
The purpose of the site visit is to provide an opportunity for
everyone involved in the subdivision proposal to
familiarize themselves with the property's existing
conditions and special features, to identify potential site
82-49
design issues, and to discuss design concepts, including the
general layout of designated conservation areas, if
applicable, and potential locations for proposed buildings
and street alignments. This part of the preapplication
conference is optional, but is perhaps the most critical of
the entire design and review process; because it enables the
applicants, the staff, and the town plan commission and
town board to work together to fully understand the site and
its potential for carefully designing a development around
an open space network. The goal of the site visit is to
ensure that the features mapped on the site analysis maps
have been designed around and protected. If a site visit is
scheduled, those invited shall include the town staff, the
town plan commission, and the town board, along with the
applicant and the general public. Notice of the site visit
shall include all notices as may be required by the state
open meetings laws, and the site visit shall be conducted in
compliance with such laws. The town, its boards,
commissions, officers, agents and staff are not required to
attend a scheduled site visit, and a properly noticed site
visit can occur even if less than a quorum of any invited
governing body attends. Comments made by town officials,
agents or staff during a site visit shall be understood and
interpreted as being only informal and suggestive, and shall
not be binding on either the town or the applicant. It should
be understood by all parties that no formal
recommendations can be offered, and no decisions can be
made at the site visit, which is essentially an outdoor
workshop session. Nothing that transpires during the site
visit shall relieve the applicant from the obligation to fully
comply with the application, submittal and review
procedures of this Code and the town land division and
development ordinance and other laws. The town, its
boards, commissions, officers, agents and staff shall not be
deemed to have formal, actual or implied notice of existing
features of the property or the surrounding environs that
must be shown or disclosed in the application and review
process, even if such features were observed or were
readily observable during a site visit.
3. Sketch plans.
i. The applicant shall also submit the following sketch
plans:
(aa) A sketch plan of a conventional subdivision
layout, which complies with the zoning
district requirements and the town land
division and development control ordinance;
82-50
(bb) A sketch plan of a planned unit development
complying with all open space regulations,
densities and lot size requirements of this
chapter and with the town land division and
development control ordinance; and
(cc) A sketch plan of a conservation design
development which shall have of a
minimum of 40 percent of the subject
property in open space meeting all open
space regulations, all density requirements
and complies with the town land division
and development control ordinance.
ii. The individual sketch plan shall be prepared by
using a four-step process, which includes the
following:
(aa) A detailed site analysis of all the physical
features and resources of the subject
property;
(bb) Submit a map showing the number and
location of the individual house sites as
allowed by the density of the applicable
zoning district;
(cc) Locate the proposed roads to accommodate
all proposed home sites while preserving the
physical features of the site and complying
with the road standards in the town land
division and development control ordinance;
and
(dd) Designate lot lines for the house sites in
accordance with the minimum lot size
requirements of this chapter.
4. Application. Following the preapplication conference, an
official submittal shall be made to the town clerk and shall
include 15 copies each of the conventional layout and
proposed conservation design development map, preferably
on a topographic map, drawn at a scale of 100:1, showing
the following:
i. The size, arrangement, and location of all lots,
blocks, and all proposed buildings or building
groups located within the common area;
82-51
ii. The pattern of public streets, existing and proposed
utility easements, and other public improvements;
iii. The location of recreational open space and areas
reserved or dedicated for use by the residences;
iv. The general landscape treatment with particular
attention given to the treatment and creation of
buffer zones between the proposed cluster
development and any adjacent development
whether residential or otherwise;
v. Existing topography and stormwater drainage, and
proposed stormwater drainage systems, showing
basic topographic changes and proposed grading
elevations;
vi. All physical features of the site, such as wetlands,
primary and secondary environmental corridors,
isolated natural areas, and historic features;
vii. All types and locations of trees greater than eightinch
caliper in the buildable area. This requirement
may be waived by the plan commission if it is
determined during a site visit that no public or
private improvements will occur on areas on the site
containing the trees;
viii. A completed town land division review checklist;
ix. Statistical data on the total size of the project area,
area of the open space, density computations,
proposed number and types of residential units, an
economic and market analysis, impact on municipal
services, wetlands, groundwater and other
environmentally sensitive areas and any other
pertinent data required by the town plan
commission or town board;
x. A general summary of financial factors such as
value of the structures, estimated improvement
costs, amounts proposed for landscaping and special
features, and total anticipated development cost of
project;
xi. Anticipated amounts of impervious surface
including all proposed public and private
improvements;
82-52
xii. General outline of intended organizational structure
related to property owner's association, architectural
review committee, deed restrictions, and provision
of utility and other services;
xiii. A project staging plan which outlines a timetable for
project development including, but not limited to,
road cutting, utility hookups, building
constructions, landscaping, and open
space/recreational areas provisions; and
xiv. An environmental impact assessment of loss of
plant species and animal habitat, farmland,
wetlands, soil erosion, surface and groundwater
hydrology, water quality, aquatic species and air
resources may be required if deemed reasonably
necessary by both the town board and the plan
commission.
5. Fees. A fee, as set by town board resolution from time to
time, shall accompany each application. Such fee shall be
paid by cash, check, or money order to the Town of
Mukwonago to defray the costs of review. The costs
incurred by the town in obtaining legal, planning,
engineering, and other technical and professional advice in
connection with the review of the application and
preparation of conditions for such uses shall be charged to
the applicant and, if required by the town, a fee covering
such costs shall accompany the application.
i. Approval procedures.
1. Referral for action by the town plan commission. The town
planner shall, within 30 days after receipt of the
application, determine whether the application fulfills the
requirements of this section. If the staff determines that the
application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this
section, the staff shall refer the same to the town plan
commission to schedule a public hearing, in accordance
with section 82-267. If the staff determines that the
application is not complete and does not fulfill the
requirements of this section, they shall return the
application to the applicant. When the application meets the
staff's approval, it shall be referred to the town plan
commission and the town engineering consultants for their
report and recommendation. Upon completion of the
necessary study and investigation, the town plan
commission shall make its recommendation, as to the
appropriateness and desirability of the proposed project
82-53
with the density factor requested, the suitability of the
proposed development, and any changes or additional
conditions applicable to such plans, which they may feel
are necessary and appropriate.
2. Basis for approval. The town plan commission, in its
action, shall give consideration to and be satisfied as to the
following:
i. The proposed development is consistent with the
spirit and intent of this chapter and will not be
contrary to the general welfare and economic
prosperity of the town, but rather that the benefits
derived by utilizing the conservation design
development and, in keeping with the current
economic and social consideration, justifies the
application of the conservation design development
technique;
ii. Such development conforms to the adopted master
plan of the town and its components;
iii. The size, quality, and architectural design of all
buildings in the project shall not be of such as to
have an adverse effect upon the general character of
the town or the surrounding neighborhood;
iv. Functional utility and relationship of the lots or
units to the common open space and facilities
provided shall be of such quality, size, and aesthetic
value as to meet the purpose and intent of this
chapter, and that all other required preserved areas
are preserved or protected unless disturbed to
accommodate a road as designated on the town's
official map;
v. The approval shall be based upon satisfaction of
standards of this chapter and shall include any
conditions of approval applicable thereto, regarding
the building design, site layout, and operational
plans, as well as all other commitments offered and
required in regard to project value, character, or
other factors pertinent to an insurance that the
proposed development will be carried out as
approved;
vi. The plan will result in preservation of open land in a
manner, which will enhance the total environmental
setting and desirability of the development and of
the neighborhood and that adequate guarantee is
82-54
provided for permanent retention as common open
space of the residential open land areas resulting
from the application of these standards. These are
by private reservation or by dedication to the public;
and
vii. Ownership and tax liability of the private open
space preservation areas shall be established in a
manner acceptable to the town attorney and made a
part of the conditions of this specific plan approval.
3. Approval by town board. The town board, after receiving
the recommendation of the planning commission,
conducting of public hearing per section 82-267, and due
consideration, may deny, approve, or approve subject to
additional conditions the conditional use permit.
4. Application for residential development permit. Upon
approval and compliance with any conditions of the town
plan commission and town board, the applicant shall be
authorized to submit an application for residential
development permits and the necessary allotment.
5. Preliminary plat or condominium plat approval. Upon
approval of the necessary residential development permits
and the required allotment, the preliminary plat or
condominium plat may then be submitted for approval.
6. Conditions for preparation of final plat or condominium
plat. After issuance of a conditional use permit, the final
plat or condominium plat shall be prepared in accordance
with the conditions specified and the following shall be
submitted:
i. Developers agreement: A contractual agreement
between the town and the owners of the
development outlining all of the obligations and
commitments required by the town.
ii. Rights-of-way, easements, exact net area. The
subdivision plat, condominium plat or certified
survey map shall show all rights-of-way, easements,
and the exact net area.
iii. Homeowners Association bylaws: The Homeowners
Association documents of incorporation and bylaws
shall be submitted to and approved by the town
attorney, town planner and the town board and
placed on record with the town clerk and be
82-55
recorded in the county register of deeds office. Such
documents must conform with all state and local
requirements for the protection of the property
owners and the town.
vi. Utility and stormwater facility easements:
Wherever required by the town, utility companies or
the county land resources division and conforming
to the specifications of the town and county.
v. Construction routes: A map of the development
showing the access points to be used by
construction vehicles during the course of
construction, and which shall become part of the
contract between the town and the developer, with
such provisions for enforcement as provided in the
contract.
7. Consultant and legal fees: If the town incurs consultant or
legal fees to prepare or review any aspect of the proposed
development, the town will notify the petitioner of what
portion of fees shall be charged to petitioner, and all such
charges shall be paid in full before signing the final
document, in the form of a final plat, certified survey map,
or condominium plat.
8. Financial guarantee to complete construction of
improvements in conservation design developments: A
letter of credit or cash deposit in a state financial institution
or other satisfactory financial guarantee approved by the
town attorney or town board to cover the cost of all
improvements and facilities agreed upon in the conditional
use permit and final plat, certified survey map or
condominium plat.
9. Recording: The conditional use shall be recorded in the
county office of the register of deeds to affect the real estate
upon which the conditional use is granted.
10. Subsequent changes or additions: Any subsequent changes
or additions to an approved plan shall first be submitted for
approval to the town plan commission and, if it is the
commission's opinion such change or addition is not
substantial, it may recommend approval to the town board.
The following shall automatically be construed to be
substantial:
i. An increase in the number of dwelling units from
that shown in the approved project;
82-56
ii. A significant change in the size, value, or type of
structure from that indicated in the approved
conditional use;
iii. The addition of any principal uses not included in
the approved conditional use; and
iv. Any change in the basic concept of the site
development, which would significantly alter the
relationship of uses or open space to adjoining
properties
82-57
(14) Conversions.
a. Where permitted, as outlined in subsection (d)(11)b of this section,
rentals of existing barns and farm buildings for the storage of
machinery, equipment, vehicles, boats, furniture and similar items,
under the circumstances described in the following sentence, may
be permitted as a conditional use in the A-1 agricultural district
where the parcel was the original farmstead and is not a lot in a
recorded subdivision plat. This conditional use permit is required
whenever items that are not owned by the lot owner or by a person
lawfully residing on the lot, are stored in existing barns or farm
buildings in the A-1 agricultural district, and for which storage the
owner of the items pays rent, provides goods or services, or
provides other consideration.
b. Conditions under which the conversion will be permitted.
Conditional use status will not be granted to any conversion for the
use of an existing barn or farm building for the storage of
machinery, equipment, vehicles, boats, furniture or similar items,
unless all of the following conditions are met:
1. No such use shall be permitted on parcels less than ten
acres in size.
2. The use, if it is allowed, will be allowed only in buildings
as they exist on the premises on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived, except as
otherwise described in this chapter.
3. No additional buildings or additions may be made without
the expressed approval of the planning commission in
accordance with the terms of the applicable ordinances. No
new buildings will be allowed for the purpose of rental
storage.
4. A certified survey map must be submitted with the
application for the conditional use detailing the size, offsets
and use of all existing structures on the subject parcel.
5. The parcel must have access to an arterial or collector street
as defined on the County Street and highway width map.
6. There shall be no outside storage allowed. Storage of
machinery, vehicles, equipment, boats, furniture or other
similar items outside overnight shall be considered a
violation of the terms of any conditional use permit issued
under this subsection and grounds for termination of such
permit.
82-58
7. Water supply facilities and the necessary septic system
shall be in accordance with the rules of the county
department of parks and land use, environmental health
division and the state department of commerce.
8. There shall be no commercial signs associated with the
proposed use.
9. A detailed landscaping plan indicating the size, type,
location and time table, for installation shall be submitted
and approved by the planning commission prior to issuance
of the conditional use permit.
10. The buildings and grounds shall be maintained in a neat,
attractive and orderly way.
11. The property shall comply with all rules and regulations of
the town, the appropriate state building code and the local
fire department regulations, including submission to routine
inspections by the town and fire department.
12. In determining whether or not the proposed conditional use
permit shall be recommended, a "determination of
compatibility" with adjacent land uses shall be made by the
planning commission who shall forward that
recommendation to the town board. The town board shall
then, upon consideration of the planning commission's
recommendation and all other relevant factors, make a
determination of compatibility. In making this
determination both the planning commission and the town
board shall consider the town master plan to determine
whether there will be any potential conflicts with future
development, which may occur in accordance with the
town master plan.
13. The location, building, and site plan and plan-of-operation
must be submitted to and approved by the planning
commission.
14. When the proposed use includes the storage of equipment
and vehicles normally associated with an ongoing business,
the use shall be explicitly for storage. There shall be no
office permitted on such premises, nor shall the building be
occupied for any reason other than periodic pickup and
return of equipment on a seasonal basis.
82-59
15. If there are complaints about unusual noise inconsistent
with the normal operations of such storage buildings, the
planning commission may recommend to the town board
that a public hearing shall be held upon due notice and shall
make reasonable rules and regulations in regards to
rectifying the conflicts with adjacent land uses or terminate
the use.
16. Any building used for such storage shall be at least 50 feet
from all side and rear lot lines.
17. The town board may impose additional reasonable
conditions upon the issuance of the conditional use permit.
As a condition precedent to the issuance of the conditional
use permit, the petitioner is required to accept the terms and
conditions of the conditional use permit in its entirety, in
writing.
(15) Drive-in establishments serving food or beverages to customers other than
at a booth or table. In local business or less restrictive districts, provided
the building plans, site plans, and plan of operation have been submitted to
and approved by the plan commission.
(16) Feed lot operation. Feed lots, as defined in section 82-4, including
livestock and poultry of all types, may be permitted as conditional uses in
all agricultural districts except A-E agricultural, subject to the following:
This conditional use category is created in recognition of the potential
which exists in feed lot operations for uncontrolled runoff and animal
waste, pollution of surface and groundwater and potential for such use to
be a nuisance.
a. General requirements:
1. No feed lot operation shall be permitted on less than 35
acres of tillable land nor closer than 1,000 feet from any
land presently zoned for a residential district.
2. No accessory residence shall be permitted closer than 100
feet to the feed lot operation.
3. No part of the feed lot operation shall be closer than 300
feet from the centerline of any public road nor closer than
200 feet from the lot lines of the site on which the
production unit is situated.
4. It is important that careful planning and sound management
be applied to the operation of manure handling and waste
runoff. Farmers are encouraged to seek advice from the
county land conservation committee. A conservation plan
addressing the proposed methods of manure handling and
82-60
waste runoff control shall be prepared and made a part of
the plan of operation for any proposed feed lot operation.
5. Animal waste shall not be mechanically spread between
December 1 and April 1 unless the manner of application
has been reviewed by and approved by the town board.
b. Information to be submitted:
1. A site plan showing drainage, structures and the methods to
be employed to control, contain or divert runoff of animal
wastes.
2. An operation plan detailing the method of operation and the
equipment necessary to accomplish safe and sanitary
disposal of animal wastes.
3. A statement of the number of animals to be contained in the
proposed animal feed lot. This plan shall include numbers,
type and weights. Any change in the number of animal
units for a period of more than 30 days shall be reported to
the plan commission.
4. A statement detailing the method of animal collection,
storage and disposal to be employed.
5. A conservation plan prepared by the county land
conservation committee, with approval by the plan
commission.
(17) In-law units. In the A-P, R-H, E-C, A-1, S-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, B-2, B-
3, subject to the restrictions as set forth in section 82-200, M-1, subject to
the restrictions as set forth in section 82-230, M-2, subject to the
restrictions as set forth in division 18, and all planned unit developments
subject to the following:
a. The location, building and site plans shall be submitted to and
approved by the plan commission.
b. The county health department shall certify that the septic system
will accommodate the proposed use.
c. The maximum living area in an in-law unit shall not exceed 800
square feet for a one bedroom unit and 900 square feet for a two
bedroom unit.
d. There shall be an additional parking space for the in-law unit.
82-61
e. The architecture of the residence shall be compatible with the
adjacent residential neighborhood and should appear to be a singlefamily
residence.
f. The plan commission may determine that it is appropriate to have
an interior door between the living units.
g. A deed restriction shall be filed in the county register of deeds'
office prior to issuance of the building permit indicating that this
living unit is for family members of the principal dwelling unit
only.
(18) Laboratories for testing, experimental or analytical purposes. In any
district other than residential, environmental corridor or restricted business
districts, subject to the following:
a. The building plans, site plans and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No building other than one used only for residence purposes shall
be closer than 50 feet to the line of an adjoining lot in a district
permitting residential use.
c. Off-street parking shall be provided as required for office building
and customer service establishments.
(19) Legal nonconforming uses. In any district as provided by section 82-
32(b)(2).
(20) Marinas and boat deliveries. To be allowed as a permitted use by right in
B-3, M-1 and M-2 districts and a conditional use in all other districts
except A-P, A-E and E-C subject to the following:
a. Such use shall be located at least 500 feet from the nearest public
bathing beach or park.
b. Such use is designed and constructed so as not to interfere with the
adjacent riparian owners use of the water for swimming, fishing or
boating nor interfere or obstruct the public's free navigation.
c. The minimum lot area shall be one acre with a minimum lake
frontage of not less than 150 feet.
d. The building plans, site plans and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
e. Sewage disposal field shall be located not closer than 50 feet from
the normal high water mark of the body of water.
82-62
f. Fuel pumps shall be located two feet above the normal high water
mark elevation. Fuel storage tanks shall be located not less than
100 feet from the normal high water mark and shall be located
aboveground and shall be adequately screened and fireproofed.
The offset requirements for fuel pumps and storage tanks shall be
at least 50 feet from any side lot line and all other locational
requirements as required by the local fire department.
g. No lighting installation shall be permitted which creates a hazard
to traffic or nuisance to surrounding properties.
h. The aggregate length of all piers shall not exceed one-half of the
total width of lakeshore as measured at the meander line of the
premises. Piers shall not be constructed closer to the side lot line
than the length of its pier.
i. Mooring of boats shall only be permitted in a way which will not
necessitate maneuvering beyond the extended lot lines.
j. Land storage may be permitted based upon the size of the parcel
and its compatibility with the other uses of the premises.
k. Any other requirements which may be deemed necessary by the
planning commission and board.
(21) Mobile home parks and trailer camps. In any district other than C-1, A-E,
A-T, E-C, A-P, residential or restricted business districts, provided the site
plan and plan of operation have been submitted to and approved by the
plan commission subject to the following:
a. No such use shall be permitted on a parcel less than five acres in
area.
b. No buildings shall be located closer than 50 feet to the lot line of
an adjoining residential district.
c. The provisions of all county, state and local regulation on trailers,
mobile homes and mobile home parks shall be met.
d. A county septic system permit, or permits, shall be required to
accommodate all proposed units.
e. Mobile home parks developed to permit privately owned lots must
be designed and built in accordance with the PUD requirements.
(22) Motels. In any district other than a residential, C-1 and E-C, A-P, A-E, AT
or restricted business districts, subject to the following:
82-63
a. The building plans, site plans, and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No such use shall be permitted on a lot less than three acres in
area.
c. At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each
rental unit.
d. No building shall be closer than 50 feet to the lot line of an
adjoining lot in a district permitting residential use.
(23) Multifamily units and condominiums. In R-2, R-3, B-1, B-2, or planned
unit developments, subject to the following:
a. The minimum lot area shall be determined by the number of units
to be constructed on one parcel. When the units are to be served by
private waste disposal system, each unit shall have a minimum of
15,000 square feet of open space on suitable soils for septic system
operation. Where the use will be served by municipal sewer, the
open space requirements can be reduced to a minimum of 10,000
square feet per unit. The width of the lot shall be increased as the
size of the lot increases in order to avoid excessively long, narrow
lots and shall, however, be no less than 180 feet in width.
b. The manner in which the units are to be serviced with sewage
disposal is subject to the approval of the state department
commerce and the county health department, prior to approval by
the Town.
c. The minimum floor area per unit shall be as set forth in the basic
underlying district in which the property is located.
d. Architectural review of the project may be required by the
planning commission.
e. There shall be at least two off-street parking spaces per unit, one of
which is interior.
f. The offset, setback and landscape requirements are subject to
modification by the plan commission and board. However, the
offset requirements shall not be reduced to less than 20 feet from
the lot line of an adjoining residential district. The setback shall be
a minimum of 50 feet. The maximum height shall not exceed 35
feet. Additional height may be permitted if the offset and setback
requirements are increased by one foot for each additional one foot
in height beyond 35 feet.
82-64
(24) Outdoor theaters. In any district other than residential, restricted business,
C-1, E-C, A-E, A-T or A-P districts, subject to the following:
a. The building plans, site plans, and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No portion of the theater area shall be closer than 200 feet to the
base setback line or closer than 200 feet to the lot line of an
adjoining lot in a district permitting residential use.
c. A planting screen at least six feet high shall be provided along any
lot line abutting a district permitting residential use.
d. Additional highway width sufficient to provide for the safe control
of traffic at the theater entrance shall be dedicated and the
necessary highway improvements constructed to provide for a
divided roadway, with adequate reservoir area in the center strip to
shelter cars entering the theater.
82-65
(25) Planned unit development. The PUD planned unit development use is
permitted in any zoning district subject to review and approval of the
development plans by the planning commission and the town board. No
structures shall be allowed in the conservancy or A-E districts. Any use
permitted in an underlying basic district may be permitted in the planned
development.
a. Intent and purpose. The regulations in this subsection are intended
to allow for greater flexibility and design freedom than would be
permitted by standard application for normal district regulations.
Such uses will only be permitted on parcels of 20 acres or more
when appropriately located and where the unified and plan
development of such tract would allow a more desirable utilization
of the site and produce a more aesthetically and economical
development than would result from the application of normal
district regulation. It is then intended that appropriate; open spaces
be provided and the overall density of the project not be greater
than that permitted in the underlying district.
b. Application and regulations.
1. The unified and planned development of a site, in single,
corporate ownership, or common ownership under the
Condominium Ownership Act (Wis. Stats. § 703.01 et seq.)
at the time of development, may be permitted in a planned
development without the customary division into individual
lots and without requiring strict compliance to the specific
district regulations, subject to the requirements of this
subsection. Lot size, offset, setback, open space, and floor
area requirements may be modified according to the
following conditions:
i. All sanitary and water provisions are in
conformance with the requirements of the state
division of health, the county health department,
and the local sanitary district.
ii. The proposed development is in conformity with
the master plan and any local comprehensive plans,
when applicable, is not contrary to the general
welfare or economic balance of the community and
that the benefits and amenities of the resultant
development justify the variation from the normal
requirements of the district in which it is located.
iii. All other requirements of the planned development
are met as set forth in this subsection 82-21(d)(25).
82-66
2. Required standards as established by the town relative to
road design, drainage or other engineering parameters may
be modified subject to the conditions of approval as long as
such modifications are consistent with good engineering
practice and the approval of the town board.
3. The application of these regulations will be classified as
follows:
i. Rural-residential PUD: Defined as areas that utilize
private waste disposal and water systems.
ii. Urban-residential PUD: Defined as areas that utilize
public waste disposal and water systems. (A private
sewerage disposal plant will not be accepted as an
alternative to the public facility required.)
iii. Commercial/industrial PUD: Permitted only in
areas zoned for these uses and utilizing either public
or private waste disposal and water systems.
iv. Mixed PUD:
(aa) The proposed mixture of commercial and
residential uses shall produce a unified
composite which is compatible both within
itself and with the surrounding
neighborhood.
(bb) The mixed uses shall conform to the general
requirements applicable to each of them as
set forth in this subsection.
(cc) The maximum allowable dwelling unit
density shall be computed using only the
residential portion of the total planned
development area.
v. Size of parcel: In order to assure that it is of
appropriate size for a planned development, the
parcel shall meet the following standards:
(aa) Provide valuable and important open space.
(bb) Assure attractive and appropriate buildings
and improvements configurations.
82-67
(cc) Allow improvements and facilities necessary
to serve the residents and/or users of the
development.
(dd) Provide for all required sewage waste and
water facilities.
(ee) Guarantee adequate drainage systems.
(ff) Be compatible with adjacent land uses.
(gg) In no event shall a rural-residential or urbanresidential
PUD, as defined in this section,
contain any lot less than 1 1/2 acres in size.
vi. Common open space: All residential planned
developments shall provide permanent common
open space. The open space may be in public
ownership, corporate ownership or in private
ownership with an open space easement to assure
that the open space will be permanent. The common
open space area shall be conveniently accessible to
all residential dwelling units within a planned
development, available to all occupants of dwelling
units for whose use the space is intended, and
should provide meaningful and useful area for such
intended open use. It is the intent of this subsection
to ensure equitable distribution of various land uses
to all owners and maintain a maximum amount of
open space. Common open space does not include:
private lots, street rights-of-way (public or private),
public lands or land determined unsuitable by the
town board due to accessibility, common benefit or
proposal intent. Ownership, maintenance and tax
liability of common open space shall be established
in a manner acceptable to the town and made a part
of the conditions of the project approval.
c. Specific project regulations.
1. Residential density factors.
i. The maximum allowable densities shall not be
greater than those permitted in the underlying
zoning district. The ultimate allowable density shall
be determined by the town board based upon
recommendations of planning commission and
consultations with developer.
82-68
ii. The specific allowable maximum number of
dwelling units shall be computed by dividing the
total area allowable for density computations by the
appropriate residential density factor. Existing
public right-of-way or existing public open space
easements may not be included in the area for
density computation.
iii. The following residential density factors (RDF)
shall be utilized to compute the maximum dwelling
units (DU) density requirements of the planned unit
development.
Zoning
Classifications
RDF
A-P 130,680 square
feet/DU
R-H 217,800 square
feet/DU
E-C 217,800 square
feet/DU
A-1 139,392 square
feet/DU
S-E 130,680 square
feet/DU
R-1 130,680 square
feet/DU
R-2 130,680 square
feet/DU
R-3 130,680 square
feet/DU
B-1 20,000 square
feet/DU
B-2 20,000 square
feet/DU
B-3 20,000 square
feet/DU
M-1 43,560 square
feet/DU
M-2 43,560 square
feet/DU
2. Absolute minimum lot size. The following table shall be
utilized to determine the absolute minimum lot size which
may be utilized for the platting of lots in the planned
development.
82-69
Rural-Residential PUD
Zoning
Classification
Absolute Minimum
Lot Size
A-P 65,340 square
feet/DU
R-H 65,340 square
feet/DU
A-1 65,340 square
feet/DU
S-E 65,340 square
feet/DU
R-1 30,000 square
feet/DU
R-2 30,000 square
feet/DU
R-3 20,000 square
feet/DU
Urban Residential
P.U.D.
15,000 square
feet/DU
Commercial/Industri
al PUD
15,000 square
feet/DU
The plan commission shall have the right to require
selected lots to be substantially larger than the minimum
for the purposes of blending into and with surrounding
subdivisions and other developments.
3. Absolute minimum average lot width. The following table
shall be utilized to determine the absolute minimum
average lot width which may be utilized for the individual
lots within the planned development.
Rural-Residential
PUD
Absolute Minimum
Average Lot Width
A-P 200 feet
R-H 200 feet
A-1 200 feet
S-E 200 feet
R-1 120 feet
R-2 120 feet
R-3 120 feet
Urban-residential
PUD
100 feet
Commercial/industri
al PUD
100 feet
82-70
4. Use of structures for housing. Use of structures may permit
either single-family or multifamily housing, provided the
proposed population composition will not result in an
adverse effect upon the town's capability to provide
municipal services or school facilities.
5. Diverse lot sizes. Residential lot size diversity shall be
encouraged within a planned development provided that
there is a consistent quality among the different lot sizes,
and that the diversity of lot sizes does not detract from each
specific lot size and from the development as a whole.
6. Densities. Conservancy and A-E exclusive agricultural
district lands may be used to augment the otherwise
applicable density of a planned unit development project in
one of the two following ways, whichever allows the least
additional density:
i. Twenty percent of the area of lands which are zoned
conservancy or A-E exclusive agricultural district
within the project may be used to augment the
planned unit development project density; or
ii. Five percent of that part of the total project area
which is zoned other than conservancy or exclusive
agriculture may be used to augment the planned unit
development project density.
Example:
Existing conditions:
Total area of project
("Total Area"): 180 acres
Total conservancy and exclusive agriculture lands
("Total Protected Area"): 60 acres
Total area minus total protected area
("Developable Area"): 120 acres
Conservancy and exclusive agriculture zoned lands
comparison:
20 percent of the total protected area (60 acres) = 12
acres
Five percent of the developable area (120 acres) =
Six acres
82-71
Analysis:
Six is less than 12, so six acres can be added to the
developable area. 120 acres developable area + six
acres = 126 acres. Assuming the developable area is
zoned A-1 and A-1 allows one dwelling unit per 3.2
acres, then 126/3.2 = 39 units.
7. Guarantee for retention of open space. An adequate
guarantee shall be provided for permanent retention of open
area resulting from these regulations, either by private
reservation for use of the residents within the development
or by public dedication. Buildings or uses for
noncommercial, recreational or accessory facilities may be
permitted in such open space area, subject to specific grant
in the conditional use permit. Perpetual care and
maintenance of such open space areas and structures shall
be provided for, and an operational plan shall be submitted
for specific approval and inclusion in the terms of the
permit. Ownership and tax liability of the open space areas
shall be established in a manner acceptable to the town and
shall be made a part of the conditions of approval.
8. Agreement with the town. The developer shall enter into a
developer's agreement with the town to guarantee the
implementation of the development according to the terms
of the conditions established as part of the development
plan approval.
d. Basis for approval. The planning commission in making its
recommendations, and the town board in making its determination,
as to the approval or denial of the conditional use permit for the
planned development, shall give consideration to the purposes set
forth in this subsection, and be satisfied as to the following:
1. That the proposed development is consistent with the spirit
and intent of this subsection, is in conformity with the
general character of the town, and, would not be contrary to
the general welfare and economic prosperity of the town or
of the immediate neighborhood.
2. The benefits from the anticipated improved design of the
resultant development shall justify the variation from the
normal requirements of this subsection through the
application of this subsection.
3. That the size, quality and architectural design of all
buildings in the project will not have an adverse effect upon
the general character of the town and surrounding
neighborhood.
82-72
4. That the provisions and facilities of the open space areas
being provided are of such quality, size and aesthetic value
to justify the approval of the project.
5. That the setbacks shall be maintained along any boundary
street of the project area, as required by the existing
underlying basic district.
6. That no building shall be permitted closer to a side or rear
boundary lot line of the project area than required by the
applicable side or rear yard requirements of the adjoining
underlying basic district.
7. The approval of a petition for conditional use shall be based
on and include as conditions thereto the basic architectural
design, the site plan, the operational plans for the
development as approved, as well as all other commitments
offered as required in regard to project value, character or
other factors pertinent to an assurance that the proposed
development will be carried out basically as presented for
the project.
8. After all conditions of a planned development project are
certified by the town board as being completed, the
conditional use status of such completed development shall
be changed to a permitted use in the district in which it is
located.
e. Application procedures.
1. Filing procedure to initiate projects and preapplication
conference. The following information shall be submitted
prior to any requests for approval of any type of a planned
unit development. The applicants are required to submit a
site analysis map at the time they submit an application for
a preapplication conference. The purpose of the site
analysis map is to ensure that the important site features
have been adequately surveyed and identified and this
information has been or will be incorporated into the site
design. This will give the plan commission, town board,
town planner and the town engineer the necessary
information to understand the physical features of the site
in their review of the sketch plan and make
recommendations for changes before the applicant has
invested in the final site design. The site analysis map
should show:
82-73
i. Property boundaries;
ii. All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other
hydrological features;
iii. Topographic contours with intervals of two feet or
less;
iv. Each primary and secondary environmental corridor
labeled by type;
v. General vegetation characteristics;
vi. General soils types by group;
vii. The planned boundaries of protected open space;
viii. Existing roads and streets;
ix. Open space and trails traversing, or adjacent to the
site, whether existing or planned. Any other
information reasonably necessary for the plan
commission or the town board to make a
determination;
x. All class I and II soils for agricultural uses;
xi. Aerial photographs with a scale of one inch equals
100 feet; and
xii. Any groundwater recharge areas designated by the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission or the state department of natural
resources.
2. Site visit. The applicant is encouraged to hold a site visit on
the subject property, prior to filing an application, as part of
the preapplication process. The applicant can make
arrangements for a site visit by contacting the town planner.
The purpose of the site visit is to provide an opportunity for
everyone involved in the subdivision proposal to
familiarize themselves with the property's existing
conditions and special features, to identify potential site
design issues, and to discuss design concepts, including the
general layout of designated conservation areas, if
applicable, and potential locations for proposed buildings
and street alignments. This part of the preapplication
conference is optional, but is perhaps the most critical of
the entire design and review process, because it enables the
82-74
applicants, the staff, and the town plan commission and
town board to work together to fully understand the site and
its potential for carefully designing full density
development around an open space network. The goal of
the site visit is to ensure that the features mapped on the
site analysis maps have been designed around and
protected. If a site visit is scheduled, those invited shall
include the town staff, the town plan commission, and the
town board, along with the applicant and the general
public. Notice of the site visit shall include all notices as
may be required by the state open meetings laws, and the
site visit shall be conducted in compliance with such laws.
The town, its boards, commissions, officers, agents and
staff are not required to attend a scheduled site visit, and a
properly noticed site visit can occur even if less than a
quorum of any invited governing body attends. Comments
made by town officials, agents or staff during a site visit
shall be understood and interpreted as being only informal
and suggestive, and shall not be binding on either the town
or the applicant. It should be understood by all parties that
no formal recommendations can be offered, and no
decisions can be made at the site visit, which is essentially
an outdoor workshop session. Nothing that transpires
during the site visit shall relieve the applicant from the
obligation to fully comply with the application, submittal
and review procedures of this Code and the town land
division and development ordinance and other laws. The
town, its boards, commissions, officers, agents and staff
shall not be deemed to have formal, actual or implied
notice of existing features of the property or the
surrounding environs that must be shown or disclosed in
the application and review process, even if such features
were observed or were readily observable during a site
visit.
3. Sketch plans.
i. The applicant shall also submit the following sketch
plans:
(aa) A sketch plan of a conventional subdivision
plat, which complies with the zoning district
requirements and the town land division and
development control ordinance;
(bb) A sketch plan of a planned unit development
complying with all the open space
regulations, densities and lot size
requirements of this chapter and with the
town land division and development control
ordinance; and
82-75
(cc) A sketch plan of a conservation design
development which shall have of a
minimum of 40 percent of the subject
property in open space meeting all open
space regulations, all density requirements
and complies with the town land division
and development control ordinance.
ii. The individual sketch plans shall be prepared by
using a four-step process, which includes the
following:
(aa) A detailed site analysis of all the physical
features and resources of the subject
property;
(bb) Submit a map showing the number and
location of the individual house sites as
allowed by the density of the applicable
zoning district;
(cc) Locate the proposed roads to accommodate
all proposed home sites while preserving the
physical features of the site and complying
with the road standards in the town land
division and development control ordinance;
and
(dd) Designate lot lines for the house sites in
accordance with the minimum lot size
requirements of this chapter.
4. Application. Following the preapplication conference, an
official submittal shall be made to the town clerk and shall
include 15 copies each of the conventional layout and
proposed planned unit development map, preferably on a
topographic map, drawn at a scale of 100:1, showing the
following:
i. The size, arrangement, and location of all lots,
blocks, and all proposed buildings or building
groups located within the common area;
ii. The pattern of public streets, existing and proposed
utility easements, and other public improvements;
iii. The location of recreational open space and areas
reserved or dedicated for use by the residences;
82-76
iv. The general landscape treatment with particular
attention given to the treatment and creation of
buffer zones between the proposed cluster
development and any adjacent development
whether residential or otherwise;
v. Existing topography and stormwater drainage, and
proposed stormwater drainage systems, showing
basic topographic changes and proposed grading
elevations;
vi. All physical features of the site, such as wetlands,
primary and secondary environmental corridors,
isolated natural areas, and historic features;
vii. All types and locations of trees greater than eightinch
caliper in the buildable area. This requirement
may be waived by the plan commission if it is
determined during a site visit that no public or
private improvements will occur on area on the site
containing trees;
viii. A completed town land division review checklist;
ix. Statistical data on the total size of the project area,
area of the open space, density computations,
proposed number and types of residential units, an
economic and market analysis, impact on municipal
services, wetlands, groundwater and other
environmentally sensitive areas and any other
pertinent data required by the town plan
commission or town board;
x. Anticipated amounts of impervious surface
including all proposed public and private
improvements;
xi. A general summary of financial factors such as
value of the structures, estimated improvement
costs, amounts proposed for landscaping and special
features, and total anticipated development cost of
project;
xii. General outline of intended organizational structure
related to property owner's association, architectural
review committee, deed restrictions, and provision
of utility and other services;
82-77
xiii. A project staging plan which outlines a timetable for
project development including, but not limited to,
road cutting, utility hookups, building
constructions, landscaping, and open
space/recreational areas provision; and
xiv. An environmental impact assessment of loss of
plant species and animal habitat, farmland,
wetlands, soil erosion, surface and groundwater
hydrology, water quality, aquatic species and air
resources may be required if deemed reasonably
necessary by both the town plan commission and
town board.
5. Fees. A fee, as set by town board resolution from time to
time, shall accompany each application. Such fee shall be
paid by cash, check, or money order to the Town of
Mukwonago to defray the costs of review. The costs
incurred by the town in obtaining legal, planning,
engineering, and other technical and professional advice in
connection with the review of the application and
preparation of conditions for such uses shall be charged to
the applicant and, if required by the town, a fee covering
such costs shall accompany the application.
6. Procedure.
i. Referral for action by the town plan commission.
The town planner shall, within 30 days after receipt
of the application, determine whether the
application fulfills the requirements of this section.
If the staff determines that the application is
complete and fulfills the requirements of this
section, the staff shall refer the same to the town
plan commission to schedule a public hearing, in
accordance with section 82-267. If the staff
determines that the application is not complete and
does not fulfill the requirements of this section, they
shall return the application to the applicant. When
the application meets the staff's approval, it shall be
referred to the town plan commission and the town
engineering consultants for their report and
recommendation. Upon completion of the necessary
study and investigation, the town plan commission
shall make its recommendation, as to the
appropriateness and desirability of the proposed
project with the density factor requested, the
suitability of the proposed development, and any
82-78
changes or additional conditions applicable to such
plans, which they may feel are necessary and
appropriate.
ii. Basis for approval. The town plan commission, in
its action, shall give consideration to and be
satisfied as to the following:
(aa) The proposed development is consistent
with the spirit and intent of this chapter and
will not be contrary to the general welfare
and economic prosperity of the town, but
rather that the benefits derived by utilizing
the planned unit development and, in
keeping with the current economic and
social consideration, justifies the application
of the planned unit development technique;
(bb) Such development conforms to the adopted
master plan of the town and its components;
(cc) The size, quality, and architectural design of
all buildings in the project shall not be of
such as to have an adverse effect upon the
general character of the town or the
surrounding neighborhood;
(dd) Functional utility and relationship of the lots
or units to the common open space and
facilities provided shall be of such quality,
size, and aesthetic value as to meet the
purpose and intent of this section, and that
all other required preserved areas are
preserved or protected unless disturbed to
accommodate a road as designated on the
town's official map;
(ee) The approval shall be based upon
satisfaction of standards of this chapter and
shall include any conditions of approval
applicable thereto, regarding the building
design, site layout, and operational plans, as
well as all other commitments offered and
required in regard to project value,
character, or other factors pertinent to an
insurance that the proposed development
will be carried out as approved;
82-79
(ff) The plan will result in preservation of open
land in a manner, which will enhance the
total environmental setting and desirability
of the development and of the neighborhood
and that adequate guarantee is provided for
permanent retention as common open space
of the residential open land areas resulting
from the application of these standards.
These are by private reservation or by
dedication to the public; and
(gg) Ownership and tax liability of the private
open space preservation areas shall be
established in a manner acceptable to the
town attorney and made a part of the
conditions of this specific plan approval.
iii. Approval by town board. The town board, after
receiving the recommendation of the planning
commission, conducting of public hearing per
section 82-267, and due consideration, may deny,
approve, or approve subject to additional conditions
the conditional use permit.
iv. Application for residential development permit.
Upon approval and compliance with any conditions
of the town plan commission and town board, the
applicant shall be authorized to submit an
application for residential development permits and
the necessary allotment.
v. Submission of preliminary plat. Upon submittal of
the necessary residential development permits and
the required allotment, the preliminary plat may
then be submitted for approval.
vi. Conditions for preparation of final plat. After
issuance of a conditional use permit, the final plat
shall be prepared in accordance with the conditions
specified and the following shall be submitted:
(aa) Developers agreement: A contractual
agreement between the Town and the
Owners of the development outlining all of
the obligations and commitments required
by the Town.
82-80
(bb) Rights-of-way, easements, exact net area:
The subdivision plat or certified survey map
shall show all rights-of-way, easements, and
the exact net area.
(cc) Homeowners Association bylaws: The
Homeowners Association documents of
incorporation and bylaws shall be submitted
to and approved by the town attorney, town
planner and the town board and placed on
record with the town clerk and be recorded
in the county register of deeds office. Such
documents must conform with all state and
local requirements for the protection of the
property owners and the town.
(dd) Utility and stormwater facility easements:
Wherever required by the town, utility
companies or county land resources division
and conforming to the specifications of the
town and county.
(ee) Construction routes: A map of the
development showing the access points to be
used by construction vehicles during the
course of construction, and which shall
become part of the contract between the
Town and the Developer, with such
provisions for enforcement as provided in
the contract.
vii. Consultant and legal fees: If the town incurs
consultant or legal fees to prepare or review any
aspect of the proposed development, the town will
notify the petitioner of what portion of fees shall be
charged to petitioner, and all such charges shall be
paid in full before signing the final document, in the
form of a final plat, certified survey map, or
condominium plat.
viii. Financial guarantee to complete construction of
improvements in planned unit development: A letter
of credit or cash escrow in a state financial
institution or other satisfactory financial guarantee
approved by the town attorney or town board to
cover the cost of all improvements and facilities
agreed upon in the conditional use permit and final
plat or certified survey map.
82-81
ix. Recording: The conditional use shall be recorded in
the county office of the register of deeds to affect
the real estate upon which the conditional use is
granted.
x. Subsequent changes or additions: Any subsequent
changes or additions to an approved plan shall first
be submitted for approval to the town plan
commission and, if it is the commission's opinion
such change or addition is not substantial, it may
recommend approval to the town board. The
following shall automatically be construed to be
substantial:
(aa) An increase in the number of dwelling units
from that shown in the approved project;
(bb) A significant change in the size, value, or
type of structure from that indicated in the
approved conditional use;
(cc) The addition of any principal uses not
included in the approved conditional use;
and
(dd) Any change in the basic concept of the site
development, which would significantly
alter the relationship of uses or open space
to adjoining properties.
82-82
(26) Private clubs and outdoor recreational facilities, such as gun clubs,
recreational camps, golf courses, bathing beaches, riding academies,
resorts. In any district, subject to the following:
a. The building plans, site plans, and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No such use shall be permitted on a lot less than three acres in
area, except in a restricted business or less restrictive district.
c. No building, other than one used only for residence purposes, shall
be closer than 50 feet to the lot line of an adjoining lot in a district
permitting residential use.
d. Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the plan
commission adequate to meet the particular needs of the proposed
use.
e. No such permitted use shall include the operation of a commercial
facility such as a bar or restaurant, except as may be specifically
authorized in the grant of permit.
f. No more than 15 percent of the environmental corridor district may
be disturbed or vegetation removed, as part of the development of
the site for the proposed use. This includes the structures, parking,
walkways, recreational uses, septic system location, etc.
(27) Private stables. Such uses are permitted uses by right in the EFO, A-E, AP,
A-T and A-1 districts on parcels 20 acres or greater in size, and such
uses are permitted uses by right in the EFO, A-E, A-P, A-T and the A-1
districts on parcels of less than 20 acres provided that not more than one
horse or other head of livestock are kept for each full open acre over two
acres of open lot area, such uses are not permitted uses and may not be
allowed as conditional uses on any size parcel in the C-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3
districts, such uses are permitted uses in the R-H and S-E districts
provided that not more than one horse or other head of livestock are kept
for each full open acre over two acres of open lot area, such uses may be
allowed as conditional uses in the B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1 and M-2 districts
subject to the following:
a. The building plans, site plans, plan of operation and refuse disposal
plan shall be submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No buildings other than one used only for residential purposes
shall be closer than 100 feet to the lot line of any adjoining lot in a
district permitting residential use.
82-83
c. The plan commission shall make a finding that such use is
compatible with surrounding and nearby residential land uses
which may be affected by the proposed use.
d. Generally, not more than one horse or other head of livestock
should be kept for each full open acre over two acres of open lot
area, unless the plan commission makes a specific finding that the
subject parcel can maintain a greater number of livestock based on
the proposed building plans, site plans, plan of operation and
refuse disposal plan.
e. The keeping of hogs, pigs of any type (except potbellied pigs as
defined in this chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has
been issued), male goats or fur-bearing animals shall not be
permitted on less than 20 acres.
(28) Public and commercial refuse disposal sites. In any district other than
residential, agricultural, land preservation, conservancy, environmental
corridor or exclusive agricultural conservancy districts, subject to the
following:
a. The building plans, site plan, plan of operation (including the
description of the types and sources of refuse to be disposed of)
and plan of restoration shall be submitted to and approved by the
town board following recommendation by the plan commission.
b. The facility shall in all respects conform with the Wisconsin
Administrative Code requirements pertinent to such facilities (i.e.,
NR180) and in conformance with the applicable sections of the
Wis. Stats. ch. 281.
c. All existing refuse disposal operations shall be registered with the
clerk by the operator within 50 days after the adoption of the
ordinance from which this subsection is derived. Registration shall
include pertinent data relative to present operation including the
boundaries of the actual operation and ownership. Conditional use
status shall be granted to such existing operations provided the
plan of operation is approved by the town board. A plan of
restoration shall be submitted by the operator within one year of
the adoption of this chapter. Such operation and restoration plans
shall not impose requirements which are economically or
engineeringly unreasonable with respect to conditions resulting
from the operations prior to enactment of this chapter.
d. The operation and facilities shall conform to all related
requirements for quarrying per section 82-21(d)(30), or as
otherwise directed by the town board. A quarrying permit shall be
required.
82-84
e. Submittal of performance maintenance bonds meeting approval of
the town attorney covering operations and restoration
requirements.
(29) Public and semi-public structures and uses. In any district subject to the
following:
a. The building plan, site plan, and plan of operation shall be
submitted to and approved by the plan commission;
b. Such use or structure shall conform to the setback, height, and
double the offset requirements of the district in which it is located;
and
c. The height limitation shall be extended to a maximum of 50 feet;
provided, the minimum required setbacks and offsets shall be
increased 2 feet for every additional foot in height in excess of the
permitted maximum of the district.
(30) Quarrying. As defined in this chapter in any district other than a
conservancy, environmental corridor, residential or restrictive business
districts, subject to the following:
a. Procedure for application.
1. Permit. No quarrying operation shall take place in any
district until a quarrying permit has been secured from the
town board. Such permit shall be for an initial period as is
deemed appropriate to the specific situation but not exceed
five years, and may be renewed thereafter for periods not to
exceed three years provided application therefor shall be
made at least 60 and no more than 120 days before
expiration of the original permit. Application after such
date shall be treated as an original application.
2. Application. Application for a quarry permit shall be made
on forms supplied by the clerk and shall be accompanied
by:
i. A fee in accordance with the established fee
schedule to defray the cost of notification and
holding of public hearings, review of application
and referrals to affected public agencies.
82-85
ii. A description of all phases of the contemplated
operation and the type of machinery or equipment
which may be necessary to carry on the operation.
Where the operation is to include the washing of
sand and gravel, the estimated daily quantity of
water required, its source and its disposition shall be
made part of the description.
iii. A legal description of the proposed site with a map
showing its location with indications of private
access roads, existing or proposed, and of public
highways adjacent to the site which will be affected
by the operation.
iv. A topographic map of the area at a minimum
contour interval of five feet extending beyond the
site to the nearest public street or highway or to a
minimum distance of 300 feet on all sides.
v. A site restoration plan conforming to county
conservation committee requirements.
vi. An environmental and economical impact
assessment for the proposed facilities satisfying
local and regional review agency requirements.
b. Procedures for action on applications.
1. Referral to plan commission. The application and all data
pertaining thereto shall be referred to the plan commission
for review and consideration per standard conditional use
procedures.
2. Public hearing. Within 65 days after an application has
been filed, a public hearing shall be held at which all
interested parties may be heard. In addition to the normal
posting and publishing as provided in section 82-267,
notices shall be sent through the mail to all land owners
within a half-mile radius of the approximate center of the
proposed quarrying operation. These notices shall be
mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the date of
hearing.
3. Action by town board. The town board shall within 35 days
after receipt of the recommendation of the plan
commission, take action to approve or disapprove the
application for the proposed quarrying operation. Such
determination shall be guided by consideration of the
public health, safety and welfare and shall give particular
consideration to the following factors:
82-86
i. The effect of the proposed operation on existing
roads, traffic movements, safety and efficiency.
ii. The effect of the proposed operation on drainage
and water supply.
iii. The possibility of soil erosion as a result of the
proposed operation.
iv. The effect of dust and noise as a result of the
proposed operation.
v. The practical possibility of restoration of the site
and its reuse.
vi. The effect of the proposed operation on the natural
beauty, character, tax base, land value and land uses
in the area.
vii. The most suitable land use for the area with
particular consideration for future residential value.
viii. Any other factors deemed necessary by the town
board.
4. Renewals. The procedure as designated in subsections b.1,
b.2 and b.3 of this section shall apply to applications for
renewal of a permit. Determination in regard to renewal
shall be based on an evaluation of the effect of the
continuance of the use with relation to changing conditions
in the area. Where renewal is not granted, the reasons for
refusal shall be presented to the applicant in writing and
made a part of the records of the town.
c. Requirements.
1. General requirements. No part of the quarrying operation or
buildings shall be permitted closer than 500 feet to a district
zoned rural home, suburban estate or residential except
with the written consent of the adjacent owners, but in no
case shall such operation be permitted closer than 200 feet
to a residential district.
2. Setback requirements. No part of the quarrying operation or
buildings shall be located closer than 100 feet to the base
setback line along any street or highway.
82-87
3. Offset requirements. No part of the quarrying operation or
buildings shall be permitted closer than 50 feet to any
property line except with the written consent of the owner
of the adjoining property.
4. Operational requirements.
i. Fencing or other suitable barriers shall be erected
and maintained around the site or around portions of
the site where in the determination of the town
board such facilities are necessary for the protection
of the public. The type and extent of the fencing
shall be approved by the town board.
ii. All machinery and equipment used in the operation
shall be constructed, maintained and operated in
such a manner as to minimize dust, noise and
vibration. Access and haulage roads on the site shall
be maintained in dust-free condition by surfacing or
treatment as directed by the town board.
iii. The crushing, washing, refining or processing other
than the initial removal of material, may be
permitted as an accessory use only as specifically
authorized under the terms of the grant of permit.
iv. In stone quarries the production, manufacturing or
storage of veneer stone, sills, lintels, cut flagstone,
hearth stones, paving stone and similar architectural
or structural stone shall be considered a permissible
part of the operation.
v. The manufacture of concrete building blocks, lime
products, ready-mixed concrete and any similar
production or manufacturing processes shall not be
permitted.
vi. The washing of sand and gravel shall be prohibited
in any operation where the source of water is of
doubtful capacity or may seriously affect the supply
for other uses in the area.
vii. Landscaping shall be provided where deemed
necessary by the plan commission to screen the
operation from normal view, to enhance the general
appearance and generally to minimize the affect of
the operation on the beauty and character of the
surrounding countryside. Such plantings shall be
started as soon as practicable, but no later than one
year after quarrying operations have begun and
82-88
shall be done according to the recommendations of
the plan commission.
viii. The proposed hours of operation shall be submitted
to and approved by the town board. Such hours
shall be posted at the site when deemed necessary
by the town board.
5. Restorative requirements.
i. In order to ensure that the area of quarrying
operation shall be restored to a condition of
practical usefulness and reasonable physical
attractiveness, the owner or operator shall, prior to
the issuance of a permit, submit to the town board a
plan for such restoration in the form of the
following: An agreement with the town whereby the
applicant contracts to restore the premises to a
condition and within a time satisfactory to the town;
a physical restoration plan approved by the county
land conservation committee showing the proposed
contours after restoration, plantings and other
special features of restoration, and the method by
which such restoration is to be accomplished; a cash
escrow, certified check or other financial guarantee
satisfactory to the town attorney in an amount
sufficient in the opinion of the town board to secure
the performance of the restoration agreement. Such
agreement and financial guarantee shall be in a form
approved by the town attorney.
ii. In the event of the applicant's failure to fulfill this
agreement, such check or other financial guarantee
shall be deemed forfeited for the purpose of
enabling the town to perform the restoration.
iii. Restoration shall proceed as soon as practicable,
upon order and direction of the town board.
However, the owner or operator may, at his option,
submit a plan for progressive restoration as the
quarrying operation is being carried on. The
required bond in such case may cover progressive
stages of the restoration for periods of not less than
two years.
iv. At any stage during restoration the plan may be
modified by mutual written agreement between the
town and the owner or operator.
82-89
v. Where there is any backfilling, the material or
method used shall not create a health hazard nor be
objectionable because of odor, combustibility or
unsightliness. In any case the finished grade of the
restored area except for rock faces, outcroppings,
water bodies or areas of proposed building or
paving construction, shall be of sufficient depth of
earth to support plant growth and contain a
minimum topsoil thickness of four inches.
vi. Within one year after the cessation of the operation,
all temporary structures, stock piles, rubbish heaps
or other debris shall be removed or backfilled into
the excavation to leave the premises in a neat and
orderly condition.
vii. In any restoration procedure which takes place in
sand or gravel pits, no slope shall be left which is
steeper than a ratio of two horizontal to one vertical.
In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle
of slippage of the material involved.
6. Exceptions.
i. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
the removal of sod.
ii. When the operation is limited to the removal of
topsoil, the plan commission may modify any or all
of the provisions of this subsection, provided
however, that in no case shall such operation be
permitted closer than ten feet from any property
line, be to a depth in excess of 18 inches or so as to
adversely affect the drainage of the area.
iii. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
an operation which is accessory to the legitimate
use of the premises; however, where such operation
involves the commercial disposal of the material
removed, the approval of the town board shall be
required and such operation shall be limited to a
maximum period of six months.
iv. In a general industrial district, the town board may,
consistent with the intent of these regulations,
permit a reduction in the required setback or offset.
But in no case shall the setback be less than 100
feet, nor the offset be less than 50 feet.
82-90
d. Application to existing operations.
1. Permits. Within 60 days after the adoption
of the ordinance from which this subsection
is derived all existing quarrying operations
shall be required to register with the clerk
submitting pertinent data relative to the
present operation, boundaries of the actual
operation and of the ownership. A quarrying
permit shall be granted to such existing
operation subject to compliance with the
operational requirements of this chapter
where they can be reasonably applied under
existing circumstances.
2. Plan for restoration. There shall be required
within one year after adoption of the
ordinance from which this section is
derived, the submission of a plan for
restoration of the site of any existing
quarrying operation. The plan for restoration
in such case shall not impose requirements
which are economically unreasonable with
respect to conditions resulting from
operations prior to enactment of the
ordinance from which this section is
derived.
3. Renewal permit. Within three years after the
date of the ordinance from which this
section is derived, any such existing
operation shall be required to make
application for a renewal permit.
82-91
(31) Restaurants, supper clubs, lake resorts, taverns and similar uses. In all
other districts except C-1, A-E, A-T and A-P, these uses shall be
considered conditional uses subject to the following:
a. The minimum lot area shall be at least three acres and at least 200
feet in minimum average width.
b. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided within 200 feet of
the building in which such use is occurring, but offset 20 feet from
any lot line or adjacent property zoned agricultural or residential.
The amount of space shall be in accordance with the parking
provisions of this chapter.
c. A planting screen or fence of at least six feet in initial height shall
be provided and maintained between any abutting residential
district and the proposed conditional use. Additional screening
may be required by the plan commission and/or town board.
d. The proposed building shall be offset at least 50 feet from any
adjoining residential district and 100 feet from the high water mark
of any lake or navigable body of water.
e. No more than 15 percent of the environmental corridor district may
be disturbed or vegetation removed, as part of the development of
the site for the proposed use. This includes the structures, parking,
walkways, recreational uses, septic system location, etc.
82-92
(32) Towers.
a. All freestanding licensed amateur radio operator towers,
ornamental towers, spires, and masts exceeding the height limit
allowed for an accessory structure in the underlying zoning district
and all roof-mounted licensed amateur radio operator antennas
exceeding ten feet in height from the roof: In any district subject to
the tower or structure meeting all industry construction standards
and subject to landscaping plan approval by the plan commission
as deemed necessary and subject to the height regulations
contained in section 82-23.
b. All freestanding towers for use by other than licensed amateur
radio operators, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
monuments, penthouses, stacks, scenery lofts, tanks, water towers,
and necessary mechanical appurtenances exceeding the height
limit allowed for an accessory structure in the underlying zoning
district: In agricultural, business, industrial or park districts,
subject to the towers and structures meeting all industry
construction standards and subject to landscaping plan approval by
the plan commission as deemed necessary and subject to the height
regulations contained in section 82-23.
(33) Wrecking and salvage yards. In any agricultural district except A-P, A-T
or A-E. General industrial district subject to the following:
a. The building, site plan, and plan of operation have been submitted
to and approved by the plan commission.
b. No such use shall be permitted on a lot less than ten acres in area.
c. The junked materials shall be screened from view by a sightobscuring,
unpierced fence at least six feet in height.
d. No part of the wrecking operation shall take place closer than 200
feet to any residential district.
e. All requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Code shall be
met.
82-93
(34) Other uses. Other uses or situations not specifically provided for in this
conditional use section and which may be determined to be acceptable
under the provisions of this chapter. Such determination shall be made by
the plan commission and board to meet the intent of the conditional use
provisions as set forth in this section.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.08; Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986; Ord. No. 95-3B, § 2, 9-13-1995;
Ord. No. 95-5, § 1, 10-11-1995; Ord. No. 96-2, §§ 2, 3, 5-8-1996; Ord. No. 98-4, § 3, 6-
10-1998; Ord. No. 99-4, § 1, 9-8-1999; Ord. No. 2000-6, § 2, 9-11-2000; Ord. No. 2001-
6, §§ 6, 7, 10-29-2001; Ord. No. 2004-8, § 1, 6-9-2004; Ord. No. 2006-1, §§ 8--10, 1-3-
2006)
82-94
Sec. 82-22. Building location.
(a) Setbacks.
(1) Base setback lines, from which building setbacks shall be measured, are
established for all streets and highways in the township as follows:
a. On all streets or highways for which the ultimate width has been
established by the Highway Width Ordinance of Waukesha
County, the base setback line shall be located at a distance from
the centerline equal to one-half of such established width as
designated on the "Established Street and Highway Width Map of
Waukesha County."
b. On all other streets, which shall be designated as "local streets,"
the base setback line shall be 33 feet from the centerline of such
street or 60 feet from the center point of a cul-de-sac unless
specifically designated otherwise by action of the town board.
c. When a lot abuts a frontage road, the base setback line shall be
located at a distance from the centerline equal to one-half the rightof-
way width of such frontage road.
d. Such setback lines shall be parallel to and measured at right angles
to the centerline of the street or highway.
(2) Vision setback lines at the intersections of public streets or highways and
of a street or highway with a railroad, where the grade is not separated, are
established as follows:
a. Across each sector between the intersection of a street or highway
with a railroad, a vision setback line shall be established by a
straight line connecting points on the base setback line and the
railroad right-of-way line, which points are located 120 feet from
the intersection of these two lines.
b. Across each sector between intersecting streets or highways, one or
more of which has an established width of 100 feet or more, a
vision setback line shall be established by a straight line
connecting two points on the intersecting base setback lines, which
are located 60 feet from the intersection.
c. Across each sector between any other intersecting streets a vision
setback line shall be established by a straight line connecting two
points on the intersecting base setback lines which are located 30
feet from the intersection.
82-95
(3) No principal building or its accessory buildings shall be erected, altered or
placed so that any roofed or enclosed portion is closer to the base setback
line than the setback distance hereinafter specified by the regulations for
the district in which such building is located with the following exceptions
applicable only where the setback requirements of the properties involved
are identical:
a. Where the nearest existing building on one side of such building is
within 500 feet and has less than the required setback, the average
between such existing setback and the required setback shall apply.
b. Where the nearest buildings on both sides of such building are
within 500 feet of such buildings but not closer than 300 feet to
each other and have less than the required setback, the average of
such existing setbacks and the required setback shall apply.
c. Where the nearest buildings on both sides of such building are
within 300 feet of each other and have less than the required
setback, the average between such existing setbacks shall apply.
d. In the case of a proposed addition to an existing building which has
less than the required setback, such existing building may be
considered the "nearest existing building" in order to apply the
aforesaid exceptions in determining required setback for the
proposed addition.
(4) No other structures of any kind, except necessary highway and traffic
signs, public utility lines, drainage structures, rural mailboxes and
newspaper boxes shall be erected, altered or placed within such base
setback areas. Private retaining walls, guard posts or other landscape
structures shall not be permitted unless placed below the street centerline
elevation. Mailboxes and newspaper boxes shall not be permitted on the
circle portion of the cul-de-sac.
(5) In the vision setback area no structure of any kind shall be permitted
which exceeds a height of three feet above the elevation of the center of
the intersection, except for necessary highway and traffic signs, public
utility lines and open fences through which there is clear vision, nor shall
any plant material be permitted which obscures safe vision of the
approaches to the intersection.
(6) Additions to and replacements of existing structures may be made within
the established setback areas, subject to approval of the plan commission
and provided the owner will file, with the town an agreement in writing to
the effect that the owner will remove all new construction, additions and
replacements created after the adoption of the ordinance from which this
section is derived at his expense, when necessary for the improvement of
the highway.
82-96
(7) In all cases where any of the highways for which setback lines are
established by this section are located on municipal boundaries, such
establishment shall apply only within the unincorporated area.
(8) On corner lots of record as such, as of the date of the ordinance from
which this section is derived, the effect of the setback regulations shall not
reduce the buildable width of such corner lot to less than 30 feet.
(9) Shore setback lines shall be a minimum of 75 feet from the established
floodplain line, conservancy line, or the average annual highwater mark
when such established lines are not available. Attached open decks shall
maintain a minimum shore setback distance of 80 percent of the distance
to the existing principal building or 60 feet, whichever is the shorter
distance. A boathouse may be exempt from these provisions per
subsection (b)(1)a of this section.
(10) In the case of a lot abutting a dedicated but unimproved right-of-way that
terminates at a public water body, the town plan commission may grant a
special exception as to the setback from such dedicated but unimproved
right-of-way, subject to the following procedures, requirements and
conditions:
a. Procedure. A property owner may apply for a special exception
and the special exception may be considered as follows:
1. The property owner shall submit a petition to the town
clerk. The petition shall include building and site plans,
which include elevations along with such additional
information as may be required by the building inspector
and the plan commission. The building and site plan shall
depict the proposed construction and the location of the
proposed construction on the lot, including its location in
relationship to existing structures on the lot and on adjacent
lots within 100 feet. If the petition is for an addition to an
existing structure, the application shall include recent
photographs of all structures on the parcel. The petition
shall be accompanied by payment of such application fees
as may be established from time to time by the town board
by separate resolution and shall be submitted to the town
clerk no later than 3 weeks prior to the town plan
commission meeting at which they are to be scheduled.
2. Upon receipt of the complete application, required plans
and application fees, the town clerk shall provide a copy of
the petition and plans to the town building inspector and
town planner and shall place the matter on an upcoming
town plan commission agenda for consideration.
82-97
3. Prior to the town plan commission meeting when the matter
will be heard, the town planner shall review the request and
discuss the matter with the town building inspector, view
the proposed location, and shall submit a written
recommendation to the town plan commission. Along with
the recommendation, the town planner shall advise the
town plan commission as to whether the proposed
construction would be in full compliance with all
applicable federal, state, county, and town codes, statutes,
rules, regulations and ordinances if the special exception
were granted.
4. The town plan commission shall consider the matter at the
scheduled plan commission meeting. The petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard regarding the matter at
that meeting.
5. The town plan commission shall approve, deny, or
conditionally approve the special exception petition, in
accordance with the requirements and conditions of this
subsection 82-22(a)(10). The town plan commission shall
issue its decision in writing.
b. Requirements and conditions. In order to approve or conditionally
approve a special exception petition, the town plan commission
must find all of the following to be true regarding the proposed
construction:
1. The proposed construction must be at least five feet from
the dedicated but unimproved right-of-way setback line.
2. The proposed construction must be in compliance with all
applicable federal, state, county, and town codes, statutes,
rules, regulations and ordinances, if the special exception is
granted.
3. The proposed construction must be compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood.
4. If the property for which the special exception is requested
contains legal non-conforming structures, legal
nonconforming use of structures or lands, or is a legal
nonconforming lot, the plan commission shall require the
petitioner to file a deed restriction, as follows. The deed
restriction shall state that if the structure that is the subject
of the special exception petition is damaged or repaired
beyond 50 percent of the full equalized assessed value at
the date of completion of the construction, the structure can
only be repaired or rebuilt in full compliance with all then82-
98
current requirements of the town zoning code. Such deed
restriction shall be recorded with the county register of
deeds in a form that is subject to the approval of the town
attorney.
5. The plan commission must find that the special exception
will not be adverse to the public health, safety or general
welfare, and will not be in conflict with the spirit and intent
of the town zoning code, and will not otherwise be
detrimental to the town or the immediate neighborhood
where the constructions would be located.
6. The plan commission may require additional conditions
and restrictions, including but not limited to conditions
related to screening and landscaping.
7. If approved, a deed restriction in a form approved by the
town attorney shall be filed in the county register of deeds
office prior to the issuance of any building permit,
indicating the special exception has been granted and
recording any conditions of approval, including a statement
that the structure may only be used for personal use and
cannot be used for any type of commercial purposes unless
otherwise permitted by the town zoning code.
82-99
(b) Offsets.
(1) No principal building or its accessory buildings shall be erected or altered
so that any roofed or enclosed portion thereof is closer to any lot line than
the offset distance hereinafter specified by the regulations for the district
in which such building is located, with the following exceptions:
a. On a lake shore lot one boathouse may be permitted not within five
feet of the ordinary highwater line.
b. In the case of any lot of record which has a minimum average
width of less than 120 feet, the side lot offset may be reduced
proportionately to the ratio between the actual minimum average
width and 120 feet, provided that no offset shall in any case be less
than ten feet. Exceptions to these offsets may be permitted for
detached accessory buildings on lots of 100 feet in width or less
which may be reduced to five feet; provided, that no detached
accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to any
structure used for residential purposes. Further reduction in offsets
of detached accessory buildings to less than five feet must be
approved by the plan commission; but in no case shall the offset be
reduced to less than three feet. Attached open decks and patios
shall be permitted to within 40 percent of the limits in this
subsection.
c. The offset may be reduced on lots 1 1/2 acres or less for one
detached accessory building, which is less than 200 square feet to a
minimum of five feet from the lot line, unless otherwise regulated
under any other provisions of this chapter.
(2) For a lot that abuts a district boundary line; the offset from such lot line
shall be not less than the offset applicable to the district in which the lot is
located, or the offset applicable in the abutting district, whichever offset is
larger. (Ord. 2007-2 § 2 12-01-2006)
(3) In the case of multiple family or commercial use structures, the offsets
may be modified as follows:
a. Two or more buildings on adjoining lots may be erected with
common or directly adjoining walls, provided the requirements of
the applicable state administrative code relative to such
construction are complied with, and provided that at both ends of
such "row" type buildings the applicable offset requirements shall
be complied with.
82-100
b. The required offset may be reduced on one side of a structure
provided the offset on the other side is increased by an equivalent
amount, and provided the owners of any property adjoining the
area of reduced offset shall file with the town board a copy of a
recorded deed restriction stipulating that no building shall be
erected on such property to reduce the combined offset in such
case to a distance less than that resulting from the normal
application of the minimum offset requirements to both properties,
except as permitted under subsection (b)(3)a of this section.
(c) Maintenance and use of setback and offset areas. Any such required
setback or offset area shall be landscaped and kept clean and free from the accumulation
of debris or refuse and shall not be used for the storage or display of equipment, products,
vehicles or any other material.
(d) Accessory building location. No detached accessory building shall be
erected, structurally altered, or placed on a lot so that any roofed or enclosed portion
thereof is closer than ten feet to the principal building on such lot, or as otherwise
permitted by chapter 14, relative to buildings and building regulations.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.09; Ord. No. 2004-4, § 2, 3-11-2004)
Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14.
82-101
Sec. 82-23. Height regulations.
(a) Maximum height restricted. In any district, no building or structure shall
be, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived, erected
or structurally altered to a height in excess of that specified by the regulations for that
district except as otherwise set forth in this section.
(b) Exceptions; no plan commission approval required. The following should
be excepted from the height regulations of all districts, but are subject to all other
regulations of the town:
(1) Chimneys and flues.
(2) Accessory farm buildings, not to exceed 60 feet in height, on lots of three
acres or more in area.
(3) Electrical transmission and distribution facilities.
(4) Roof-mounted television and radio receiving antennas not exceeding ten
feet in height from the roof and roof-mounted licensed amateur radio
operator antennas not exceeding ten feet in height from the roof.
(c) Exemptions; plan commission approval required. The following shall be
exempted from the height regulations of all districts, subject to the approval of the plan
commission, but are subject to all other regulations of the town: Cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, penthouses, stacks, scenery lofts, tanks, water towers,
ornamental towers, spires, masts, free standing towers, roof-mounted licensed amateur
radio operator antennas ten feet or more in height from the roof, aerial and necessary
mechanical appurtenances.
(d) Increase permitted. All other buildings or structures not exempted by
subsections (b) and (c) of this section may be increased by not more than ten feet, subject
to satisfying the following conditions:
(1) All required offsets and setbacks are increased by one foot for each foot
which such building or structure exceeds the height limit of the district in
which it is located.
(2) Subject to approval of the plan commission.
(3) Subject to all other regulations of the town.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.10; Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-8-1996)
82-102
Sec. 82-24. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area.
(1) Any building intended in whole or part for residential purposes shall
provide a minimum floor area as specified by the regulations for the
district in which such building is located. Such minimums are stated in
terms of the minimum total floor area required for a building and that
portion of the total which must be provided on the first floor level. Such
minimum total shall be increased by 200 square feet for any building not
having a basement of at least 300 square feet in area.
(2) The maximum total floor area of the buildings on a lot shall not exceed
that permitted under the floor area ratio as specified by the regulations for
the district in which such buildings are located unless allowed per section
82-16(d). Basements shall not be included in determining permitted floor
area ratio.
(3) Floor area shall be measured at each level from the outside edge of a wall
to the outside edge of wall and for purposes of computing total minimum
floor area shall not include garages; other outbuildings, open porches or
basements. Breezeways, exposed basements, split levels and the secondary
floors of multistoried residences may be included in computing total
minimum floor area according to the following schedule:
a. One-half of the floor area of a breezeway if walled-in from floor
joist to rafters but not heated. All of the breezeway may be
included if walled-in from floor joists to rafters and heated by the
central heating system. Open breezeways shall not be included.
b. That portion of the basement of an exposed basement residence or
split level which has been designed as an integral part of the living
area of the home may be included in computing total minimum
floor area when at least one side is exposed and access has been
provided to the outside at grade level by means of at least one
door. Such computations shall maintain a minimum basement floor
area of 300 square feet.
c. That portion of the secondary floors of multistoried buildings,
which have a minimum distance between the ceiling face and the
top of the lower floor ceiling joist of seven feet, may be included in
computing the total minimum floor living area, provided there are
permanent stairways leading from each floor to the next floor.
d. In a split level building the first floor area shall include all area
which is not over another living area of the building.
82-103
(4) The board of adjustment may grant an exception to permit a building of
less than the required minimum floor area; where such grant would not be
contrary to the spirit or intent of the chapter, would not be of such
character or quality as to depreciate the property values of the surrounding
area, and provided that in no case shall a minimum floor area of less than
900 square feet be permitted.
(b) Lot size.
(1) No lot shall be created, and no building shall be erected on a lot of less
area or of minimum average width less than specified by the regulations of
the district in which such building is located, unless permitted per section
82-16(d) or is a preexisting legal lot of record.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the lot area shall be measured from the
base setback line.
(3) The lot shall be at least as wide as the specified minimum average width
for a distance of at least one-half the lot depth.
(4) No lot area shall be reduced by any means to create a lot of less than the
required size, or so that the existing offsets, setbacks, open space or lot
area would be reduced below that required by the regulations for the
district in which such lot is located, except as provided by section 82-
16(d).
(5) Where a lot has less land area or width than required for the district in
which it is located and was of record at the time of the passage of the
ordinance from which this section is derived, such lot may be used for any
purpose permitted in such district, but not for residential purposes for
more than one family; provided, however, that in no case shall the setback
and offset requirements be reduced except by order of the board of
adjustment after due hearing or as otherwise provided in this chapter. It
shall be further required that a minimum of 10,000 square feet of open
space shall be provided on such lots of record. Such substandard lot shall
also be in separate ownership from abutting lands. If abutting lands and
the substandard lot are in the same ownership, the substandard lot shall not
be sold or developed unless it has a minimum width of 100 feet and a
minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
(c) Open space.
(1) No building shall be erected, structurally altered or placed on a lot so as to
reduce the useable open area of such lot to less than that specified by the
regulations for that district, except as provided by section 82-16(d).
82-104
(2) To be considered useable, such open area shall be readily accessible and
of a size and shape which can be reasonably considered to provide for the
amenities and necessities of light, air, play space, drying yard, garden, etc.
Crop, pasture and wooded land may be included in computing such open
area.
(3) No part of the open space provided for any building shall be included as
part of the open space required for another building; except as provided
for planned unit developments.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.11)
82-105
Sec. 82-25. Accessory buildings and structures.
(a) Size and location.
(1) No accessory buildings shall be erected, structurally altered or placed on a
lot in any district so that any portion thereof is closer than ten feet to the
principle building or other accessory buildings and structures on such lot
unless it complies with all local building code requirements.
(2) Square Footage and Number of Accessory Buildings
(a) In all Districts, the aggregate floor area of accessory buildings shall
not exceed the maximum per lot square footage as outlined in the
following table. Accessory buildings shall also not exceed the floor
area ratio requirements for the applicable district. Temporary
buildings shall be included in calculating the square footages for any
lot.
EFO 500 square feet
AE 500 square feet
AT 500 square feet
RH 2,000 square feet
EC 720 square feet
A-1 1,300 square feet
SE 1,300 square feet
R-1 720 square feet
R-2 500 square feet
R-3 500 square feet
B-1 1,000 square feet
B-2 1,000 square feet
(b) Exceptions: The maximum square footage for accessory buildings set
forth in Subsection (a) above shall be subject to adjustment as follows:
1. Except in the “EC” Environmental Corridor District and subject to the
applicable district floor area ratio requirements, the maximum square
footage for accessory buildings shall be increased by 50 sq. ft. for every ½
acre of land that the subject property exceeds the district minimum lot
size.
2. For parcels of three (3) acres of more in size in any zoning district other
than the Environmental Corridor District, the accessory building areas
may be greater than those requirements set forth in subsection 2(a), if the
Town Board in its discretion, upon consideration of a recommendation
from the Plan Commission, grants a special exception and makes all of the
following findings:
a. That one or more rural accessory buildings(s) as defined herein,
are located on the property;
82-106
b. That such rural accessory buildings(s) is (are) not a nuisance or
detriment to the existing neighborhood;
c. That the property is in compliance with the floor area ratio
requirements of the District in which it is located; and
d. That the total floor area of all accessory buildings, excluding the
floor area of such rural accessory building(s), is in compliance
with the requirements set forth in subsection 2(a).
3. Environmental Corridor District Accessory Buildings
a. For any size parcel in the EC Environmental Corridor District, the
Town Board, may in its discretion, grant a special exception to the
maximum square footage requirements for accessory building set
forth in subsection 2(a) after receiving a recommendation from the
Plan Commission where all of the following criteria have been
met;
1. The Building Inspector determines that no more than
32,600 sq. ft. of land disturbance has or will occur for
all structures, septic systems, driveways and parking
areas, patios, decks, pools, lawns and play areas. For
purposes of this section, the areas of disturbance shall
include any area where, due to development, the
natural vegetation has previously been removed or
land altering activities have previously occurred and
areas where, due to any proposed accessory
building(s), natural vegetation will be removed or
land altering activities will occur.
2. Only one accessory building will be allowed on a
parcel which is entirely within the Environmental
Corridor District.
3. The use of the accessory building is for personal use
only by the person(s) occupying the subject parcel.
4. The location of the proposed accessory building is not
high quality environmental corridor or wildlife habitat
area. The Town Board or Plan Commission may
require the applicant to provide an environmental
assessment by a qualified professional as to the
impact the proposed accessory building and any
associated vegetative disturbance or land
altering may have on the environmental quality of the
corridor.
b. If a special exception is granted under subsection (A) above
for a parcel in the EC Environmental Corridor District, the
Board may designate a specific location for the accessory
building to eliminate any unnecessary vegetative
disturbance or land altering activity.
82-107
c. If a special exception is granted under subsection a. above,
a Deed Restriction shall be filed prior to the issuance
of a building permit setting forth the square footage of the
allowable disturbance along with a detailed map
designating the allowable area of disturbance for all
improvements. Said Deed Restriction shall also restrict
and set forth any additional conditions of approval of the
special exception by the Plan Commission and/or Town
Board and shall be approved by the Town Attorney as to
form.
4. On parcels of 15-acres or more, in area, the building areas may be
greater than those set forth in subsection 2(a) when used solely for
agricultural purposes and when consistent with the floor area ratio
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Number of Accessory Structures.
1. No more than (2) accessory buildings per parcel are permitted in
any district except as follows:
a. On parcels of 15-acres or more, in area used solely for
agricultural purposes, more than two accessory buildings may
be permitted by the Plan Commission subject to compliance
with the floor area ratio requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
b. In the B-3 and all Industrial Districts, the Plan Commission may
approve more than two accessory buildings as part of a site plan
and plan of operation when such accessory buildings are
accessory to the principal use and constructed and used in
accordance with the approved site plan and plan of operation.
c. Where a Conditional Use Permit has been issued for the lot that
expressly permits more than two accessory buildings/structures.
2. On parcels of three (3) acres or more in size, more than two (2)
accessory buildings may be permitted by the Town Board, upon
consideration of a recommendation from the Plan Commission, if
the Town Board makes all of the following findings:
a. That there are one or more rural accessory building(s),
as defined herein, on the property;
b. That such rural accessory building(s) is (are) not a
nuisance or detriment to the existing neighborhood; and
c. That, excluding any rural accessory building(s), there
are not more than two (2) accessory buildings on the
property.
(Ord. 2007-3 § 2 1-18-07)
82-108
(3) In no case shall any accessory structure in any agricultural or residential
zoning district be used for commercial or industrial purposes except with a
conditional use permit.
(4) A polystructure, subject to the dimensional regulations of the this chapter,
shall only be allowed for the purposes of housing plant materials
associated with a nursery or greenhouse operation, whether retail,
wholesale or private and shall not be used for storage of any other types of
materials not directly related to the nursery or greenhouse operation unless
otherwise specifically authorized as part of a conditional use under article
III. This subsection does not apply to the use of a polystructure as part of a
general farm operation as defined in section 82-4 on a parcel of 35 acres or
more.
(b) Garages.
(1) Required. A private garage at least 240 square feet in area shall be
required for each dwelling unit hereinafter erected. Such structures shall
be either attached or detached and conform to the offset and setback
requirements of the district involved.
(2) Attached garage maximum size. Attached residential garages hereinafter
erected shall be no larger than 50 percent of the first floor square footage
of a ranch-style residence and no larger than 70 percent of the first floor
square footage of a two-story style residence, unless a special exception is
granted as described in subsection (b)(3), below.
(3) Special exception. Upon petition from a property owner, the plan
commission may grant a special exception to the maximum attached
garage size limitations of subsection (b)(2) of this section or maximum
accessory building square footages allowed in the table in subsection
(a)(2) of this section as follows:
a. The petitioner shall submit a petition to the town clerk. The
petition shall include building and site plans, which include
elevations, along with such additional information as the plan
commission may require. The building and site plans shall depict
the proposed construction and the location of the proposed
construction on the lot, including the location in relation to existing
structures on the lot and adjacent lots. The petition shall be
accompanied by payment of such application fees as may be
established from time to time by the town board by separate
resolution.
b. Upon receipt of the complete petition, required plans, and
application fees, the town clerk shall provide a copy of the petition
and plans to the building inspector and the plan commission, and
shall place the matter upon an upcoming plan commission agenda
for consideration. The town clerk shall notify the petitioner of the
82-109
date. The notification of neighbors is not required unless the plan
commission so directs. If the plan commission so directs, notice
shall be provided in such manner as the plan commission may
require and a public hearing must be held prior to a decision being
made.
c. Prior to the plan commission meeting where the matter will be
heard, the building inspector shall review the request, shall view
the proposed location, and shall submit a written recommendation
to the plan commission. Along with the recommendation, the
building inspector shall advise the plan commission whether
detached accessory structures are prohibited on the lot by
applicable laws and deed restrictions.
d. The following limitations apply:
1. Special exceptions may be granted under this subsection
only in regard to the maximum size limitation of
subsections (a)(2) and (b)(2) of this section.
2. Special exceptions are prohibited if the requested location,
structure, or use thereof, would conflict with any applicable
federal, state, county codes, statutes, rules, ordinances or
lawful orders, or with any town ordinances other than the
maximum size limitations of subsection (a)(2) or (b)(2) of
this section. A special exception may be allowed by the
town plan commission if the county board of adjustment
has varied the square footage requirements of the
Waukesha County Shoreland and Floodland Protection
Ordinance where applicable.
3. Special exceptions are prohibited from allowing garages
that would have doors for more than four side-by-side
vehicles facing the right-of-way from which the dwelling
unit has street access.
4. The architecture of the attached or detached structure shall
be compatible with the residence. Special exceptions are
prohibited if the plan commission finds that the architecture
is not compatible.
5. In no case shall any attached garage or detached accessory
structure in any agricultural or residential zoning district be
used for commercial or industrial purposes, except with the
granting of a conditional use permit by the town board.
e. After reviewing the petition, the plans submitted, the building
inspector's recommendation, and all additional information
received in the matter, the plan commission shall either grant or
deny the special exception, or grant the special exception upon
82-110
specified reasonable conditions including screening and
landscaping if appropriate. To grant or conditionally grant the
special exception, the plan commission must find that the
requested attached garage or accessory structure will not be
adverse to the public health, safety or welfare; will not be in
conflict with the spirit or intent of this chapter; and will not
otherwise be detrimental to the town or the immediate
neighborhood where the structure would be located. The plan
commission shall issue its decision in writing, including any
conditions of approval, and shall provide a copy of the decision to
the petitioner. The decision of the plan commission shall be final,
and cannot be appealed to the zoning board of adjustment.
f. In the case of the granting of a special exception to the square
footage requirements of an attached garage, the grant shall be
subject to an equivalent reduction being made in the square footage
of accessory structures that are allowed on the lot, in accordance
with subsection (a)(2) of this section.
g. Upon approval, a deed restriction, in a form approved by the town
attorney shall be filed in the county register of deeds office, prior
to issuance of the building permit indicating that a special
exception has been granted and recording any conditions of
approval, including the reduction in the permitted square footage
of accessory structures and a statement that the attached or
detached accessory structure may only be used for personal use
and cannot be used for any type of commercial or industrial
purpose unless otherwise permitted by this chapter.
(c) Boathouses.
(1) Use permitted. Boathouses, as defined by this chapter, are permitted in any
district in which a single-family dwelling is permitted and where the
property fronts on a lake, river or stream.
(2) Human habitation prohibited. A boathouse must not be used for human
habitation or occupancy and for only occasional maintenance. Such
facilities shall not be leased or rented for human occupancy nor contain
sanitary sewer facilities.
(3) Accessory to a single-family dwelling. No boathouse is permitted unless a
single-family dwelling is already present on the lot. Only one boathouse
per lot is allowed, and it must contain a minimum of 200 square feet of
boat storage area.
(4) Locational requirements. Boathouses shall conform to the setback and
offset requirements of the district and be of permanent construction. The
one boathouse shall not be permitted within five feet of the ordinary highwater
line. No metal buildings shall be permitted.
82-111
(d) Swimming pools.
(1) Use permitted. Above and below ground swimming pools are permitted in
any district other than A-E or C-1 districts, subject to the following:
a. The pool must be intended to be used solely by the occupants of
the principal use of the property on which the pool is intended to
be located and their guests.
b. Any pool, together with its surrounding walks, patios, diving
platforms, bathhouses and accessory structures, shall be so located
that the parts of such complex are in conformity with the setback
and offset requirements of the applicable district.
c. Walls or fences of at least four feet, but not more than six feet, in
height shall be provided to restrict access by children.
(2) Permit required. No swimming pool shall be constructed unless a permit
has been issued by the building inspector in accordance with chapter 14,
regarding buildings and building regulations and governing the installation
and maintenance of swimming pools.
(e) Fuel tanks. All accessory structures involving the utilization or storage of
flammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety
devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and comply with all the
requirements of the fire department and/or building inspector. All range
from active to intense burning shall be utilized and stored only in
completely enclosed structures which have incombustible exterior walls.
The aboveground storage capacity of materials that produce flammable or
explosive vapors shall not exceed 500 gallons unless approved by the plan
commission or located within an agricultural or industrial district.
(f) Special use systems.
(1) Use permitted. Special use systems are permitted in any district other than
A-E or C-1, when used solely by the occupants of the principal use, and
subject to the following:
(2) Permit required. A separate special use permit shall be required for each
system. Such permit shall be applicable solely to the systems, structures,
use and property described in the permit.
(3) Basis of approval. The town board shall base their determination on
general considerations as to the effect of such grant on the health, general
welfare, safety and economic prosperity of the town and specifically of the
immediate neighborhood in which such use would be located.
82-112
These considerations shall include the effect on the established character
and quality of the area, its physical attractiveness, the demand for related
services, the possible hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive, or nuisance
effect as a result of noise, glare, dust, smoke or odor, and such other
factors as would be appropriate to carrying out the intent of this chapter.
(4) Types of special uses.
a. Solar energy conversion system. Solar energy conversion system,
commonly referred to as "active" or "passive" solar collection and
heating systems and including systems defined by Wis. Stats. §
13.48.
b. Wind energy conversion systems. Wind energy conversion systems
commonly referred to as "windmills" which are used to produce
electrical power.
c. Communication systems. Communication systems commonly
referred to as private cable televisions (disks, dishes, devices)
unless exempt by federal law.
d. Exterior Fuel-Fired heating Devices, Any equipment, device or
apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed or
situated for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce
heat or energy used as a component of a heating system providing
heat for any interior space or water source that is not located in the
structure for which it is producing heat or energy.
(Ord. 2007-4 § 1 1-18-07)
(5) Fees. The town board shall by resolution establish fees for the processing
and issuance of special use permits.
(6) Permit procedure.
a. The town board is the agency which approves special use permits
and further designates the building inspector as the official to
receive, process and, following approval by the town board, issue
special use permits.
b. The permit application shall be made to the building inspector on
forms provided by the town and include the name and address of
the applicant, a site plan, a plan of operation, proposed
improvements to site, and any additional information deemed
necessary by the building inspector for proper review of the
application.
c. The building inspector shall review the application and, if the
application is complete and contains all required information, shall
refer it to the town board.
82-113
d. Determination: Following public hearing per section 82-267, when
deemed necessary by the town board, and necessary study and
investigation, the town board shall as soon as practical render its
decision in writing. Such decision shall include an accurate
description of the special use permitted, of the property on which
permitted and any and all conditions made applicable thereto, or if
disapproved, shall indicate the reasons for disapproval. The town
board may impose any conditions or exemptions necessary to
minimize any burden on any persons affected by granting the
special use permit.
e. Termination: When a special use does not continue in conformity
with the conditions of the original approval, or where a change in
the character of the surrounding area or of the use itself cause it to
be no longer compatible with surrounding areas, or for similar
cause based upon consideration for the public welfare, the special
grant may be terminated by action of the town board following a
public hearing per section 82-267.
f. Special Requirements:
a. No Exterior Fuel-Fired Heating Devices shall be allowed
on any parcel one (1) acre or less in size.
b. In addition to the general standard requirements as stated in
this section, such Special Uses shall be subject to more
specific standards and requirements pertinent to the
particular use, which standards and requirements may be
set in a supplementary guide for a Special Use regulation
adopted by the Town Board, and modified from time to
time in order that they reflect the best and most
contemporary regulatory practices.
(7) Standard requirements.
a. Except as may be specifically otherwise provided, any such special
use shall conform to the building location, height, building size and
open space regulations of the district in which it is located.
b. Building, site and operation plans of the proposed use shall be
submitted for approval of the town board. Such plans shall be in
sufficient detail to enable the board to evaluate the suitability of
architectural and landscape treatment; the proper location of the
building or buildings on the lot; the satisfactory provision for
parking and circulation needs, for drainage and sewage disposal,
for adequate planting screens where necessary, and for operational
control devices where necessary to eliminate noise, glare, dust,
odor, smoke or other objectionable operating condition; and the
general compatibility of the proposed use with the area in which it
is located.
82-114
(8) Special requirements.
a) No Exterior Fuel-Fired Heating Devices shall be allowed on any
parcel one (1) acre or less in size.
b) In addition to the general standard requirements as stated in this
section, such Special Uses shall be subject to more specific
standards and requirements pertinent to the particular use, which
standards and requirements may be set in a supplementary guide
for a Special Use regulation adopted by the Town Board, and
modified from time to time in order that they reflect the best and
most contemporary regulatory practices. (Ord. 2007-4 § 2 1-18-07)
(9) Modification of regulations. Requirements applicable to uses by the
regulations of this chapter may be modified or waived by the board in
their application to special use if in the board's opinion they are not
appropriate or necessary to the proper regulation of the special use, and
where such modification or waiver would not, in the board's opinion,
result in adverse effect upon the surrounding properties.
(10) Approval does not waive permit requirements. The approval of a permit
under this section shall not be construed to waive the requirement to
obtain a building or plumbing permit prior to installation of any system.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.12; Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986; Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 5-20-1999; Ord.
No. 2002-9, § 2, 2-13-2002; Ord. No. 2003-1, § 2, 1-15-2003; Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 12-
10-2003; Ord. No. 2005-4, §§ 4, 5, 7-28-2005)
82-115
Sec. 82-26. Utility cabinets.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Large utility cabinets means pedestals, loaders, junction boxes, cross connect
boxes and any similar facilities which relate to the provisions of telephone, electric,
natural gas, cable television, cable Internet, or similar public services, and which are
owned by the providers of such services, and which are larger than a small utility cabinet,
as defined in this definition, but less than six feet in height.
Small utility cabinets means pedestals, loaders, junction boxes, cross connect
boxes and any similar facilities which relate to the provision of telephone, electric,
natural gas, cable television, cable Internet, or similar public services, and which are
owned by the providers of such services, and for which there are no more than three such
small utility cabinets on any lot, which shall be no greater than the following: One cable
company cabinet being no more than 35 inches (height) by 32 inches (width) by 17
inches (depth), one electrical facility cabinet being no more than 40 inches (height) by 38
inches (width) by 30 inches (depth), and one telephone company cabinet being no more
than 60 inches (height) by 24 inches (width) by 12 inches (depth).
(b) Small utility cabinets. Small utility cabinets shall be considered a
permitted use by right regardless of whether they are in fact accessory to other uses on
the property or whether there are principal structures on the lots where they will be
located; and will not require a building permit; and will not have to meet the setback and
offset requirements of this chapter; provided that the small utility cabinet shall either (i)
be placed within a town road right-of-way in compliance with the town right-of-way
regulations in chapter 62, article II, including any amendments that may be made thereto
in the future; or (ii) be placed within a public road right-of-way under the jurisdiction of
the county or the state, in compliance with all applicable laws and subject to obtaining all
necessary approvals as required by the governing bodies having jurisdiction; or (iii) be
placed within a private road right-of-way with the proper easements; or (iv) be placed on
private property with proper lease or easements.
(c) Large utility cabinets. Large utility cabinets shall be considered a special
use, will require a special use permit as described in this subsection, and building permit;
and will be prohibited within any public or private right-of-way, except with town board
approval, except that the town board may grant specific approval on a case-by-case basis
provided that the large utility cabinet shall either (i) be placed within a town road rightof-
way in compliance with right-of-way regulations in chapter 62, article II, including
any amendments that may be made thereto in the future; or (ii) be placed within a public
road right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the county or the state in compliance with all
applicable laws and subject to obtaining all necessary approvals as required by the
governing bodies having jurisdiction; or (iii) be placed within a private road right-of-way
with the proper lease or easements. Large utility cabinets will not have to meet the offset
and setback requirements of the zoning district in which any such large utility cabinet is
proposed to be located, but shall be subject to vision corner easement requirements, and
must not interfere with safe sight distances from public streets accesses. Large utility
82-116
cabinets may be allowed by the town board in any district as described in this subsection
and may require screening from existing, adjacent residential uses.
(1) Permit required. A separate special use permit shall be required for each
property on which one or more large utility cabinet is proposed. Such
permit shall be applicable solely to the cabinet, structure, use and property
described in the permit.
(2) Basis of approval. The town board shall base their determination on
general considerations as to the effect such grant may have on the health,
general welfare, safety and economic prosperity of the town and
specifically on the immediate neighborhood where such use will be
located. These considerations shall include the effect on the established
character and quality of the areas, physical attractiveness, the demand for
related services, the possible hazards, harmful, noxious, offensive or
nuisance effect as a result of noise, glare, dust, smoke or odor and other
factors as may be appropriate to carry out the intent of this chapter.
(3) Fees. The town board shall establish fees for the processing and issuance
of special use permits on an annual basis by separate resolution.
(4) Permit procedure.
a. The town board is the designated agency, which approves special
use permits and further designates the building inspector as the
official to receive, process and following approval by the town
board, issue special use permits.
b. The permit application shall be made to the building inspector on
forms provided by the town and contain the following:
1. The name and addresses of the applicant, the owner of the
property, and all contiguous properties.
2. A site plan specifying the exact location of the easement or
leased area, cabinets, cross boxes, loaders, junction boxes,
power pedestals or any other associated facilities.
3. A detailed description of the cabinets and facilities.
4. Specifications for screening or fencing, which is to
surround the subject cabinet facilities, or a landscaping
plan, as may be required by the town board.
5. A plan of operation.
6. Proof of an easement or lease agreement with the property
owner.
82-117
7. An erosion control permit issued from the county
department of parks and land use land resource division, if
necessary.
8. Documentation from the building inspector whether the
facility requires state approved plans.
9. An abandonment plan, which shall clearly state that within
90 days after discontinuance of the use of the facilities, the
access roads, concrete paths and all other appurtenances
will be removed and the site will be restored to its natural
condition.
10. A schematic of the cabinet that shows where on the utility
cabinets there will be a permanent placard that identifies
the carrier and provides an emergency telephone number
where accidents or public concerns may be reported.
c. The building inspector shall review the application and if the
application is complete and contains all required information shall
refer it to the town board.
d. Following a public hearing per section 82-267, if deemed
necessary by the town board, and after the necessary study and
investigation, the town board shall as soon as practicable render its
decision in writing. Such decision shall include an accurate
description of the special use permitted, of the property on which it
is permitted and any and all conditions made applicable thereto or
if disapproved, shall indicate the reasons for disapproval. The town
board may impose any conditions or exemptions necessary to
minimize any burden on any person affected by granting a special
use permit.
(5) Standard requirements. Except as may be specifically allowed otherwise
by this chapter, any such large utility cabinet shall not have to conform to
the building location, and open space, requirements of the zoning district
in which it is located and be no more than six feet high. Any cabinet more
than six feet high may be authorized under the provisions of section 82-
21(d)(29).
(6) Modification of regulations. Requirements applicable to large utility
cabinets by the regulations of this section may be modified and/or waived
by the town board in their review of an application for a special use if in
the board's opinion they are not appropriate or necessary to the proper
regulation of the special use and where such modification would not, in
the board's opinion, result in an adverse effect on the surrounding
properties.
82-118
(7) Termination. When a special use permit has been issued for a large utility
cabinet and it does not continue in conformity with the conditions of the
original approval, or of the use itself causes the original special use permit
to no longer be compatible with the surrounding areas or for similar cause,
based upon consideration of the public welfare, a special use permit may
be terminated or amended by action of the town board following a public
hearing per section 82-267.
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 1, 2-26-2003)
82-119
Sec. 82-27. Off-street parking.
(a) Spaces required. Any building erected or structurally altered after the
effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be provided with
off-street vehicle parking spaces, not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from the
building served and to be used exclusively by the residents, patrons, or employees of such
building. A parking space shall be generally interpreted to be equivalent to 300 square
feet of parking, ingress, and egress area. The following schedule shall be utilized to
determine the number of parking spaces required for the various uses.
(1) Two spaces per residential dwelling unit: Garage space can be used to
satisfy this requirement.
(2) Auditoriums, churches, theaters, community centers and other places of
public assembly: One space for four seats.
(3) Retail business establishments, restaurants, taverns, clubs, etc.: Seven
spaces per 1,000 square feet of primary floor area devoted to the principal
use of the property. This requirement does not apply to the area of the
building utilized for storage purposes: no additional space will be required
for such storage space.
(4) Wholesale and other general business establishments: One space for each
two employees during any 12-hour period.
(5) Office buildings: One space for each 300 square feet of floor area, with a
minimum of one space for each two employees.
(6) Medical and dental clinics: Three spaces for each doctor and one space for
each employee.
(7) Industrial buildings and warehouse buildings: One space for each two
employees during any 12-hour period.
(8) Sanitariums, institutions, rest homes, nursing homes: One space for each
five beds plus one space for every three employees.
(9) Hospitals: One space for each two beds plus one space for every three
employees.
(10) Hotels and motels: One space for each guestroom plus one space for every
three employees.
(11) Colleges, vocational and night schools, secondary and elementary schools:
One space for each employees plus one space for every two students. At
elementary and secondary schools the number of stalls for student parking
shall be determined by the plan commission after consultation with the
administration of that school and appropriate provisions will be made
consistent with the intent of this provision.
82-120
(12) Multiple use facilities: Shall be based upon a maximum space requirement
as determined by the plan commission.
(b) Residential parking. Parking of vehicles accessory to a residential use
shall be limited to those actually used by the residents or for temporary parking for
guests. Vans, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or pick-up trucks used for private and
recreational use, or one similar vehicle used in a business for transportation to and from a
place of employment, may be parked on a residential property as long as such use does
not become a nuisance to the neighborhood.
(c) Parking of trucks and equipment. No other vehicular equipment of a
commercial or industrial nature, as excepted in subsection (b) of this section, shall be
parked or stored for more than three consecutive hours and six accumulative hours during
any 24-hour period on any lot in any zoning district, except business or industrial
districts, or as follows:
(1) Agricultural equipment (such as farm tractors, plows, seeders, combines,
cultivators, farm trucks, etc.) used in a farm operation and located within
an agricultural or rural home district.
(2) One panel, van or pick-up truck used in the conduct of a conforming
business activity being carried on in a residential or agricultural district.
The board of adjustment may, if the need is evident, permit more than one
such vehicle if the town board and planning commission indicates it has
no objection to the increase in the number of such vehicles. No limitation
shall be placed on vans or pick-up trucks if they are used for private nonbusiness
or noncommercial recreational purposes.
(3) Consideration for issuance of a conditional use permit, pursuant to section
82-21(d)(10) may be given to allow the parking of commercial or
industrial type vehicles in any zoning district, except C-1 conservancy and
A-E exclusive agricultural. This determination shall be made by the plan
commission after conducting an informal hearing and notifying all
property owners within 300 feet of such a hearing. In business or
industrial districts where such vehicles are accessory to an otherwise
permitted business or commercial use, a conditional use permit will not be
required and there are no limitations as to the number of such vehicles
which may be parked on the property except as may be established under
the provisions of the applicable zoning district.
(d) Surfacing. Any off-street parking area, other than that provided for a
residence, having a capacity for more than four vehicles shall be surfaced
and maintained in a dustless condition.
(e) Screening. Any off-street parking area, other than that provided for a
residence, which abuts or faces a residence district shall provide a planting
screen, landscaped fence, or wall at least four feet in height along the side
abutting or fronting on a residence district.
82-121
(f) Offset. In any off-street parking area, other than that provided for a
residence, which abuts a residence district, no vehicle shall be allowed to
park closer than ten feet to the abutting residential lot line.
(g) Setback. No vehicle shall be parked closer than ten feet to the base setback
line.
(h) Lighting. Lights provided in any parking area shall be hooded or beamed
so as not to create undesirable glare or illumination of adjacent residential
property.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.13; Ord. No. 90-5, § 1, 8-13-1990)
Cross reference--Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70.
Sec. 82-28. Off-street loading and unloading.
(a) Required. In any local business, general business, limited industrial or
general industrial district an off-street loading space shall be provided, in
addition to the defined off-street parking area, for every 10,000 square feet
or fraction thereof in excess of 3,000 square feet of building area,
exclusive of storage areas, used for commercial purposes.
(b) Areas. Each such loading space shall have an area at least ten feet wide by
45 feet long and with a minimum of 14 feet of height clearance.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.14)
Cross reference--Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70.
82-122
Sec. 82-29. Signs.
(a) Use restricted: Signs are prohibited in all zoning districts in the Town
except: (1) One or more sign may be specifically authorized by a duly issued Conditional
Use Permit; (2) One or more sign is permitted to the extent specifically authorized by the
applicable zoning district regulations. (Ord. 2006-2 § 2 12-13-06)
(b) Setbacks and offsets. In any district, no sign other than those permitted in a
residence or agricultural district shall be permitted closer than 20 feet to the base setback
line or to any other lot line, and any sign not directly related to the use of the premises on
which it is located shall conform to the setback and offset requirements as would apply to
a building in that district, unless otherwise approved by the town board upon
recommendation of the plan commission.
(c) Hazards or nuisances prohibited. No sign, billboard or other advertising
media which creates a hazard or dangerous distraction to vehicular traffic, or a nuisance
to adjoining residential property, shall be permitted in any district.
(d) Directional signs. A sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area for the
purpose of advertising and directing patrons to an establishment off the main traveled
highway may be permitted in any district other than a residential district upon
recommendation of the plan commission and approval of the town board.
(e) Heights. No free standing sign shall exceed 20 feet in height from the
ground, and no sign shall in any case exceed the maximum height limit for the district in
which it is located.
(f) Temporary signs. All portable signs used for commercial purposes shall
conform to the standards of this section and receive plan commission and town board
approvals if installed for a continuous period of at least 14 days but less than six months.
Campaign signs placed within the base setback areas shall be removed within 72 hours of
the closing of polls.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.15; Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
Sec. 82-30. Airport safety zone.
(a) Maximum height. No buildings or objects of natural growth located within
two miles of the boundaries of any existing airport landing field or landing and take-off
strip, and within a band 500 feet on each side of the centerline extended of any runway,
shall be erected, altered, or permitted to grow after the effective date of the ordinance
from which this section is derived to a height above the elevation of the nearest point of
such runway greater than one-fifteenth of the distance from such point.
(b) Control of use. No building or land located within two miles of the
boundary of any airport, landing field or landing and take-off strip shall be so used that
by reason of the emission of smoke, gas or other emanation it shall produce a hazard to
the operation of aircraft.
82-123
(c) Exceptions. The regulation in this section shall not apply to growing field
crops which are harvested at least once a year, nor to fences not over five feet high.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.16)
Sec. 82-31. Mobile homes and recreational vehicles.
(a) Human habitation prohibited. Except within an approved mobile home
park or camp, no mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be used for the purpose of
human habitation (human habitation being defined as entering a mobile home or
recreational vehicle for any purpose other than maintenance).
(b) Human habitation allowed. A permit for one continuous six-month period
allowing the human habitation of a mobile home or a recreational vehicle on lands other
than an approved mobile home park may be granted by the town board provided:
(1) The habitation is an accessory to the current construction of a
principal structure owned by the same person who is the applicant for
the permit; and
(2) The waste disposal facilities and water supply facilities for the
property upon which the mobile home or recreational vehicle is to be
located have been approved by the county health department.
(c) Storage permitted. One (1) mobile home or recreational vehicle may be stored
outside of a building provided the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The overall length of the mobile home or recreational vehicle
including the towing tongue shall not exceed 35 feet.
(2) The mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be registered or
licensed with the State of Wisconsin.
(3) The condition of the mobile home or recreational vehicle does not
constitute a nuisance as determined by the plan commission.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.17; Ord. No. 96-3, § 3, 5-8-1996)
(Ord. No. 2010-2, § 1, 8-25-2010).
Revised 8/25/10
82-124
Sec. 82-32. Legal non-conforming uses, structures and lots.
(a) Continuance of Use, Generally,
1) Any lawfully established construction of a building or structure at the time
of the enactment of this chapter or any amendment applicable thereto that
does not conform to the dimensional regulations for the District in which it
is located shall be deemed a legal nonconforming structure and may be
continued, except as otherwise provided herein.
2) Any lawfully established use of a building, structure or land at the time of
the enactment of this chapter or any amendment applicable thereto that
does not conform to the use regulations for the District in which it is
located shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be
continued, except as otherwise provided herein.
3) Any lawfully established lot or parcel of land at the time of enactment of
this chapter or any amendment thereto which does not meet the
requirements for the District in which it is located shall be deemed to be a
legal nonconforming lot and may be used in accordance with this chapter
and as provided herein.
(b) Regulation. For the purposes of administration, legal nonconforming
structures, uses and lots shall be classified and regulated as follows:
(1) Existing Non-conforming Structures. A lawful structure which existed at
the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may be
continued as a legal non-conforming structure, although the structure size
or location does not conform to all the requirements of this Ordinance,
however:
a. A legal non-conforming structure containing conforming uses may
be totally rebuilt if, and only if, such reconstruction is identical in
all respects to the size, shape, height, location, footprint, style and
use of the original structure.
b. A legal non-conforming structure containing conforming uses,
subject to approval of the Town Plan Commission, may be reduced
in size, may have its shape modified, may have its height lowered,
and may have its style modified, as long as the proposed structure
is identical in all respects to the location, footprint and use of the
original structure.
c. A legal non-conforming structure containing conforming uses,
subject to the grant of a variance from the Board of Adjustment,
may be increased in size, may be increased in shape, may be
increased in height, and the location and footprint may be
modified.
82-125
d. Regardless of the foregoing provisions in this subsection, the
footprint of a legal non-conforming primary residence with
conforming uses, subject to the Town Plan Commission approval,
may be expanded into areas of the lot where the expansion fully
complies with all offset and setback requirements of the district in
which it is located, provided that the expansion is otherwise in
compliance with all other applicable laws. In passing upon such
matter, the Town Plan Commission shall consider all the following
factors: the size of the lot; the size and location of the existing
legal non-conforming structure; the size and location of any other
structure on the lot; the size and location of the proposed
expansion; the impact, if any, that the expansion may have upon
neighboring properties; whether the proposed expansion would
violate the intent of the Zoning Ordinance and such other matters
as the Town Plan Commission finds to be relevant in the interest of
the public health, safety, welfare, and be compatible with other
properties in the area of the Town.
(2) Nonconforming Use of Structures and Lands. A lawful use which existed
at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued
as a legal non-conforming use, although the use of the structure and land
does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, however:
a. No such use shall be expanded or enlarged.
b. Upon petition to and approval of the Town Board, such use may be
changed to another use provided the Town Board determines that
the new use would not result in a greater degree of non-conformity
than the current use.
c. When any such use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive
months or eighteen (18) cumulative months during a three-year
period, any future use of the land or structure shall conform to the
use regulations of the applicable district. Seasonable uses shall be
excluded from this provision.
d. When a structure which houses such non-conforming use is
damaged beyond 50 percent of its present equalized assessed
value, it shall be restored for any use in conformity with the
applicable district regulations.
e. Total structural repairs or alterations to a structure housing a nonconforming
use shall not exceed, on an accumulative percentage
basis, 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of the
structure.
(3) Nonconforming lots. The size and shape of such lots shall not be altered in
any way which would increase the degree of such non-conformity to the
applicable district regulations.
82-126
(c) Conditional use status. Subject to the provisions of section 82-21,
Conditional Use Status may be granted to existing legal non-conforming
uses, structures or lots upon petition of the owner and where such use,
structure or lot id determined by the Plan Commission and Town Board to
be: not adverse to the public health, safety, or welfare; not in conflict with
the spirit or intent of the Ordinance; and not otherwise detrimental to
the community and particularly the surrounding neighborhood. Such
conditional use status shall be granted only with the recommendation of
the Plan Commission and approval of the Town Board following a joint
public hearing in the manner provided in section 82-267.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.18)
(d) State Law: Any applicable restriction in this Ordinance which prohibits
restoration of a damaged or destroyed non-conforming structure shall not
apply to the extent that 2005 Wisconsin Act 112 applies to such
restoration, including such amendments and renumbering of the applicable
statutes referred to therein as may be made from time to time.
(Ord. 2006-2 § 12-01-06)
Sec. 82-33. Prior permit.
(a) Construction permitted. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require
any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building or part
thereof for which a building permit has been issued before the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived and the construction of which shall have
been substantially started within six months from the date of such permit.
(b) Subsequently nonconforming. Any such use which does not conform to the
use regulations of the district in which it is located shall, however, subsequently be
considered a legal nonconforming use.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 3.19)
Secs. 82-34--82-49. Reserved.
82-127
ARTICLE IV.
DISTRICTS
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 82-50. Establishment of districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the town is divided into zoning districts which shall be
designated as follows:
C-1 Conservancy
District
EFO Existing Floodplain
Overlay District
A-E Exclusive
Agriculture District
A-P Agricultural Land
Preservation District
A-T Agricultural Land
Preservation
Transition District
R-H Rural Home District
A-1 Agricultural District
S-E Suburban Estate
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
B-1 Restricted Business
District
B-2 Local Business
District
B-3 General Business
District
M-1 Limited Industrial
District
M-2 General Industrial
District
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 4.01; Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
82-128
Sec. 82-51. Zoning map.
(a) Districts mapped. The boundaries of the zoning districts are shown upon a
zoning map of the town, which map is made part of this section, and all the notations,
references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this section as
if the matters and information set forth by such map were all fully described herein. Such
map shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk. For the purpose of local
administration, a copy of the appropriate section map shall also be kept on file in the
office of the building inspector. (Ord. No. 2009-9 § 1, 5/14/2010)
(b) Determination of boundaries. District boundaries shall be determined by
measurement from and as shown on the official zoning maps and, in case of any
questions as to the interpretation of such boundary lines, the plan commission shall
interpret the map according to the reasonable intent of this chapter.
(1) Unless otherwise specifically indicated or dimensioned on the map, the
district boundaries are normally lot lines; section, quarter section or 16th
section lines; or the centerlines of streets, highways, railways or alleys.
(2) The boundaries of conservancy districts as drawn are intended to represent
the edge of swamp, marsh and floodland or the high water line along a
stream or watercourse, and shall be finally determined by the actual
conditions in each specific situation; provided, however, that along a
stream or watercourse such line shall not be less than 100 feet from the
center of such stream or watercourse.
(3) The boundaries of the environmental corridor district are intended to
include all non-wetland/floodplain primary or secondary environmental
corridors, such as significant woodlands, upland wildlife habitat areas,
scenic overlooks and slopes exceeding 12 percent. Where questions arise
as to the exact location or boundary of an environmental corridor district,
the extent and location of such corridor shall be finally determined by an
infield investigation by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission Staff Biologist or his designee.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 4.02; Ord. No. 2000-6, § 4, 9-11-2000)
Secs. 82-52--82-59. Reserved.
Revised 5/14/2010
82-129
DIVISION 2.
C-1 CONSERVANCY DISTRICT
Sec. 82-60. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the C-1 conservancy district:
(1) Grazing.
(2) The harvesting of any wild crops such as marsh hay; ferns, moss, berries,
tree fruits and tree seeds.
(3) Hunting and fishing unless prohibited by other ordinances or laws.
(4) Sustained yield forestry.
(5) Dams and hydro-electric power stations.
(6) Telephone, telegraph and power transmission lines.
(7) Nonresidential buildings used solely in conjunction with the raising of
waterfowl, minnows and other similar lowland animals, fowl or fish.
(8) Telephone and electric distribution substations.
(9) Park and recreational structures or facilities.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 5.01(1))
Sec. 82-61. Specific prohibited activities.
Filling or drainage of wetlands, removal of top soil or peat, or damming or
relocating of any watercourse shall not be permitted in the C-1 district except with
recommendation of the plan commission and approval of the town board.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 5.01(2))
Sec. 82-62. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the C-1 conservancy shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 60 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 60 feet maximum.
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 4, 5-8-1996)
82-130
Sec. 82-63. Area regulations.
There are no specific minimum lot size requirements that apply to conservancy
zoned land. Lands which are zoned conservancy that lie within a larger parcel or tract of
land, the remainder of which is zoned either A-P agricultural land preservation district or
A-T agricultural land preservation transition district and have a minimum parcel size of
35 acres, shall be eligible for the agricultural preservation tax credit program.
(Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
Secs. 82-64--82-69. Reserved.
82-131
DIVISION 3.
EFO EXISTING FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sec. 82-70. Purpose and intent.
(a) The purpose and intent of the EFO existing floodplain overlay district is to
provide for the continued use of improved properties that lie within the floodplain and
which are considered prohibited structures. It is recognized that these improvements
represent the substance of many families' estates and principal residences. Therefore, the
principal intent of this division is to recognize existing uses and structures and regulate
them in accordance with sound floodplain management practices while protecting the
overall water quality of the river system.
(b) Another intent of the provisions in this division is to regulate and diminish
the proliferation of nonconforming structures and uses in floodplain areas through control
of reconstruction, remodeling, conversion and repair. The basis behind these controls is
to lessen the potential danger to life, safety, health and welfare of persons whose lands
are subject to the hazards of floods.
(c) The provisions for the EFO existing floodplain overlay district shall apply
to all floodplains where specifically mapped and where structures are in existence as of
the date of adoption of this provision of this chapter.
(d) The degree of flood protection intended to be provided by this division is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. This division does not imply that areas outside the 100-year recurrence
interval floodplain or land uses permitted within such areas will always be totally free
from flooding or flood damages, nor shall this division create a liability on the part of or a
cause of action against the town or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that may result from reliance on this chapter.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 6.01)
Sec. 82-71. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the EFO existing floodplain overlay
district:
(1) Any use as permitted in the C-1 conservancy district or the A-E exclusive
agricultural district.
(2) Structures and uses, including principal as well as accessory uses and
structures existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this
provision is derived, subject to compliance with the following:
a. In the event of damage, including fire, wind or other natural
causes, to any such existing structures, the valuation of which to
repair such damage would exceed 50 percent of its present
equalized assessed value (as computed over the life of the structure
82-132
and including past improvements) such structure may be
reconstructed, remodeled or rebuilt if the following standards are
met:
1. The structure is not located in a floodway as defined in this
chapter.
2. The first floor of the structure shall be placed at or above
the flood protection elevation and reconstruction may occur
on the same foundation or newly constructed foundation
which represents no greater an encroachment or extension
of the previously existing structure other than vertically.
Such foundation shall be floodproofed and certified as set
forth herein.
Fill shall be used to elevate the first floor to meet the
requirements of this subsection. This fill shall not be less
than one foot below the flood protection elevation for the
particular area and shall extend at such elevation for a
distance of at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the
structure. Where such distance cannot be achieved because
of lot lines or other similar constraints, such fill elevation
shall extend as far as is practicable resulting in no slope
conditions at its terminus which may adversely affect
surface water drainage on adjacent properties.
Where the 15 feet of fill cannot be achieved as set forth in
this subsection, the structures shall be floodproofed to the
flood protection elevation in accordance with the methods
set forth herein and shall be certified as such by an architect
or professional engineer registered in the state. Other
methods may be used, as long as they are certified as set
forth in this section. All floodproofing measures shall
provide anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement,
and ensure that the structural walls and floors are
watertight. To ensure that adequate measures are taken, the
applicant shall submit a certified plan or document
verifying that the proposed floodproofing measures are
adequately designed to protect the structure to the flood
protection elevation for the subject area.
3. There shall be dry land access to all structures affected by
the regulations in this division. Such lands shall be
contiguous lands outside or above the floodplain elevation
where the depth and duration of floodwaters do not
adversely affect rescue and relief operations during a flood.
Normally inundations of not more than one foot of water
above the roadways is considered adequate to meet the
intent of this requirement.
82-133
4. All on-site waste disposal systems and private wells shall
be floodproofed to the flood protection elevation and shall
conform with the provisions of the county sanitary code
and/or Wisconsin Administrative Codes where applicable
to such facilities.
5. The basement or crawl space elevation shall not be more
than two feet below the flood protection elevation, unless a
community-wide exemption allowing floodproofing of
basements has been granted by the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency
Management Administration (FEMA). Heating and
electrical equipment shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation.
6. A structure may be reconstructed or rebuilt where the
offset, setback, building footprint and impervious surface
regulations outlined in the R-3 district can be met. If the
offset, setback and building footprint requirements do not
allow a minimum of an 1,140 square foot building envelope
to accommodate a 900 square foot first floor and a 240
square foot garage, the applicant may apply for a special
exception in accordance with section 82-175.
7. Where more than one principal building, as defined in this
chapter, exists on a single property and one or more of such
buildings would be destroyed or damaged beyond 50
percent of their present equalized assessed value as
heretofore set forth, the reconstruction, rebuilding or repair
of only one of such buildings would be allowed. Where
only one principal building on a property where more than
one principal building exists, is destroyed or damaged as
set forth in this subsection, the reconstruction or repair of
that building would not be allowed unless all other
principal buildings were removed. The intent of this
provision is to allow for the reasonable use of the
developed floodplain lands but not to the degree of
intensity which may have existed prior and so that the
intensity of use of floodplain lands will be diminished.
b. Where a structure lies within the floodplain but outside of the
floodway, no modification or addition to such structure shall be
permitted unless it conforms, with the following standards: (For
the purpose of this section, the words "modification" and
"addition" shall include, but not be limited to, any structural
alteration, addition, modification, conversion of space for living
purposes, rebuilding or lateral enlargement of any such existing
structure, principal or accessory. Ordinary maintenance repairs,
82-134
including painting, decorating, paneling, replacement of doors,
windows and other nonstructural components, shall not be subject
to these provisions.)
1. The modification or addition to a structure may not
decrease floodwater storage capacities. Such modification
or addition to a structure shall not extend laterally from the
structure so as to extend into the floodplain but may be
allowed to go above existing floors of the structure. An
accessory building may be permitted on existing grades, as
long as it is not enclosed on its sides. It shall, however,
meet all other offset, setback and floor area ratio
requirements.
A garage may be permitted accessory to the existing
principal use. When attached, the garage floor shall be at or
above the flood protection elevation and when detached
shall be at least one foot below the flood protection
elevation and shall meet the fill requirements, per
subsection (2)a.2. of this section, locational and floor area
ratio criteria of this chapter.
2. The building footprint and impervious surface limits in
section 82-174(a), and the building location requirements in
section 82-172 must be met.
3. The provisions of subsection (2)a.2., 3., 5., 6. and 7. of this
section, shall be complied with. Only one principal
structure on a lot will be allowed to be modified or altered
in accordance with the intent of subsection (2)a.7. of this
section.
4. The provisions of subsection (2)a.4 of this section shall be
complied with. Where a modification or addition requires a
larger waste disposal system than what exists (i.e.,
additional bedrooms), it shall be demonstrated to the
building inspector that a new or expanded waste disposal
system can be provided which complies with the
requirements of the county sanitary code and the Wisconsin
Administrative Code. Such documentation shall be
provided prior to the issuance of a building permit for such
alterations to the structure. The new, improved or enlarged
waste disposal system shall be installed concurrently with
the construction or prior to occupancy of the altered
structure.
82-135
The intent of this provision is to allow only those additions
and modifications which can be accommodated with an
onsite or public waste disposal system which will comply
with contemporary standards, be adequately protected from
flooding and will accommodate such structures.
c. Conversion of residences from seasonal use to year round use will
not be allowed unless all of the conditions set forth in subsection
(2)b. of this section are met. Conversions of this nature will require
a building permit and inspection to determine conformance with
subsection (2)b. of this section.
d. The provisions set forth in this section and related to
reconstruction, modification, remodeling and additions, shall
conform with all other requirements and provisions of this chapter.
e. Lateral extension of buildings or other exceptions which may be
prohibited in this section may be allowed only with approval by
the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures
established in this chapter. The board of adjustment in granting
such extension shall determine whether the spirit and intent of the
chapter will be upheld.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 6.02; Ord. No. 2006-1, §§ 11, 12, 1-3-2006)
Sec. 82-72. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the EFO existing floodplain overlay district shall be as
follows:
(1) Principal building
(A) A point measured from the lowest point of the exposed structure to
the highest floor line shall not exceed 12 ft.
(B) A point measured from the lowest point of the exposed structure to
any eave line shall not exceed 24ft.
(C) A point measured from the lowest point of the exposed structure to
the highest point of any roof shall not exceed 34 ft.
(D) It is the intent of this section that no more than 2 stories of habitable
space shall exist when viewed from the waterfront.
(Ord. 2007-2 § 3 12-01-2006)
(2) Accessory buildings: 60 feet maximum.
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 5, 5-8-1996)
Secs. 82-73--82-79. Reserved.
82-136
DIVISION 4.
A-E EXCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL CONSERVANCY DISTRICT
Sec. 82-80. Purpose.
(a) This district is intended to apply to those areas presently in agricultural use
by virtue of either cultivation, pasture or in some other way, and which if they were not
being used for agricultural purposes would be classified as conservancy lands due to
inherent wet soil characteristics and the presence of natural vegetation indicative of wet
soils. The intent of the A-E exclusive agricultural conservancy district is to preserve and
maintain agricultural uses on lands suited for such purposes. These lands often include
lands poorly suited for urban or suburban development while being particularly well
suited for some types of agricultural use either with or without a higher level of soil
management.
(b) In this district structures related to farm operations, including dwellings,
are deemed consistent with the purpose of this division where the location of buildings
associated with the permitted agricultural operation is found to conform with health,
sanitation and safety provisions of this and any other state regulation or local ordinance.
Determination of such suitability shall be evidenced by onsite examination and
evaluation. The intent for mapping purposes is that lands within the A-E exclusive
agricultural conservancy district shall have exhibited those agricultural uses in the past. It
is not the intent of this division to promote or permit the conversion of wetlands.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 7.01)
Sec. 82-81. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the A-E exclusive agricultural
conservancy district:
(1) Any use permitted in the C-1 conservancy district.
(2) Ordinary farm uses, including dairying, livestock, poultry raising and
truck farming.
(3) Accessory uses within buildings normally associated with permitted
agricultural operations and shelters for housing animals, except that no
structure shall be located in a floodplain or upon lands not suited due to
soil limitations. Any structures within floodlands must conform to division
3 of this article.
(4) Nurseries, greenhouses and hatcheries limiting the retail sales of such
produce to that which is produced by the farm operator.
(5) Roadside stands.
82-137
(6) Signs not to exceed 12 square feet in area displaying the name of the farm
or farm organization.
(7) Sod farming in conformance with section 82-645.
(8) Private stables and commercial stables subject to the following:
a. Private stables on parcels of less than 20 acres subject to a written
refuse disposal plan being submitted to and approved by the plan
commission if requested by the town, provided that not more than
one horse or other head of livestock are kept for each full open
acre over two acres of lot area and provided that the keeping of
hogs, pigs of any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in this
chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued),
male goats or fur-bearing animals shall not be permitted on less
than 20 acres.
b. Private stables on parcels 20 acres or greater in size subject to a
written refuse disposal plan being submitted to and approved by
the plan commission if requested by the town.
c. Commercial stables on parcels 20 acres or greater in size subject to
a written refuse disposal plan being submitted to and approved by
the plan commission if requested by the town.
d. Commercial stables on parcels of less than 20 acres are not
permitted but may be allowed as conditional uses pursuant to
section 82-21(d)(11) and provided that the keeping of hogs, pigs of
any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in this chapter for
which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued), male goats or
fur-bearing animals shall not be permitted on less than 20 acres.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 7.02(1); Ord. No. 98-4, § 4, 6-10-1998; Ord. No. 2001-6, §§ 8, 9,
10-29-2001)
82-138
Sec. 82-82. Conditional Uses.
Commercial stables on parcels less than 20 acres in size shall be a conditional use
in the A-E exclusive agricultural conservancy district pursuant to section 82-21(d)(11)
provided that the keeping of hogs, pigs of any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in
this chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued), male goats or furbearing
animals shall not be permitted on less than 20 acres.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 7.02(2); Ord. No. 2001-6, § 10, 10-29-2001)
Sec. 82-83. Building location.
Building location requirements for the A-E exclusive agricultural conservancy
district shall be as follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 50 feet minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 7.03)
Sec. 82-84. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the A-E exclusive agricultural conservancy district shall be
as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory structures: Farm, 60 feet; other, 15 feet, except that this height
limit may be increased to allow structures up to 100 feet where the setback
and offset are equal to or exceed the height of the structure itself.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 7.04)
Sec. 82-85. Area regulations.
(a) Minimum required floor area. The minimum required floor area for the AE
exclusive Agricultural Conservancy District shall be as follows:
Single Family
Bedrooms/D.U. Single Family-Total Area
(Sq Ft)
First Floor (Square Foot)
One 1,400 1,100
Two 1,400 1,100
Three 1,600 1,100
Four (+) 1,800 1,100
(Ord. 2007-2 § 4 12-01-2006)
(b) Maximum floor area ratio permitted. The maximum floor area ratio
permitted in the A-E exclusive agricultural conservancy district shall be
ten percent.
82-139
(c) Lot size. The lot size requirements in the A-E exclusive agricultural
conservancy district shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum parcel size: 35 acres, except as may be provided in section 82-
92(4) for those residual existing dwellings and parcels that result due to
farm consolidation and section 82-93(2).
(2) Minimum average width: 600 feet, except as provided in section 82-92(4)
or section 82-93(2).
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 7.05; Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986; Ord. No. 95-5, § 2, 10-11-1995)
Secs. 82-86--82-89. Reserved.
82-140
DIVISION 5.
A-P AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION DISTRICT
Sec. 82-90. Purposes.
The purposes of the A-P agricultural land preservation district are to:
(1) Preserve productive agricultural lands for the production of food and fiber.
(2) Preserve productive farms by preventing land use conflicts between
incompatible uses.
(3) Control the cost of public services through efficient extension of those
services.
(4) Maintain a viable agricultural base and associated agricultural supportive
uses.
(5) Pace and shape development in the changing rural landscape.
(6) Implement the provisions of the county agricultural land preservation plan
when and if adopted.
(7) Comply with the provisions of the Wisconsin Farmland Preservation Act
which permits eligible land owners to receive tax credits under Wis. Stats.
§ 71.60.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 8.01)
Sec. 82-91. Lands to be included in district.
Land to be included within the A-P agricultural land preservation district are as
follows:
(1) Lands historically exhibiting good crop yields or those capable of such
good crop yields by virtue of their good soil characteristics.
(2) Lands which have been demonstrated to be productive for dairying,
livestock raising and grazing and have records of good production levels.
(3) Other lands which form an integral part of such farm operations.
(4) Lands used for the production of specialty crops such as onions, herbs,
sod, fruits and vegetables.
(5) Lands which are capable of productive use through economically feasible
improvements such as irrigation or tile draining when wetlands are not
thereby disturbed or converted.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 8.02)
82-141
Sec. 82-92. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the A-P agricultural land preservation
district:
(1) Any permitted use as described in the A-1 agricultural district.
(2) General farming, including, but not limited to, basic agriculture, dairying,
floriculture, viticulture, forestry, livestock grazing, hay baling, grain
drying from a single farm operation, and livestock raising. Such operations
may include paddocks, stables, truck farms, nurseries, sod farms and other
related agricultural facilities. Farm buildings housing animals, barnyards
and feedlots, shall not be located within a floodland nor closer than 100
feet to any navigable water course, an existing adjacent dwelling or a
residentially zoned lot.
(3) Farm dwellings for farm owners. Farm dwellings for laborers who derive
the principal portion of their income from the farm.
(4) Existing dwellings or dwellings remaining after the consolidation of a
farm enterprise. Parcels thereby created as a result of consolidation shall
be not less than one acre in size and shall meet the width and setback
requirements of the R-1 residential district. New non-farm dwellings are
prohibited.
(5) Private stables as follows:
a. Private stables on parcels of less than 20 acres subject to a written
refuse disposal plan being submitted to and approved by the plan
commission if requested by the town, provided that not more than
one horse or other head of livestock are kept for each full open
acre over two acres of lot area and provided that the keeping of
hogs, pigs of any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in this
chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued),
male goats or fur-bearing animals shall not be permitted on less
than 20 acres.
b. Private stables on parcels 20 acres or greater in size subject to a
written refuse disposal plan being submitted to and approved by
the plan commission if requested by the town.
c. Commercial stables on parcels 20 acres or greater in size subject to
a written refuse disposal plan being submitted to and approved by
the plan commission if requested by the town.
82-142
d. Commercial stables on parcels of less than 20 acres are not
permitted but may be allowed as conditional uses pursuant to
section 82-21(d)(11) and provided that the keeping of hogs, pigs of
any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in this chapter for
which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued), male goats or
fur-bearing animals shall not be permitted on less than 20 acres.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 8.03(1); Ord. No. 98-4, § 6, 6-10-1998; Ord. No. 2001-6, §§ 11, 12,
10-29-2001)
Sec. 82-93. Conditional uses.
The following shall be conditional uses in the A-P agricultural land preservation
district:
(1) Commercial stables on parcels less than 20 acres in size pursuant to
section 82-21(d)(11) provided that the keeping of hogs, pigs of any type
(except potbellied pigs as defined in this chapter for which a hobby kennel
use permit has been issued), male goats or fur-bearing animals shall not be
permitted on less than 20 acres.
(2) Single-family homes exceeding one per farm operating unit to be owned
and occupied by a person or family earning a substantial livelihood from
the existing agricultural operation may be permitted by conditional use.
Residences for a living child or parent of farm operator on minimum one
acre lots may also be allowed, providing that the commission finds that the
proposed residence and lot will be used in a timely manner by the relative
and that the resulting residential use will not adversely affect the existing
agricultural uses in the neighborhood. Any such parcel created shall
conform to the minimum requirements of the R-1 zoning district.
(3) Other conditional uses as provided in section 82-21(d).
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 8.03(2); Ord. No. 2001-6, § 13, 10-29-2001)
Sec. 82-94. Building location.
Building location requirements for the A-P agricultural land preservation district
shall be as follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 50 feet minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 8.04)
Sec. 82-95. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the A-P agricultural land preservation district shall be as
follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
82-143
(2) Accessory building: 60 feet maximum, except that both principal and
accessory buildings may be increased to not more than 100 feet where the
setback and offset equals or exceeds the height of the structure.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 8.05)
Sec. 82-96. Area regulations.
(a) Minimum required floor area. The minimum required floor area in the AP
(Agricultural Land Preservation District) shall be as follows:
Single Family
Bedrooms/D.U. Single Family-
(Square Footage)
First Floor (Square Foot)
One 1,400 1,100
Two 1,400 1,100
Three 1,600 1,100
Four (+) 1,800 1,100
(Ord. 2007-2 §5 12-01-2006)
(b) Maximum floor area ratio permitted. The maximum floor area ratio
permitted in the A-P agricultural land preservation district shall be ten
percent.
(c) Lot size. Lot size regulations for the AP agricultural land preservation
district shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum parcel size: 35 acres except as may be provided in section 82-
92(4) for those residual existing dwellings and parcels that result due to
farm consolidation and section 82-93(2).
(2) Minimum average width: 600 feet, except as provided in section 82-92(4)
or section 82-93(2).
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 8.06; Ord. No. 95-5, § 3, 10-11-1995)
Secs. 82-97--82-99. Reserved.
82-144
DIVISION 6.
A-T AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION TRANSITION DISTRICT
Sec. 82-100. Creation.
The A-T agricultural land preservation transition district is hereby created and
shall be regulated by the provisions set out in this division.
(Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
Sec. 82-101. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the A-T agricultural land preservation transition district is to
protect and encourage farming in areas that are anticipated to develop consistent with
adopted plans for the community. The A-T agricultural land preservation transition
district will serve as a holding or transition zone enabling farmers to continue in the
practice of farming and making qualified farmers eligible to claim income tax credits
under the state's agricultural land preservation program. Because lands in the A-T
agricultural land preservation transition district are recognized as possessing development
potential consistent with adopted plans for the community. It is the policy of the town to
conduct a periodic comprehensive review of all A-T agricultural land preservation
transition district lands at least every five years beginning in 1990. Additional stated
purposes of the A-T agricultural land preservation transition district are as follows:
(1) To preserve productive agricultural lands for the production of food and
fiber.
(2) To preserve productive farms by preventing land use conflicts between
incompatible uses.
(3) To control the cost of public services through efficient extension of those
services.
(4) To maintain a viable agricultural base and associated agricultural
supportive uses.
(5) To pace and shape development in the changing rural landscape by
preventing premature development of lands intended to be served by
municipal services or when such land is determined to be necessary for
growth and development by the community and by virtue of other factors.
(6) To implement the provisions of the county agricultural land preservation
plan.
(7) To comply with the provisions of the Wisconsin Farmland Preservation
Act which permits eligible land owners to receive tax credit under Wis.
Stats. § 71.60.
(Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
82-145
Sec. 82-102. Lands to be included in district.
Lands to be included within the A-T agricultural land preservation transition
district are as follows:
(1) Lands historically exhibiting good crop yields or those capable of such
good crop yields by virtue of their good soil characteristics.
(2) Lands which have been demonstrated to be productive for dairying,
livestock raising and grazing and have records of good production levels.
(3) Other lands which form an integral part of such farm operations.
(4) Lands used for the production of specialty crops such as onions, herbs,
sod, fruits and vegetables.
(5) Lands which are capable of productive use through economically feasible
improvements such as irrigation or tile draining when wetlands are not
thereby disturbed or converted.
(6) Lands suited for development but which, for the present, lie beyond
recognized needs to provide land for growth and development in the near
term but do lie within areas recognized as needed for growth and
development in the long term.
(Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
Sec. 82-103. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses in the A-T agricultural land preservation transition district shall
include any permitted use as described in the A-P agricultural land preservation district.
(Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
Sec. 82-104. Building location.
Building location requirements for the A-T agricultural land preservation
transition district shall be as follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 50 feet minimum.
(Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
82-146
Sec. 82-105. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the A-T agricultural land preservation transition district
shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory building: 60 feet maximum, except that both principal and
accessory buildings may be increased to not more than 100 feet where the
setback and offset equals or exceeds the height of the structure.
(Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
Sec. 82-106. Floor area regulations.
The minimum required floor area for the AT (Agricultural Land Preservation Transition
District) shall be as follows:
Single Family
Bedrooms/D.U. Total Area (Square
Footage)
First Floor (Square Foot)
One 1,400 1,100
Two 1,400 1,100
Three 1,600 1,100
Four (+) 1,800 1,100
(Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986; Ord. No. 95-5, § 4, 10-11-1995)
(Ord. No. 2007-2 §6 12-01-2006)
Sec. 82-107. Lot size.
Lot size requirement in the A-T agricultural land preservation transition district
shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum parcel size: 35 acres, except as may be provided in, section 82-
92(4) for those residual existing dwellings and parcels that result due to
farm consolidation and section 82-93.
(2) Minimum average width: 600 feet, except as provided in section 82-92(4)
or section 82-93.
(Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
Secs. 82-108, 82-109. Reserved.
82-147
DIVISION 7.
R-H RURAL HOME DISTRICT
Sec. 82-110. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the R-H rural home district:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Public parks and recreation areas.
(3) General farming on not less than ten acres and as regulated in subsections
(4), (6) and (11) of this section.
(4) Keeping of poultry provided not more than 20 fowl may be kept for each
full acre over two acres of lot area.
(5) Horticulture, including greenhouses and nurseries.
(6) The following accessory buildings and uses, subject to the conditions
specified:
a. Private garages, when located on the same lot, and not involving
the conduct of a business; provided, however, that no private
garage shall be erected unless that principal building to which such
garage is an accessory use has been erected or is to be erected
simultaneously with such garage.
b. Quarters for household or farm employees; provided, however, that
such quarters shall be occupied only by individuals employed full
time on the premises and their families.
c. Private boathouses, provided no living quarters are included in
such boathouse.
d. Stables, barns, kennels, or poultry houses, provided that no
building housing domestic livestock or poultry shall be closer than
50 feet to any lot line.
(7) Home occupations and professional offices as defined in this section,
when incident to the residential use and when situated in the same
dwelling, subject to the following conditions:
a. No name plate exceeding three square feet in area shall be
permitted.
b. Such home occupation or professional office shall not occupy
more than 20 percent of the floor area of the principal building.
82-148
c. Such home occupation or professional office shall not employ
more than one person not a resident on such lot.
d. Adequate off-street parking facilities shall be provided adjacent or
reasonably adjacent to the building served.
e. Such permitted use shall not include conduct of any retail or
wholesale business on the premises, nor the removal of sand,
gravel or stone for commercial purposes.
f. Such permitted use shall not include the use of any machinery
tools or other appliances which can reasonably be construed as
creating an abnormal nuisance to the surrounding residential area.
(8) A sign appertaining to the lease or sale of any building or land provided
such sign does not exceed 12 square feet in area. A sign not exceeding six
square feet in area may be maintained by the owner or occupant of any
land or building for the purpose of displaying the name of the owner or
occupant, or for the purpose of warning against trespasses.
(9) Telephone, telegraph, and power transmission lines.
(10) Hobby kennel.
a. Number of dogs limited. The keeping of dogs by right, and the
keeping of dogs by hobby kennel use permit, is limited to the
number of dogs described as follows:
1. One acre or less. On parcels one acre or less in size, no
more than two dogs required to be licensed by statute shall
be kept on the parcel. Hobby kennel use permits cannot be
issued for parcels one acre or less in size.
2. One to three acres. On parcels more than one acre in size,
but less than three acres in size, no more than two dogs
required to be licensed by statute shall be kept on the
parcel. Hobby kennel use permits may be issued for parcels
more than one acre in size.
3. Three acres or larger. On parcels three acres or larger in
size, no more than three dogs required to be licensed by
statute shall be kept on the parcel. Hobby kennel use
permits may be issued for parcels three acres or larger in
size.
b. Number of potbellied pigs limited. Potbellied pigs are prohibited in
the town, regardless of the size of the parcel on which the pigs
would be located, except upon the issuance of a hobby kennel use
permit. Hobby kennel use permits may be granted to allow keeping
of potbellied pigs, up to the numbers described as follows:
82-149
1. Less than three acres. Hobby kennel use permits for
potbellied pigs shall not be issued for parcels less than three
acres in size.
2. Three acres or larger. Hobby kennel use permits for
potbellied pigs may be issued for parcels three acres or
larger in size, subject to the regulations described in
subsection (10)c of this section, and subject to the numbers
of potbellied pigs being restricted to the following: the
hobby kennel use permit may allow no more than two
potbellied pigs on a parcel that is three acres but less than
four acres in size; and no more than three potbellied pigs on
a parcel that is four acres or larger.
c. Potbellied pigs regulations. The keeping of potbellied pigs by
hobby kennel use permits is subject to the following regulations, in
addition to any specific conditions that may be imposed by the
plan commission:
1. Potbellied pigs (as defined in this chapter) must be spayed
or neutered prior to four months of age.
2. Commercial activities such as sale or breeding of potbellied
pigs (as defined in this chapter) is prohibited.
3. Potbellied pigs (as defined in this chapter) may only be
allowed by hobby kennel use permit if they are kept as
household pets, residing in the residence, with only limited
periods of time outdoors.
4. Prior to the issuance of a hobby kennel use permit, all
owners of potbellied pigs (as defined in this chapter) shall
present proof that the potbellied pigs have been tested to be
free from Pseudo rabies and Brucellosis.
5. Potbellied pigs (as defined in this chapter) must be
vaccinated no less than annually by a veterinarian who is
licensed in the state.
6. The keeper of any potbellied pig (as defined in this chapter)
shall cause litter and droppings to be collected in a
container or receptacle that when enclosed shall be vermin
proof and fly tight, and after every such collection shall
cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At
least once a week, every such keeper shall cause all litter
and droppings so collected to be disposed of in such a
manner as to not permit the presence of a nuisance to the
surrounding neighborhood.
82-150
d. Hobby kennel use permits procedures. All hobby kennel use
permits are subject to the following application procedures and
requirements:
1. A hobby kennel must be accessory to an otherwise
permitted use.
2. A hobby kennel must have the specific approval of the plan
commission.
3. Prior to approval of a hobby kennel use permit, the plan
commission must hold a public hearing.
4. The application fee for a hobby kennel use permit shall be
set by separate resolution of the town board.
5. Written notice of the public hearing shall be sent by regular
mail to the last known address of all landowners within 300
feet of the subject property.
6. The issuance of the hobby kennel use permit is subject to
the plan commission finding that such hobby kennel will
not adversely affect the use of adjacent lands and is
compatible with surrounding and nearby land uses.
7. The plan commission may require such measures or
provisions by the applicant as may be deemed necessary to
provide adequate protection of surrounding property.
8. The plan commission may deny the request for a hobby
kennel use permit on the basis of a finding that such use
would be incompatible with surrounding and nearby land
uses, a possible nuisance, and/or not in the public interest.
9. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the plan commission
relative to a hobby kennel use permit may appeal such
decision to the board of adjustment within 30 days of the
decision.
e. One hobby kennel use permit per parcel. There shall be no more
than one hobby kennel use permit allowed on any one parcel in the
town.
f. Nuisances. In all cases, regardless of the number of dogs or
potbellied pigs on a parcel, if the keeping of any number of dogs or
potbellied pigs accessory to the principal use becomes a nuisance
to the neighborhood as may be determined by the plan commission
or town board, such use shall be terminated or the nuisance abated.
The keeping of a potbellied pig without a hobby kennel use permit,
and the keeping of more dogs than are permitted by right on a
82-151
property without a hobby kennel use permit, is declared to be a
public nuisance. Where necessary, the plan commission or town
board may take appropriate steps to abate such nuisance.
(11) Private stables subject to a written refuse disposal plan being submitted to
and approved by the plan commission if requested by the town, provided
that not more than one horse or other head of livestock are kept for each
full open acre over two acres of open lot area and provided that the
keeping of hogs, pigs of any kind (except potbellied pigs as defined in this
chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued), male goats
or fur-bearing animals shall not be permitted on less than 20 acres.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 9.01(1); Ord. No. 98-4, §§ 8, 9, 6-10-1998; Ord. No. 2001, §§ 5, 14,
10-29-2001)
Sec. 82-111. Conditional uses.
Commercial stables on parcels five acres or greater in size may be allowed as
conditional uses in the R-H rural home district pursuant to section 82-21(d)(11) provided
that the keeping of hogs, pigs of any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in this
chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued), male goats or fur-bearing
animals shall not be permitted on less than 20 acres.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 9.01(2); Ord. No. 2001-6, § 15, 10-29-2001)
Sec. 82-112. Building location.
Building location requirements for the R-H rural home district shall be as follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 50 feet minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 9.02)
Sec. 82-113. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the R-H rural home district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 15 feet maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 9.03)
82-152
Sec. 82-114. Area regulations.
(a) Minimum required floor area. The minimum required floor area in the
R-H rural home district shall be as follows:
Bedrooms/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 1,400 1,100
Two 1,400 1,100
Three 1,600 1,100
Four (+) 1,800 1,100
(b) Maximum floor area ratio permitted. The maximum floor area ratio
permitted in the R-H rural home district shall be ten percent.
(c) Lot size. Lot size regulations in the R-H rural home district shall be as
follows:
(1) Minimum area: 5 acres.
(2) Minimum average width: 300 feet.
(3) Open space: 4 acres minimum per family.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 9.04; Ord. No. 95-5, § 5, 10-11-1995)
82-153
DIVISION 8.
EC ENVIRONMENTAL CORRIDOR DISTRICT
Sec. 82-121. Purpose and intent.
The environmental corridor district, as mapped or intended to be mapped, is
intended to be used to preserve, protect, enhance and restore those areas, while also
affording an opportunity to use the site for limited residential purposes, in concert with
the goal and intent of the county development plan and the town master plan, which
suggests that residential densities in such areas not exceed one unit per five acres for all
lots, which lie entirely within the environmental corridor.
(Ord. No. 2000-6, § 5(9.01A), 9-11-2000)
Sec. 82-122. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the EC environmental corridor district:
(1) Any uses permitted in the C-1 conservancy district.
(2) Single-family dwellings.
(3) Keeping of poultry and domestic livestock, except that the keeping of
hogs, male goats or fur bearing animals shall not be permitted on less than
20 acres.
(4) Private garages, when located on the same lot, and not involving the
conduct of a business; provided, however, that no private garage shall be
erected unless that principal building to which such garage is an accessory
use had been erected or is to be erected simultaneously with such garage.
(5) A sign in accordance with section 82-81(6).
(Ord. No. 2000-6, § 5(9.02A), 9-11-2000)
Sec. 82-123. Building location.
Building location requirements for the EC environmental corridor district shall be
as follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 35 feet minimum.
(3) Shore setback: 75 feet minimum.
(Ord. No. 2000-6, § 5(9.03A), 9-11-2000)
82-154
Sec. 82-124. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the EC environmental corridor district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet.
(2) Accessory building: 15 feet minimum.
(Ord. No. 2000-6, § 5(9.04A), 9-11-2000)
Sec. 82-125. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area. Floor area requirements for the EC environmental corridor
district shall be as follows:
(1) The minimum required shall be as follows:
Bedroom/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 1,400 1,100
Two 1,400 1,100
Three 1,600 1,100
Four 1,800 1,100
(2) The maximum floor area ratio permitted shall be ten percent.
(b) Lot size. Lot size requirements in the EC environmental corridor district
shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum area. The overall density of lots lying entirely within the
environmental corridor district shall be not less than one dwelling unit per
five acres of corridor, with no lot being less than two acres in size. For lots
which lie partially within and partially outside of the environmental
corridor district, if the lot size of the adjoining districts would permit a
minimum lot size of less than five acres, the five-acre density requirement
shall not apply and the lot can be the size permitted in the adjacent zoning
district, as long as any earth altering activity and/or building envelopes are
located outside of the environmental corridor district and appropriately
restricted as such on the face of the certified survey map, subdivision plat
or other deed restrictions subject to the review and written approval of the
town board and recorded along with the town board's written approval in
the office of the register of deeds. The overall goal of this requirement is
to obtain a maximum density of building activity within the environmental
corridor of not more than one dwelling unit for each five acres of
environmental corridor land.
82-155
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section, for
lots, which are partially within and partially outside the environmental
corridor district, if the area in the adjoining district is zoned A-P
agricultural land preservation district, the lot shall have a minimum gross
lot size of 35 acres.
(c) Lot width. Lot width requirements in the EC environmental corridor
district shall be as follows:
(1) Less than five-acre lot: Minimum average width, 175 feet.
(2) Five-acre lot or more: Minimum average width, 300 feet.
(d) Preservation of open space. Requirements for the preservation of open
space in the EC environmental corridor district shall be as follows:
(1) For lots lying entirely within an environmental corridor zoning district,
regardless of lot size, no open space regulations shall apply. However, all
earth altering activities and vegetative removal including building sites
and driveways (area of disturbance) shall be no more than 15 percent of
five acres (32,600 square feet) in the environmental corridor district.
(2) For lots which lie partially within and partially outside of the
environmental corridor district, the area of disturbances shall be limited to
the area outside of the environmental corridor district, unless otherwise
expressly permitted by a building envelope shown on the certified survey
map, subdivision plat or other deed restriction that has been approved, in
writing, by the town board and recorded along with the town board's
written approval in the office of the register of deeds.
(Ord. No. 2000-6, § 5(9.05A), 9-11-2000)
Secs. 82-126--82-129. Reserved.
82-156
DIVISION 9.
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
Sec. 82-130. Purpose.
(a) The A-1 agricultural district is intended to provide for the needs of
agriculture as a primary use and such residential use as may be normal and necessary in
an agricultural district.
(b) The primary purpose of the A-1 agricultural district is to preserve in
agriculture use those lands generally suited for such use and which may have the ultimate
potential for residential use but at this time are deemed beyond the current land needs for
residential use. It is intended that residential development be limited to parcels being
created by certified survey map per the town land division and development control
ordinance, or by a planned unit development or conservation design development
conditional uses.
(c) When the agricultural use is terminated in areas not developed as
described in subsection (b) of this section, those lands shall be rezoned to the appropriate
new zoning classification, depending on the proper use after public hearing in accordance
with this chapter.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 10.01; Ord. No. 2006-1, § 13, 1-3-2006)
Sec. 82-131. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the A-1 agricultural district:
(1) Any use as permitted in the A-E exclusive agricultural conservancy
district subject to the following:
a. Private stables on parcels of less than 20 acres subject to a written
refuse disposal plan being submitted to and approved by the plan
commission if requested by the town, provided that not more than
one horse or other head of livestock are kept for each full open
acre over two acres of lot area and provided that the keeping of
hogs, pigs of any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in this
chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued),
male goats or fur-bearing animals shall not be permitted on less
than 20 acres.
b. Private stables on parcels 20 acres or greater in size subject to a
written refuse disposal plan being submitted to and approved by
the plan commission if requested by the town.
c. Commercial stables on parcels 20 acres or greater in size subject to
a written refuse disposal plan being submitted to and approved by
the plan commission if requested by the town.
82-157
d. Commercial stables on parcels of less than 20 acres are not
permitted but may be allowed as conditional uses pursuant to
section 82-21(d)(11) and provided that the keeping of hogs, pigs of
any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in this chapter for
which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued), male goats or
fur-bearing animals shall not be permitted on less than 20 acres.
e. Poultry raising is permitted but not more than 20 fowl may be kept
for each full open acre over two acres of lot area.
(2) One-family dwellings.
(3) Ordinary farm uses including dairying, livestock and poultry raising and
truck farming, but not including the feeding of garbage to fatten swine,
except as otherwise restricted in this section.
(4) Accessory uses and buildings normally associated with an agricultural
operation, including garages, stables and poultry houses. Buildings used
for housing of animals shall maintain a minimum offset of 50 feet to all
the adjacent lots.
(5) Signs, not to exceed 12 square feet in area, displaying the name of a farm
or farm organization.
(6) Wholesale nurseries, greenhouses and hatcheries, except as otherwise
restricted in this section.
(7) Roadside stands, subject to the following:
a. Off-street parking for a minimum of four vehicles shall be
provided.
b. No such stand shall be closer than 30 feet to the base setback line
or closer than 20 feet to any other lot line.
(8) Home occupations and professional offices as regulated in section 82-
110(7).
(9) Hobby kennels, as regulated in section 8-110(10).
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 10.02(1); Ord. No. 94-69, § 1, 7-11-1994; Ord. No. 98-4, §§ 12--14,
6-10-1998; Ord. No. 2001-6, §§ 16, 17, 10-29-2001)
82-158
Sec. 82-132. Conditional uses.
Commercial stables on parcels less than 20 acres in size are permitted as a
conditional use in the A-1 agricultural district pursuant to section 82-21(d)(11) and
provided that the keeping of hogs, pigs of any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in
this chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued), male goats or furbearing
animals shall not be permitted on less than 20 acres.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 10.02(2); Ord. No. 2001-6, § 18, 10-29-2001)
Sec. 82-133. Building location.
Building location requirements for the A-1 agricultural district shall be as follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 20 feet minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 10.03)
Sec. 82-134. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the A-1 agricultural district shall be as follows:
(1) Height 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings:
a. Farm: 60 feet maximum.
b. Other: 15 feet maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 10.04; Ord. No. 86-3, 3-13-1986)
Sec. 82-135. Area regulations.
The municipal Code for the Town of Mukwonago in Chapter 82, entitled “Zoning”
Subsection 82-135 entitled “Area regulations” Subsection 82-135(a) entitled, “Floor
Area” Subsection 82-125(a)(1) entitled “Minimum required” is hereby repealed and
recreated to read as follows:
(a) Floor area. Floor area requirements in the A-1 agricultural district shall be
as follows:
(1) Minimum required.
82-159
Single Family
Bedrooms/D.U. Total Area (Square Feet) First Floor (Square Foot)
One 1,400 1,100
Two 1,400 1,100
Three 1,600 1,100
Four (+) 1,800 1,100
(Ord. 2007-2 § 7 12-01-2006)
(2) Maximum floor area ratio permitted. The maximum floor area ration
permitted in the A-1 agricultural district shall be ten percent.
(b) Lot size. Lot size requirements in the A-1 agricultural district shall be as
follows:
(1) Single-family.
a. Minimum area: 3 acres.
b. Minimum average width: 200 feet.
(2) Two-family.
a. Minimum area: 6 acres.
b. Minimum average width: 300 feet.
(c) Open space. In the A-1 agricultural district there shall be a minimum of
two acres of open space per family.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 10.05; Ord. No. 95-5, § 6, 10-11-1995)
Secs. 82-136--82-139. Reserved.
82-160
DIVISION 10.
S-E SUBURBAN ESTATE DISTRICT
Sec. 82-140. Permitted uses.
The following shall be a permitted use in the S-E suburban estate district:
Any permitted use as authorized and regulated in the R-H rural home district.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 11.01(1); Ord. No. 98-4, § 16, 6-10-1998; Ord. No. 2001-6, § 19,
10-29-2001)
Sec. 82-141. Conditional uses.
Commercial stables on parcels three acres or greater in size may be allowed as
conditional uses in the S-E suburban estate district pursuant to section 82-21(d)(11) and
provided that the keeping of hogs, pigs of any type (except potbellied pigs as defined in
this chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has been issued), male goats or furbearing
animals shall not be permitted on less than 20 acres.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 11.01(2); Ord. No. 2001-6, § 19, 10-29-2001)
Sec. 82-142. Building location.
Building location requirements for the S-E suburban estate district shall be as
follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset:
a. Those buildings used to house any animals other than the usual
household pets shall have a 50-foot minimum offset.
b. Those buildings authorized to house hobby or commercial kennels
shall have a 50-foot offset.
c. All other buildings and structures shall have a 30-foot minimum
offset.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 11.02; Ord. No. 92-12, § 1, 12-14-1992)
82-161
Sec. 82-143. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the S-E suburban estate district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 15 feet maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 11.03)
Sec. 82-144. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area. Floor area regulations in the S-E suburban estate district shall
be as follows:
(1) Minimum required.
Bedrooms/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 1,400 1,100
Two 1,400 1,100
Three 1,600 1,100
Four (+) 1,800 1,100
(2) The maximum floor area ratio permitted in the S-E suburban estate district
shall be ten percent.
(b) Lot size. The lot size requirements in the S-E suburban estate district shall
be as follows:
(1) Minimum area: 3 acres.
(2) Minimum average width: 200 feet.
(b) Open space. There shall be a minimum of two acres of open space per
family.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 11.04; Ord. No. 95-5, § 7, 10-11-1995)
Secs. 82-145--82-149. Reserved.
82-162
DIVISION 11.
R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Sec. 82-150. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the R-1 residential district:
(1) Any permitted use as authorized and regulated in the rural home district,
except that the keeping of poultry or domestic livestock (except potbellied
pigs as defined in this chapter for which a hobby kennel use permit has
been issued) shall not be permitted on any lot.
a. Where such use existed prior to the date of the ordinance from
which this section is derived, as a principal commercial or
agricultural use, such use may be continued subject to the
limitations regulating a nonconforming use as regulated by section
82-32.
b. Where such use existed prior to the date of the ordinance from
which this section is derived as a legal accessory or incidental use
to the principal use of property, such use may be continued only if
there is no objection from any owner of property within 300 feet,
the provisions of section 82-32 notwithstanding. Such objections
shall be submitted in writing to the town board and a public
hearing held thereon.
c. Subject to the limitations established under section 82-110(4), such
use may be permitted on any lot provided that there shall first be
filed with the town board the written consent of the owners of all
property within 300 feet and further subject to termination, after
public hearing, upon written complaint to the town board, by any
owner within 300 feet of such property. When permitted, the
keeping of poultry or domestic livestock shall be done under
maximum practical conditions of neatness and sanitation so as to
not be detrimental to the surrounding residential use, and all fowl
shall be kept confined or enclosed and not permitted to run at
large.
(2) The keeping of the usual household pets, including the operation of hobby
kennels as regulated in section 82-110(10), but not the operation of
hutches.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 12.01(1); Ord. No. 94-16, § 2, 12-12-1994; Ord. No. 2001-6, § 20,
10-29-2001)
82-163
Sec. 82-151. Building location.
Building location requirements for the R-1 residential district shall be as follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 20 feet minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 12.02)
Sec. 82-152. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the R-1 residential district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 15 feet maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 12.03)
Sec. 82-153. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area. Floor area regulations in the R-1 residential district shall be as
follows:
(1) Minimum required.
Bedrooms/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 1,400 1,100
Two 1,400 1,100
Three 1,600 1,100
Four (+) 1,800 1,100
(2) The maximum floor area ratio permitted in the R-1 residential district shall
be ten percent.
(b) Lot size. Lot size requirements in the R-1 residential district shall be as
follows:
(1) Minimum area: 1 acre.
(2) Minimum average width: 150 feet.
(c) Open space. In the R-1 residential district there shall be a minimum of
30,000 square feet of open space per family.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 12.04; Ord. No. 95-5, § 8, 10-11-1995))
Secs. 82-154--82-159. Reserved.
82-164
DIVISION 12.
R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Sec. 82-160. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the R-2 residential district:
Any permitted use as authorized and regulated in the R-1 residential district.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 13.01; Ord. No. 98-4, § 19, 6-10-1998)
Sec. 82-161. Building location.
Building location requirements for the R-2 residential district shall be as follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 20 feet minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 13.02)
Sec. 82-162. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the R-2 residential district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 15 feet maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 13.03)
Sec. 82-163. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area. Floor area regulations in the R-2 residential district shall be as
follows:
(1) Minimum required.
Bedrooms/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 1,000 900
Two 1,100 900
Three 1,200 900
Four (+) 1,400 900
(2) The maximum floor area ratio permitted in the R-2 residential district shall
be 15 percent.
(b) Lot size. Lot size requirements in the R-2 residential district shall be as
follows:
82-165
(1) Minimum area: 30,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum average width: 120 feet.
(c) Open space. In the R-2 residential district there shall be a minimum of
25,000 square feet of open space per family.
(d) Area regulations. Area regulations may be subject to reduction in
accordance with section 82-16(d) when served by a municipal or municipally approved
communal sewerage or water system.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 13.04)
Secs. 82-164--82-169. Reserved.
82-166
DIVISION 13.
R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Sec. 82-170. Statement of intent.
The R-3 district is a district intended to provide for redevelopment or
development of substandard lots of record within 500 feet of Spring Lake and Upper and
Lower Phantom Lake.
(Ord. No. 2004-9, § 2, 6-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-10, § 2, 8-11-2004)
Sec. 82-171. Use regulations.
The following are permitted uses in the R-3 district:
(1) Single-family residences.
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the R-
3 district:
a. Private detached garages not to exceed 500 square feet not
involving the conduct of a business and not including any sanitary
facilities or living quarters.
b. Accessory buildings not to exceed 200 square feet. No more than
two detached accessory buildings shall be permitted. The total
composite area of all accessory buildings and detached garages
shall not exceed 500 square feet.
(3) Keeping of household pets.
(4) Home occupations and professional offices as defined in section 82-4
when incidental to the residential use in accordance with subsection 82-
110(7).
(Ord. No. 2004-9, § 2, 6-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-10, § 2, 8-11-2004)
82-167
Sec. 82-172. Building location.
(a) Road setback. Principal buildings and accessory buildings shall be
erected, altered or placed so that any roofed or enclosed portion is no closer than 50 feet
to the base setback line with the following exceptions applicable only where the setback
requirements of the properties involved are identical and the use of the buildings is
identical, and the existing buildings are legally nonconforming as to road setback.
(1) Where the nearest existing building with an identical use as the proposed
building on an adjacent lot on one side of said building is within 100 feet
of the proposed building or building addition and has less than the
required setback, the average between the existing setback of such
adjacent building and the required 50-foot setback shall apply.
(2) Where the nearest buildings with an identical use as the proposed building
on adjacent lots on both sides of said building are less than 200 feet from
each other and have less than the required setback, the average between
such existing setbacks shall apply.
(3) In the case of a proposed addition to an existing building which has less
than the required setback, such existing building may be considered to be
the nearest existing building for purposes of the exception described in
subsection (a)(1) or (2), above, in determining the required setback for the
proposed addition.
(b) Shore setback.
(1) Seventy-five feet from the ordinary high water mark of a body of water
with the following exceptions applicable only where the setback
requirements of the properties involved are identical.
a. Where the nearest existing building with an identical use as the
proposed building on an adjacent lot on one side of said building is
within 100 feet of the proposed building or building addition and
has less than the required setback, the average between the existing
setback of such adjacent building and the required 75-foot setback
shall apply.
b. Where the nearest buildings with an identical use as the proposed
building on adjacent lots on both sides of said building are less
than 200 feet from each other and have less than the required
setback, the average between such existing setbacks shall apply.
c. In the case of a proposed addition to an existing building which has
less than the required setback, such existing building may be
considered to be the nearest existing building for purposes of the
exception described in subsection (b)(1)a. or b., above, in
determining the required setback for the proposed addition.
(2) Forty feet from the conservancy/wetland zoning district boundary if the
82-168
original grade of the proposed building site is two feet above the 100-year
floodplain or wetland boundary, with the following exceptions applicable
only where the setback requirements of the properties involved are
identical.
a. Where the nearest existing building with an identical use as the
proposed building on an adjacent lot on one side of said building is
within 100 feet of the proposed building or building addition and
has less than the required setback. The average between the
existing setback of such adjacent building and the required
conservancy setback shall apply.
b. Where the nearest building with an identical use as the proposed
building on adjacent lots, on both sides of said building are less
than 200 feet from each other and have less than the required
conservancy setback. The average between such existing setbacks
shall apply.
c. In the case of a proposed addition to an existing building which has
less than the required setback, such existing building may be
considered to be the nearest existing building for the purpose of the
exception described in subsection (b)(2)a. or b., above, in
determining the required setback for the proposed addition.
(3) Seventy-five feet from the conservancy/wetland district boundary if the
original grade at the proposed building site is less than two feet above the
100-year floodplain or the wetland boundary.
(c) Offset. Twenty feet.
(Ord. No. 2004-9, § 2, 6-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-10, § 2, 8-11-2004)
Sec. 82-173. Height regulations.
(a) Principle building.
(1) A point measured from the lowest point of the exposed structure to the
highest floor line shall not exceed 12 feet.
(2) A point measured from the lowest point of the exposed structure to any
eave line shall not exceed 24 feet.
(3) A point measured from the lowest point of the exposed structure to the
highest point of any roof shall not exceed 34 feet.
(4) It is the intent of this section that no more than two stories of habitable
space shall exist when viewed from the waterfront.
(b) Accessory building. A vertical distance of 15 feet maximum, measured
from the lowest grade of the structure to the highest point of the roof.
(Ord. No. 2004-9, § 2, 6-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-10, § 2, 8-11-2004)
82-169
Sec. 82-174. Area regulations.
(a) Building footprint and impervious surface. When a lot has less land area
or minimum average width than required in the R-2 zoning district, and was of record at
the time of the original adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived
(May 9, 1983), unless the owner of said lot owns contiguous property and/or an adjacent
lot of record, such lot may be used for any purpose permitted in such district but not for
residential purposes for more than one single-family residence. The total building
footprint for all buildings and impervious surface on the subject lot shall not exceed the
following:
Lot Size
(square feet)
Total Building
Footprint
Total Impervious
Surface
Less than 5,000 1,140 sq. ft. 1,640 sq. ft.
At least 5,000 and
less than 10,000
1,300 sq. ft. 1,800 sq. ft.
At least 10,000 and
less than 15,000
1,400 sq. ft. 1,900 sq. ft.
At least 15,000 and
less than 20,000
1,550 sq. ft. 2,050 sq. ft.
At least 20,000 and
less than 25,000
1,800 sq. ft. 2,300 sq. ft.
At least 25,000 and
less than 30,000
1,900 sq. ft. 2,400 sq. ft.
More than 30,000 15% floor area ratio 10% of total lot size
(b) Vegetative buffer plan. When a building permit is issued on any lot in the
R-3 zoning district, a vegetative buffer plan must be submitted for review and approval
by the town building inspector for 70 percent of all areas between 15 feet from the
foundation of the principal building and the ordinary high water mark or 70 percent of the
area draining towards the lake on any lot which does not abut the public water. The
vegetative buffer plan must consist of ground cover, shrubs and canopy type vegetation.
No impervious surfaces or decks shall be allowed in the vegetative buffer area. The
vegetative buffer area must be planted and established prior to an occupancy permit being
issued for the building or addition, or a cash bond or letter of credit must be posted in an
amount equal to 120 percent of the cost of implementing said plan, which shall include
the cost of the plant material, its installation and compliance with the maintenance
schedule. The town building inspector in his review shall have the authority to require a
stormwater infiltration system, rain garden or other approved best management practice
(BMP), which will promote the water quality draining into the adjacent water body.
(c) Boathouses. No boathouses shall be allowed on any lot less than 15,000
square feet in area or having a minimum average width or frontage of less than 100 feet.
(Ord. No. 2004-9, § 2, 6-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-10, § 2, 8-11-2004)
82-170
Sec. 82-175. Special exception.
On any parcel in the R-3 district, where the offsets, setbacks, and building
envelope requirements do not allow a minimum of a 1,140-square foot building envelope
to accommodate a 900-square foot first floor and a 240-square foot garage, the town plan
commission may grant a special exception to allow a building envelope of no more than
1,140 square feet subject to the following procedures, requirements and conditions.
(1) Procedure. A property owner may apply for a special exception and a
special exception may be considered as follows:
a. The property owner shall submit a petition to the town clerk. The
petition shall include a vegetative buffer plan and building and site
plans, which include all elevations along with such additional
building information and house designs as may be required by the
building inspector and the plan commission. The building and site
plan shall depict the proposed construction, the location of the
proposed construction on the lot, the location of the planting of the
vegetative buffer, implementation timetable and types of plant
material, the existing and proposed grades and contour on the lot
and adjacent lots, the ordinary high water mark of the adjacent
water body and the 100-year floodplain or wetland boundary and
its location in relationship to all existing structures on the lot and
adjacent lots within 100 feet of proposed structure or addition. If
the petition is for an addition to an existing structure, the
application shall include recent photographs of all the structures on
the parcels. The petition shall be accompanied by payment of such
application fees as may be established from time to time by the
town board by separate resolution and shall be submitted to the
town clerk no later than three weeks prior to the town plan
commission meeting at which they are to be scheduled.
b. Upon receipt of the complete application, required plans and
application fees, the town clerk shall provide a copy of the petition
and plans to the town building inspector and town planner and
shall place the matter on an upcoming plan commission agenda for
considerations.
c. Prior to the town plan commission meeting when the matter will be
heard, the town planner shall review the request and discuss the
matter with the town building inspector, view the proposed
location and shall submit a written recommendation to the town
plan commission. Along with the recommendation, the town
planner shall advise the town plan commission as to whether the
proposed construction will be in compliance with all applicable
state, federal, county and town codes, statutes, rules, regulations
and ordinances if the special exception were granted.
82-171
d. The town plan commission shall consider the matter at the next
scheduled plan commission meeting provided said application is
filed at least 21 days prior to said meeting. The petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard regarding the matter at the
scheduled meeting.
e. The town plan commission shall approve, deny or conditionally
approve the special exception petition in accordance with the
requirements and conditions of this section. The town plan
commission shall issue its decision in writing.
(2) Requirements and conditions. In order to approve or conditionally approve
a special exception petition, the town plan commission must find all the
following to be true regarding the proposed construction:
a. The proposed construction must be outside of the 100-year
floodplain and the first floor must be at least two feet above the
100-year floodplain. Note: Any lands within the floodplain are
zoned C-1 conservancy district or EFO (existing floodplain overlay
district).
b. The proposed construction must be in compliance with all
applicable state, federal, county and town codes, statutes, rules,
regulations and ordinances if the special exception is granted.
c. The proposed construction must be aesthetically compatible with
the surrounding neighborhood.
d. The town plan commission shall require the petitioner to file a
deed restriction stating that the proposal has been authorized
through the special exception procedure in the town zoning
ordinance. Such deed restrictions shall be recorded with the county
register of deeds in a form that is subject to the approval of the
town attorney.
e. The town plan commission must find that the special exception
will not have an adverse impact on the health, safety or general
welfare, will not conflict with the spirit and intent of the town
zoning ordinance, and will not otherwise be detrimental to the
town or the immediate neighborhood where the construction would
be located.
f. The town plan commission may require additional conditions and
restrictions, including but not limited to conditions related to
screening and landscaping.
g. A deed restriction in a form approved by the town attorney shall be
filed in the county register of deeds office prior to issuance of any
building permit, indicating a special exception has been granted
82-172
and recording any conditions of approval, including the statement
that the structure may only be used for personal use and cannot be
used for any type of commercial purposes unless otherwise
permitted by the town zoning ordinance.
h. A vegetative buffer plan of at least 35 feet in depth over 70 percent
of the width of the lot from the residence to the ordinary high
water mark, or if there is less than a 35-foot distance from the
residence to the ordinary high water mark, 70 percent of the width
of the lot or on the down slope side of the area draining towards
the lake on lots which do not abut the public body of water
consisting of ground cover, shrubs and canopies must be planted
prior to an occupancy permit being issued on the new structure or
addition or a cash bond or letter of credit must be posted in an
amount equal to 120 percent of the cost of implementing said plan,
which shall include the cost of the plant material, its installation
and compliance with the maintenance schedule and a deed
restriction preserving said buffer must be recorded in the county
register of deeds office prior to issuance of the building permit.
i. No special exceptions shall be allowed from the height
requirements of this R-3 zoning district.
(Ord. No. 2004-9, § 2, 6-9-2004; Ord. No. 2004-10, § 2, 8-11-2004)
Secs. 82-176--82-179. Reserved.
82-173
DIVISION 14.
B-1 RESTRICTED BUSINESS DISTRICT*
*Cross references--Businesses, ch. 18.
Sec. 82-180. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the B-1 restricted business district:
(1) Any use as permitted in the R-3 residential district.
(2) The following retail or customer service establishments of a restrictive
nature provided the building, site plan, and plan of operation have been
submitted to, and approved by, the plan commission as being in keeping
with the character of the surrounding residential area:
a. Boardinghouses or lodging houses.
b. Delicatessen.
c. Florist shop.
d. Funeral home.
e. Gift shop.
f. Interior decorator.
g. Professional office or studio.
h. Tea room or restaurant provided no liquor is served.
i. Tourist home.
j. Any similar use subject to the approval of the plan commission.
(3) Signs subject to the following:
a. No sign shall exceed 20 square feet in area.
b. No free standing sign shall exceed ten feet in height from the
ground and no sign attached to a building shall project above an
eave, cornice, or top parapet line of such building.
82-174
c. No sign shall include illuminating devices or be constructed of
illuminated material or be specifically illuminated except by
properly shielded cove or back lighting of a non-intermittent type
on an opaque background, such source of light not to be more than
two feet from the vertical face to be illuminated.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 15.01)
Sec. 82-181. Building location.
Building location requirements for the B-1 restricted business district shall be as
follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 20 feet minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 15.02)
Sec. 82-182. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the B-1 restricted business district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 15 feet maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 15.03)
Sec. 82-183. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area. Floor area regulations in the B-1 restricted business district
shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum required for residential purposes:
Bedrooms/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 800 800
Two 1,100 800
Three 1,200 800
Four (+) 1,400 800
(2) The maximum floor area ratio permitted in the B-1 restricted business
district shall be 20 percent.
(b) Lot size. Lot size requirements in the B-1 restricted business district shall
be as follows:
82-175
(1) Minimum area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum average width: 120 feet.
(c) Open space. In the B-1 restricted business district there shall be a
minimum of 15,000 square feet of open space per family.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 15.04)
Secs. 82-184--82-189. Reserved.
82-176
DIVISION 15.
B-2 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT*
*Cross reference--Businesses, ch. 18.
Sec. 82-190. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the B-2 local business district:
(1) Any use as permitted in the B-1 restricted business district.
(2) Any of the following retail and customer service establishments, provided
the building, site plan, and plan of operation have been submitted to and
approved by the plan commission.
a. Art shop.
b. Appliance store.
c. Bakery (not over ten employees).
d. Barbershop.
e. Beauty shop.
f. Bank or savings and loan office.
g. Clinic.
h. Clothing or dry goods store.
i. Confectionery store.
j. Drug store.
k. Furniture store.
l. Book or stationery store.
m. Fruit and vegetable market.
n. Grocery or other food products store.
o. Hardware store.
p. Ice cream store.
q. Jewelry store.
82-177
r. Meat and fish market.
s. Music and radio store.
t. Newsstand.
u. Notion or variety shop.
v. Parking lot.
w. Pharmacy.
x. Radio and television sales and repair shop.
y. Photographer.
z. Restaurant.
aa. Shoe store.
bb. Soda fountain.
cc. Tailor or dressmaking shop.
dd. Telegraph and telephone office and telephone exchange.
ee. Utility company office.
ff. Any similar use subject to the approval of the plan commission.
(3) Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of
the business.
(4) Signs, subject to the following conditions:
a. No sign shall exceed 40 square feet in area.
b. Illuminated signs shall not exceed 20 square feet.
c. No freestanding sign shall exceed 20 feet in height from the
ground and no attached sign shall be higher than four feet above
the top of the roof line or in any case exceed 35 feet in height.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 16.01)
82-178
Sec. 82-191. Building location.
Building location requirements for the B-2 local business district shall be as
follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset:
a. Buildings used solely for commercial purposes: Ten-foot
minimum.
b. Buildings used in whole or part for residence purposes: 20-foot
minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 16.02)
Sec. 82-192. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the B-2 local business district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 15 feet maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 16.03)
Sec. 82-193. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area. Floor area regulations in the B-2 local business district shall
be as follows:
(1) Minimum required for residence purposes:
Bedrooms/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 900 800
Two 1,100 800
Three 1,200 800
Four (+) 1,400 800
(2) The maximum floor area ratio permitted in the B-2 local business district
shall be 50 percent.
(b) Lot size. Lot size requirements in the B-2 local business district shall be as
follows:
(1) Minimum area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum average width: 120 feet.
82-179
(c) Open space. In the B-2 local business district there shall be a minimum of
15,000 square feet of open space per family.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 16.04)
Secs. 82-194--82-199. Reserved.
82-180
DIVISION 16.
B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT*
*Cross reference--Businesses, ch. 18.
Sec. 82-200. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the B-3 general business district:
(1) Any use as permitted in the B-2 local business district, except residential
shall be permitted only in combination with or accessory to the permitted
principal use.
(2) The following businesses and trades of a more general nature, normally
serving a larger trade area, provided the building, site plan, and plan of
operation have been submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
a. Wholesalers and distributors.
b. Theaters, dance halls and other amusement places.
c. Used car lots.
d. Dry cleaning and dyeing establishments.
e. Automobile sales rooms, repair shops and storage yards, and
garages for equipment, supplies or vehicles, but not including the
storage of junked or wrecked automobile parts.
f. Hotels.
g. Laundries.
h. Private vocational schools and vocational colleges.
i. Lockers and cold storage plants.
j. Any similar use subject to the approval of the plan commission.
(3) Signs, billboards and other similar advertising media.
(4) Telephone and electric distribution substations.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 17.01)
82-181
Sec. 82-201. Building location.
Building location requirements for the B-3 general business district shall be as
follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset:
a. Buildings used solely for commercial purposes: 10-foot minimum.
b. Buildings used in whole or part for residence purposes: 20-foot
minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 17.02)
Sec. 82-202. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the B-3 general business district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 15 feet maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 17.03)
Sec. 82-203. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area. Floor area regulations in the B-3 general business district shall
be as follows:
(1) Minimum required for residence purposes:
Bedrooms/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 900 800
Two 1,100 800
Three 1,200 800
Four (+) 1,400 800
(2) The maximum floor area ratio permitted in the B-3 general business
district shall be 50 percent.
(b) Lot size. Lot size requirements in the B-3 general business district shall be
as follows:
(1) Minimum area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum average width: 120 feet.
82-182
(c) Open space. In the B-3 general business district there shall be a minimum
of 15,000 square feet of open space per family.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 17.04)
Secs. 82-204--82-229. Reserved.
82-183
DIVISION 17.
M-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT*
*Cross reference--Businesses, ch. 18.
Sec. 82-230. Permitted uses.
The following shall be permitted uses in the M-1 limited industrial district:
(1) Any use as permitted in a B-3 general business or A-1 agricultural district,
except residential shall be permitted only in combination with or accessory
to the permitted principal use.
(2) Trades or industries of a restrictive character which are not detrimental to
the district or to the adjoining residential areas by reason of appearance,
noise, dust, smoke or odor, provided the building, site plan, and plan of
operation have been submitted to and approved by the plan commission,
but not including any of the following:
a. Junkyards.
b. Drop forges, foundries, refineries, tanneries or any similar use, the
normal operation of which causes objectionable noise, odor, dust
or smoke.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 18.01)
Sec. 82-231. Building location.
(a) Building location requirements for the M-1 limited industrial district shall
be as follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 10 feet minimum.
Exception. Where a lot in the M-1 limited industrial district abuts on a district boundary
line of a more restrictive district permitting residence use, the following regulations shall
apply:
(b) Buildings or uses permitted in the more restrictive district shall comply
with the offset requirements of the more restrictive district.
(c) Buildings or uses not permitted in the more restrictive district shall
provide a 50 feet minimum offset and shall be screened from the more restrictive district
by a planting screen at least six feet high.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 18.02)
82-184
Sec. 82-232. Height regulations.
Height regulations in the M-1 limited industrial district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 60 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 60 feet maximum.
(2) Buildings used in whole or part for residential purposes: 35 feet
maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 18.03)
Sec. 82-233. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area. Floor area regulations in the M-1 limited industrial district
shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum required for residence purposes:
Bedrooms/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 900 800
Two 1,100 800
Three 1,200 800
Four (+) 1,400 800
(2) The maximum floor area ratio permitted in the M-1 limited industrial
district shall be 70 percent.
(b) Lot size. Lot size requirements in the M-1 limited industrial district shall
be as follows:
(1) Minimum area: 1 acre.
(2) Minimum average width: 150 feet.
(c) Open space. There is no open space requirement in the M-1 limited
industrial district.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 18.04)
Secs. 82-234--82-239. Reserved.
82-185
DIVISION 18.
M-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT*
*Cross reference--Businesses, ch. 18.
Sec. 82-240. Permitted uses.
(a) Uses permitted in the M-2 general industrial district are as follows:
(1) Any use as permitted in the M-1 limited industrial district.
(2) Quarrying, subject to the regulation of section 82-21(d)(30).
(b) Any other commercial or industrial use not otherwise prohibited by law
provided their building, site plan, and plan of operation have been
submitted to and approved by the plan commission, except the following:
(1) Cement, lime, gypsum or Plaster of Paris manufacture.
(2) Acid manufacture.
(3) Manufacture of explosives, but not including the making of small arms
ammunition.
(4) Storage of explosives, except as incidental to a permitted use.
(5) Fertilizer manufacture.
(6) Offal or dead animal reduction.
(7) Glue manufacture, fat rendering or distillation of bones.
(8) Stockyards or commercial slaughter of animals.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 19.01)
82-186
Sec. 82-241. Building location.
Building location requirements for the M-2 general industrial district shall be as
follows:
(1) Setback: 50 feet minimum, except that where the opposite frontage is in a
residential or agricultural district, a 100 feet minimum setback shall be
required.
(2) Offset: Ten feet minimum, except that where a lot abuts on a district
boundary line of a more restrictive district permitting residence use, the
following regulations shall apply:
a. Buildings or uses permitted in the more restrictive district shall
comply with offset requirements of the more restrictive district.
b. Buildings or uses not permitted in the more restrictive district shall
provide a 100 feet minimum offset from a restricted or local
business district, and a 200 feet minimum offset from a residential
or agricultural district, and shall be screened from the more
restrictive district by a planting screen at least five feet high.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 19.02)
Sec. 82-242. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the M-2 general industrial district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 60 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory building: 60 feet maximum.
(3) Building used in whole or part for residential purposes: 35 feet maximum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 19.03)
Sec. 82-243. Area regulations.
(a) Floor area. Floor area regulations in the M-2 general industrial district
shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum required for residence purposes:
Bedrooms/DU Total Area
(square feet)
First Floor
(square feet)
One 900 800
Two 1,100 800
Three 1,200 800
Four (+) 1,400 800
82-187
(2) The maximum floor area ratio permitted in the M-2 general industrial
district shall be 70 percent.
(b) Lot size. Lot size requirements in the M-2 general industrial district shall
be as follows:
(1) Minimum area: 1 acre.
(2) Minimum average width: 150 feet.
(d) Open space. There is no open space requirement in the M-2 general
industrial district.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 19.04)
Secs. 82-244--82-249. Reserved.
82-188
DIVISION 19.
P-1 PUBLIC DISTRICT
Sec. 82-250. Intent of district.
The P-1 public district is intended to include publicly owned facilities which serve
a public use, such as education, recreation, medical care or government.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 20.01)
Sec. 82-251. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses in the P-1 public district include those uses related to the public
facility subject to any restrictions imposed by the owner or municipality.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 20.02)
Sec. 82-252. Conditional uses.
The following shall be conditional uses in the P-1 public district:
Any structure or use pursuant to sections 82-21(d)(26), 82-21(d)(28) and 82-
21(d)(29).
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 20.03)
Sec. 82-253. Building location.
Building location requirements for the P-1 public district shall be as follows:
(1) Setback:
a. From public road right-of-way: 50 feet minimum.
b. From lake, river or stream: 75 feet minimum.
(2) Offset: 50 feet minimum.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 20.04)
Sec. 82-254. Height regulations.
Height regulations for the P-1 public district shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 60 feet maximum.
(2) Accessory buildings: 60 feet maximum.
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 6, 5-8-1996)
Secs. 82-255--82-259. Reserved.
82-189
ARTICLE V.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT*
*Cross reference--Administration, ch. 2.
82-190
Sec. 82-260. Board of adjustment--Establishment.
There shall be a board of adjustment consisting of three members who shall be
appointed by the town board, but not more than one supervisor shall be a member of the
board of adjustment. Board of adjustment members shall be appointed for terms of one,
two, and three years respectively, dating from the first day of the month next following
the appointment. Successors shall be appointed or elected in like manner at the expiration
of each term, and their terms of office shall be three years in all cases and until their
successors are appointed or elected. The members of the board of adjustment shall all
reside within the town. The board of adjustment shall choose its own chair. The town
board may compensate the members of the board of adjustment. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term of any board members whose term becomes vacant.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 21.01)
Sec. 82-261. Same--Meetings.
The town board shall adopt rules for the conduct of the business of the board of
adjustment, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The board of adjustment
may adopt further rules as necessary to carry into effect the regulations of the town board.
Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other
times as the board of adjustment may determine. Such chair, or in his absence the acting
chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the
board of adjustment shall be open to the public. The board of adjustment shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if
absent indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board of adjustment
and shall be a public record.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 21.02)
Sec. 82-262. Same--Appeals.
(a) How filed. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officers, department, board or bureau of the town affected by any
decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 65 days as
provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof, together with the proper fee as established under section 82-267(d). The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment
all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(b) Stay. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of
adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on
application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause
shown.
82-191
(c) Hearing. Each appeal shall be heard within a reasonable time and not to
exceed 65 days from the time the appeal was filed with the board of adjustment. Notice
of hearing shall be given by publishing in a paper of general circulation in the vicinity of
the appeal, at least once each week for two consecutive weeks and not less than seven
days from the date of the hearing. In addition, written notice shall be given to the
administrative officer appealed from, and by certified mail to the petitioner, the owners of
each parcel of land within 300 feet of the land in question, and any other specifically
interested parties. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
(d) Decisions. Decision on any appeals shall be made within 15 days after
completion of the hearing thereon.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 21.03)
Sec. 82-263. Same--Powers.
(a) Defined. The board of adjustment shall have the following powers as
defined by statute: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirements, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement of this chapter.
(b) Additional requirements. In making its determination, the board of
adjustment shall consider whether the proposed exception, variance or use allowed by
law would be hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance to the surrounding
neighborhood by reason of physical, social or economic effects; and may impose such
requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance and
operation, in addition to any which may be stipulated in this chapter, as the board of
adjustment may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public
interest and welfare.
(c) Performance standards. In order to reach a fair and objective decision, the
board of adjustment may utilize and give recognition to appropriate performance
standards which are available in model codes or ordinances, or which have been
developed by planning, manufacturing, health, architectural and engineering research
organizations.
(d) Enforcement of decision. In exercising the powers set out in the chapter,
the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirements, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken; and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided
that no such action shall have the effect of permitting in any district a use prohibited in
that district; or rezoning; or of permitting, without the approval of the town board, any
building within the base setback area as established by section 82-22(a) or of granting
exceptions to Wis. Admin. Code chs. NR 115 or 116, the county sanitary ordinance and
any other state, federal or local requirements.
82-192
(e) Required vote. The concurring vote of two members of the board of
adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation
therefrom. The grounds of every such determination shall be stated.
(f) Further appeal. Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the
board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the
municipality, may appeal from a decision of the board of adjustment within 30 days after
the filing of the decision in the office of the board of adjustment in the manner provided
in Wis. Stats. § 59.694.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 21.04)
Sec. 82-264. Changes and amendments--Authority.
Subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 60.61(4)(c)(1), the town board may from
time to time after first submitting the proposal to the plan commission for report, and
after notice and public hearing as provided in this chapter, amend, supplement or change
the boundaries of districts or the regulations as established in this chapter or which may
be subsequently established. Such proposal may be initiated by the board of adjustment
on its own motion, by recommendation of the plan commission or by petition of one or
more property owners.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 22.01)
Sec. 82-265. Same--Procedure.
(a) Filing of petition. All petitions for any change in the text or map submitted
by any person or agency other than the town board or the plan commission shall be
prepared in triplicate on printed forms provided for that purpose by the building
inspector. Such petition shall be filed with the clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee as
regulated in section 82-267(d) and payable to the town to defray the costs of advertising,
investigation, and possible changes in the text or map of this chapter.
(b) Data required. In addition to all of the information required on the petition
form, the petitioner shall supply the following:
(1) A plot map in triplicate drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to the
inch showing the land in question, its location, the length and direction of
each boundary thereof, the location and existing use of all buildings on
such land and the principal use of all properties within 300 feet of such
land.
(2) The names and addresses of the owners of all properties within 300 feet of
any part of the land included in the proposed change.
(3) Any further information which may be required by the plan commission to
facilitate the making of a comprehensive report to the town board,
including a detailed description of the intended new use.
(c) Referral.
82-193
(1) The clerk shall transmit without delay one copy of such petition to the
plan commission and one copy to the county park and planning
commission.
(2) The plan commission shall conduct the necessary investigation, schedule a
public hearing, and report its recommendation to the town Board within a
reasonable time after the hearing.
(d) Hearing. Upon the recommendation of the plan commission and proper
notice per section 82-267(a), the town board shall hold a public hearing
thereon.
(e) Decision. The town board shall make a decision within a reasonable time
after receipt of the plan commission recommendation.
(f) Three-fourths vote in case of protest. In case of protest against such
change duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or
more either of the areas of land included in such proposed amendments,
supplement or change, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area
of the land immediately adjacent and extending 300 feet there from, or by
the owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto
extending 300 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land or in the
event that such change is contrary to the recommendation of the plan
commission such amendation, supplement or change shall require a threefourths
vote of the members of the town board.
(g) Effective upon county approval.
(1) Three signed copies of any change or amendment adopted by the town
board shall be sent to the county clerk for approval of the county board.
(2) Any such change or amendment shall become effective in the town upon
the approval of the county board.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 22.02)
Sec. 82-266. Public hearing--Purpose.
In order that the owners of property involved and other legitimately interested
parties may have fair opportunity to be heard, adequate notice shall be given of any
public hearing required by this chapter.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 23.01)
82-194
Sec. 82-267. Same--Procedure.
(a) Posting and publishing.
(1) Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, notice of
public hearing shall be given by publication for two consecutive weeks in
the official newspaper of the town or in the newspaper of general
circulation in the area of the proposed change, conditional use, variance or
sewer reduction at least seven days before such public hearing. The failure
of such notice to reach any property owner, provided such failure be not
intentional, shall not invalidate any amending ordinance or granting of
conditional use.
(2) When the hearing involves a proposed change in the zoning district
classification of any property, the granting of a conditional use, or are
appealed to the board of adjustment, the notices shall be posted in the
vicinity of such proposed change, conditional use or variance where
practical and the clerk shall mail certified letters of the public hearing to
the owners of all lands within 300 feet of any part of the land included in
such proposed change, conditional use or variance at least ten days before
such public hearing. The failure of such notice to reach a property owner
provided such failure is not intentional, shall not invalidate any amending
ordinance, variance or grant of conditional use.
(3) Notice of public hearing shall be sent to the county board supervisor
representing the subject area, the state department of natural resources,
and Federal Insurance Administrator if lying within the jurisdiction of the
Waukesha County Shoreland and Floodland Protection Ordinance.
(b) Information. Such notices shall state the time and place of such public
hearing and the purpose for which the hearing is held.
(c) Filing. Where such hearing is required by the provisions of this chapter as
a result of the request for other than a zoning change, such requests shall be presented to
the clerk in writing and shall be accompanied by a map or description clearly identifying
the property, along with a fee as set forth in section 82-267(d) payable to the town to
defray the cost of notification and holding of the public hearing.
(d) Fee schedule. The fees referred to in other sections of this chapter shall be
established by the town board in a fee schedule and may, from time to time, be modified
by resolution. Processing fees are related to costs involved in handling conditional use
petitions, appeals to the board of adjustment, zoning amendments and changes, and sewer
reductions.
(e) Special meeting. If a petitioner requests a special meeting (other than a
regular plan commission or town board meeting) all costs incurred will be the
responsibility of the petitioner.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 23.02)
82-195
Sec. 82-268. Enforcement officer.
(a) Building inspector designated. The building inspector is designated as the
enforcement officer for the provisions of this chapter under the direction of the town
board.
(b) Duties. In the enforcement of this chapter, the building inspector shall
perform the following duties:
(1) Issue the necessary "building and zoning," and "use" permits,
provided the provisions of this chapter and chapter 14, relative to
buildings and building regulations, have been complied with.
(2) Keep an accurate record of all permits, numbered in the order of
issuance, in a record book provided by the town for this purpose.
(3) Maintain accurate records and maps pertinent hereto and any
amendments or changes thereto.
(c) Authority. In the enforcement of this chapter the building inspector shall
have the power and authority for the following:
(1) At any reasonable time and for any proper purpose, to enter upon
any public or private premises to make inspections thereof.
(2) Upon reasonable cause or question as to proper compliance, to
revoke any building, zoning or occupancy permit and issue cease and
desist orders requiring the cessation of any building, moving, alteration or
use which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter, such revocation
to be in effect until reinstated by the building inspector or the board of
adjustment.
(3) In the name of the town and with the authorization of the town
board, to commence any legal proceedings necessary to enforce the
provisions of this chapter or the building code, including the collection of
forfeitures provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 24.01)
Cross References: Officers and employees, § 2-31 et seq.
82-196
Sec. 82-269. Violations.
(a) Penalties. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses
to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 and not to exceed the sum of
$2,000.00 for each offense, together with the costs of the action, and in default of the
payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail, for a period of not to exceed six
months, or until such forfeiture and the subsequent costs have been paid. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation and be punishable as
such. (Ord. 2008-4, § 1, 2-2-2009)
(b) Enforcement by injunction. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter
may also be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of the town or one or more owners
of real estate situated within the area affected by the regulations of this chapter. It shall
not be necessary to prosecute for fine or imprisonment before resorting to injunctional
procedures.
(c) Declared nuisances. Any building erected, structurally altered, or placed
on a lot, or any use carried on in violation of the provisions of this chapter, is declared to
be a nuisance per se, and the town may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to
restrain or abate such nuisance.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 24.02)
Sec. 82-270. Validity.
(a) Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All other ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
(b) Declaration of severability. The several sections, subsection, and
paragraphs of this chapter are herby declared to be severable. If any section, subsection,
paragraph, or subparagraph of this chapter shall be declared by a decision of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the other
provisions of this chapter, or of the section of which the invalid portion or paragraph may
be a part.
(c) Effective date. This chapter shall be in full force and effect upon passage
and publication by the town board and upon approval of the county board of supervisors,
said publication to consist of posting of three copies thereof in three public places in said
town.
(d) Adoption. The ordinance from which this chapter is derived was passed
and adopted by the town board the 16th day of April, 1953. Changes made, adopted and
published the ninth day of May 1983.
(Ord. of 5-9-1983, § 25)
