Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
Chapter 1
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
1.01 Form of Government
1.02 Elected Officials
1.03 Appointed Officials
1.04 Boards and Commissions
1.05 Municipal Court
1.06 Elections
1.07 Village Boundaries
1.08 Legal Notices
1.09 Ethics Code
1.10 Village President and Board of Trustees Term of Office Charter Ordinance
1.01 Form of Government. The Village of North Fond du Lac (herein referred to as the village) shall be governed by Chapters 61 and 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes and organized under Chapter 61 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
1.02 Elected Officials. The village will elect the following officers:
(1) VILLAGE PRESIDENT (a) The president, by the virtue of the office shall be a member of the board of trustees.
(b) The powers and duties of the village president are those generally prescribed by Wisconsin State Statutes and those delegated by the village board.
(c) Beginning in April 2005, compensation for the village president shall be $5,100 annually. The base salary shall be adjusted annually by the cost of living adjustment given to village employees.
(2) TRUSTEES. (a) The village shall have four trustees.
(b) The powers and duties of the trustees are those prescribed generally in Wisconsin State Statutes (Wis. Stats.) and specifically in Wis. Stats. §61.34.
(c) COMPENSATION. Beginning in April 2005, compensation for trustees elected in 2005 shall be $3,750 annually. For trustees elected in 2006 the compensation shall be $3,750 plus the annual cost of living adjustment given to village employees. The annual salary shall be adjusted each year by the annual cost of living increase given to village employees.
(3) MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
(a) Court established. Pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 755 of the Wisconsin Statutes there is hereby created and established a Municipal Court to be designated “Municipal Court for the Villages of North Fond du Lac and Rosendale and the Town of Ripon” said court to become operative and functional on June 1, 2001.
(b) Municipal Judge. 1. Qualification. The Joint court shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided over by a Municipal Judge, who resides in one of the municipalities.
2. Oath and Bond. The Judge shall, after election or appointment to fill a vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in Wis. Stats §755.02(1), and at the same time, the Judge shall
General Government - 2
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
execute and file an official bond with clerk of the municipality in an amount of $1,000. The judge shall not act until the oath and bond have been filed as required by Wis. Stats. §19.01(4)(c) and the requirements of Wis. Stats. §755.03(2) have been compiled with.
(3) Salary. The salary of the Municipal Judge shall be fixed by the Village Board of North Fond du Lac and shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No salary shall be paid to the Judge for any time during which such judge has not executed and filed the official bond or official oath as required by Wis. Stats. §19.01(40)(c).
(c) Elections. (1) Term. The Municip0al Judge shall be elected at large in the spring election for a term of four years commencing on May 1. All candidates for the position of Municipal Judge shall be nominated by nomination papers as provided in Wis. Stats. §8.10 and selection at a primary election if such is held as provided in Wis. Stat. §8.11. The state election board shall serve as the filing officer for the candidates.
(2) Electors. Electors in all municipalities that are parties to the agreement shall vote for the judge.
(3) Vacancy. Any vacancy occurring in the office of Municipal Judge shall be filled pursuant to state law.
(d) Jurisdiction. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over incidents occurring on or after June1, 2001 as provided in Article VII, §14 of the Wisconsin Constitution, Wis. States. §755.045 and 755.05, and as otherwise provided by State Law. In addition, it shall have exclusive jusrisdiction over actions in which the municipalities seek to impose forfeitures for violations of municipal ordinances, resolutions and by-laws.
The Municipal Judge may issue civil warrants to enforce matters under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court under §755.045(2), §66.122 and §66.123, Wis Stats.
The Municipal Court has jurisdiction over juvenile offenders when it enacts an ordinance under the authority of §938.17(2)(cm), Wis Stats.
(e) Municipal Court.
(1) Hours. The Municipal Court for the Villages of North Fond du Lac and Rosendale and Town of Ripon shall be open as determined by order of the Municipal Judge.
(2) Employees. The Judge shall, in writing, appoint such clerks and deputy clerks as are authorized by the Village Board of North Fond du Lac. Their salaries shall be fixed by the Village Board of North Fond du Lac.
(3) Location. The Municipal Judge shall keep his/her office and hold court in the Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Building, 16 Garfield Street, North Fond du Lac. However, the Municipal Judge may issue process and perform ministerial functions at any place in the county.
(f) Collection of Forfeitures and Costs.
The Municipal Judge may impose punishment and sentences a provided by Wis. Stats. Chapters 800 and 938 and as provided in ordinances of the municipalities that are parties tot eh agreement. All forfeitures, fees, assessments, surcharges and costs shall be paid to the treasurer of the Village of North Fond du Lac within seven (7) days of collection. At such time, the Municipal Court shall report to the treasurer the title, nature of offense and total amount of judgments imposed in actions and proceedings in which such monies are collected.
General Government - 3
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
(g) Contempt of Court. The Municipal Judge, after affording an opportunity to the person accused to be heard in defense, may punish for contempt as provided in Wis. Stats. §800.12, and may impose a forfeiture therefore not to exceed fifty dollars ($50) or upon nonpayment of the forfeiture, penalty assessment under Wis. Stats. §165.87, and jail assessment under Wis. Stats. §302.46, a jail sentence not to exceed seven (7) days.
(h) Stipulations and Deposits.
(1) Deposits for ordinance violations. The Municipal Judge shall establish and submit to the Village Boards of both North Fond du Lac and Rosendale and to the Town Board of Ripon for approval in accordance with §800.03(3), Wis. Stats., a schedule of deposits for violations of each village’s ordinances, resolutions and bylaws.
(2) Deposits for Traffic and Boating violations. The deposit schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference and the procedures set forth in Chapters 23 and 345, Wis. Stats., shall apply to stipulations and deposits for violations of traffic regulations enacted in accordance with §345.27 and boating regulations enacted in accordance with §30.77, Wis. Stats.
(3) Stipulations and Deposits in Lieu of Court Appearance. Persons cited for violations of Village of North Fond du Lac or Rosendale and Town of Ripon ordinances, resolutions or bylaws or violations of traffic or boating regulations for which a deposit has been established, shall be permitted to make a stipulation of no contest and a deposit in lieu of court appearance as provided in §800.03, §800.04, §800.09 Wis. Stats.
Section 1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances contravening or inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
1.03 Appointed Officials. (1) CHARTER ORDINANCE CHANGING ELECTED TO APPOINTED OFFICIALS (a) The village, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0101, has elected, by its charter ordinance dated 5/19/52, not to be governed by the portion of Wis. Stats. §61.19 providing for the election of the assessor and its charter ordinance dated 4/4/56 not to be governed by the portion of Wis. Stats. §61.19 providing for the election of the clerk and treasurer.
(b) In lieu of the statutory requirement of the election of these officers, the offices of village clerk, treasurer, and assessor shall be filled by appointment of the village board for such terms as shall be determined.
(2) APPOINTMENT AND TERM. (a) Officials shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the village board, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §61.197(c).
(b) This section, however, shall not preclude the village board from establishing other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of this code. (c) The appointed officials shall hold an indefinite term of office unless specified by Wisconsin Statutes or specific provisions of this code.
(d) The police chief and fire chief shall be appointed according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §62.13 by the village police and fire commission.
(e) The library director shall be appointed according to the provisions of Wis. Stat. §43.58(4).
(3) TERMINATION. Appointed village officials may be terminated pursuant to the provisions of
General Government - 4
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
Wis. Stats. §17.12 unless otherwise stated in Wisconsin Statutes.
(4) COMPENSATION. Compensation for appointed officials may be set from time to time by the village board of trustees as required.
(5) OFFICIAL OATH. All village officials shall be required to take an oath of office pursuant to Wis. Stats. §19.01(1).
(6) OFFICIAL BOND. Village officials shall be bonded according to Wis. Stat. §61.22. (a) The bonds of all village officers shall be furnished by a surety company licensed to do business in the State of Wisconsin.
(b) The premiums of the bonds shall be paid
by the village.
(7) OFFICERS OF THE VILLAGE ENUMERATED. The village shall have the following appointed officials with powers and duties as described herein. (a) Administrator 1. The administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and ordinances of the village and Wisconsin State Statutes, shall be the chief administrative officer of the village, responsible only to the village president and the village board.
2. The job description of the village administrator as adopted by the village board, and updated from time to time, is hereby incorporated by reference.
3. Cooperation. All officials and employees of the village shall cooperate with and assist the administrator so that the village government shall function effectively and efficiently.
4. The administrator shall also serve as deputy clerk/treasurer.
(b) Clerk-Treasurer
1. The clerk-treasurer shall carryout all of the powers and duties of village clerk set forth in Wis. Stats. §61.25 and the powers and duties of the village treasurer as set forth in Wis. Stats. §61.26.
2. The job description of the clerk-treasurer as adopted by the village board, and updated from time to time, is hereby incorporated by reference.
3. The clerk shall carryout the duties assigned by this code or as established by the Village Board.
(c) Police Chief. The police chief shall have administrative control over the police department. The police chief shall be appointed according to the provisions of section 1.02(d) of this code. As the police chief he/she shall have the powers and duties prescribed in section 4.02 of this code.
(d) Fire Chief. The fire chief shall have the powers and duties prescribed in section 4.03 of this code. The fire chief shall be appointed according to the provisions of section 1.02(d) of this code.
(e) EMS Director. The emergency medical services director shall have the powers and duties prescribed in section 4.04 of this code. (f) Emergency Government Director. The emergency government director shall serve as head of emergency government services according to Wis. Stats.§166.03(4).
(g) Public Works Director (herein called the director) shall carryout the powers and duties prescribed in this code.
General Government - 5
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
(h) Village Assessor. The assessor shall be appointed in accordance with Wis. Stats. §61.197(1)(f). The assessor shall have all of the powers and duties assigned to them by Wis. Stats. ch 70.
(i) Village Attorney(s). The attorney(s) shall be licensed to practice law in the State of Wisconsin. The village attorney(s) will have the powers and duties as specified from time to time by the village board.
(j) Weed Commissioner. The weed commissioner shall be appointed in accordance with Wis. Stats. §66.0517 and have all of the powers and duties of Wis. Stats. §66.0517 and section 9.19 of this code.
(k) Inspector(s) for Building, Electrical, Plumbing, and Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning. The position of inspector may be appointed separately or as combined positions depending upon the qualifications of the candidates at the time of appointment. The duties of the inspector(s) shall be those prescribed by chapters 8, 9, and 21 of this code.
(l) Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator shall have all of the powers and duties as assigned by chapter 21 of this code.
(m) Library Director. The library director shall have all of the powers and duties assigned by the library board through 1.04(3)(d) of this code.
1.04 Boards and Commissions.
(1) GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES. Every board and commission of the village shall:
(a) establish a date, time, and place for regular meetings, unless otherwise directed by Wisconsin Statutes or village ordinances;
(b) comply with open meeting laws and requirements as established by Wis. Stats. chapter 19 for regular and special meetings;
(c) record its proceedings showing the consideration, deliberation, recommendations, and vote of each member. The secretary of the committee shall file a copy of the record with the administrator;
(2) TERMS OF THE OFFICE. The following terms will apply to all boards and commissions unless otherwise stated in the Wisconsin Statutes: (a) The members of all commissions and boards shall be appointed by the village president, according to statutory guidelines, subject to confirmation by the village board;
(b) the members of all commissions and boards may be removed prior to the end of their terms according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §17.13 and §17.14;
(c) vacancies on village commissions and boards will be filled in accordance with Wis. Stats. §17.24;
(d) the village president shall designate a chairperson of each commission and board unless the method of appointment is provided for by statute;
(e) appointed members of commissions and boards shall serve without compensation unless otherwise specified by resolution of the village board.
(3) BOARDS ENUMERATED. The village shall have the following boards and commissions with powers and duties as described. (a) Board of Zoning Appeals. The village hereby creates a Board
General Government - 6
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
of Appeals pursuant to Wis. Stats. §62.23(7)(e) with all of the duties and functions prescribed therein.
1. Rules of Procedure. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this section or with applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Board of Review.
1. The board of review shall be composed of the village president, clerk treasurer, two trustees and one village representative from the county board.
a. The county board position shall be rotated between the two resident supervisors.
b. The term of office for the trustees shall run concurrent with their elected terms, one being appointed in each odd and even year.
c. Trustees shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the village board.
2. The duties and powers of the board of review shall be as defined in Wis. Stats. §70.46 and §70.47.
3. In accordance with Wis. Stats. §70.47(3)(b) the village board does hereby exercise its right to designate hours for the annual board of review proceedings other than those set forth in Wis. Stats. §70.47(3)(a) by resolution of the village board.
4. Except as otherwise provided by Wisconsin statutes, information relating to income and expenses provided to the village assessor shall be confidential. Such information shall only be released to individuals whose need for the information is justified by the discharge of their duties imposed by law, or of the duties of their office, or by order of a court. Unless a court determines that the information is inaccurate, the information is not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stat. §19.35(1).
(c) Plan Commission.
1. Membership and terms of office of the plan commission shall be pursuant to Wis. Stat § 62.23(1)(a) and (d). The commission shall consist of two trustees, the director of public works, and four citizens.
2. Four members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions taken shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of all commission members.
3. The commission shall organize at the first meeting held following their appointment each year, and shall elect a vice-chairperson and such other officers as may in their judgement be necessary.
4. The building/zoning inspector shall serve as the secretary of the plan commission.
5. Monthly meetings may be called as needed by the plan commission chair at a time to be established by the plan commission. The secretary shall give notice of meetings called by the commission.
6. The powers and duties of the plan commission shall be as defined in Wis. Stats. §62.23 and ch 236 and in ch 21 of this code.
(d) Library Board. 1. The library board shall be appointed according to the provisions of Wis. Stat. §43.54.
2. The powers and duties of the board shall be those assigned by Wis. Stat. §43.58.
General Government - 7
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
(e) Administrative Rules Appeals Board.
1. The administrative rule appeals board shall consist of the village president, one trustee, and one citizen. The trustee shall be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the board. The citizen member shall be appointed for a three year term by the village president, subject to confirmation by the board.
2. The administrator shall serve as the non-voting chair of the meeting.
3. The duties and powers of the board shall be those described in ch 23 of this code.
(f) Police and Fire Commission.
1. Membership. The police and fire commission shall consist of five members appointed by the village president for staggered terms of five years according to the provisions of Wis. Stat. §62.13. Membership in the commission shall not be limited to village residents. Every effort will be made to appoint members of recognized professional status. Appointments to the police and fire commission, by the village president, are subject to 2/3 confirmation by the village board.
2. Powers and Duties. The commission shall have the powers and duties prescribed by Wis. Stats. §62.13 (1-5m).
3. Compensation. The police and fire commission members shall be paid a per diem fee as set from time to time by resolution of the board.
(g) Community Development Authority.
1. The community development authority shall be appointed according to the provisions of Wis. Stat. §66.1335(2).
2. The powers and duties of the board shall be those assigned by Wis. Stat §66.1335(4).
1.05 Municipal Court
(1)Court Established. Pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 755 of the Wisconsin Statutes there is hereby created and established a Municipal Court to be designated “Lakeside Municipal Court”, serving the Villages of North Fond du Lac, Rosendale, Campbellsport, Brandon, Fairwater, Oakfield, the City of Fond du Lac, and the Towns of Ripon, Empire, Taycheedah and Osceola in Fond du Lac County and the Cities of Berlin, Green Lake, Markesan and Princeton in Green Lake County, said court to become operative and functional after each member of Lakeside Municipal Court passes a copy of this ordinance.
(2)Municipal Judge.
(a) Qualifications. The Joint court shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided over by a Municipal Judge, who resides in one of the municipalities.
(b) Oath and Bond. The Judge shall, after election or appointment to fill a vacancy, take and file the official oath as prescribed in Wis. Stats §757.02(1), and at the same time, the Judge shall execute and file an official bond with the clerk of the municipality in an amount of $1,000. The judge shall not act until the oath and bond have been filed as required by Wis. Stats. §19.01(4)(c) and the requirements of Wis. Stats. §755.03(2) have been compiled with.
(c) Salary. The salary of the Municipal Judge shall be fixed by the Village Board of North Fond du Lac and shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No salary shall be paid to the Judge for any time
General Government - 8
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
during which such judge has not executed and filed the official bond or official oath as required by Wis. Stats. §755.03 and filed pursuant to Wis. Stats. §19.01(40)(c).
(3)Elections.
(a) Term. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large in the spring election for a term of four years commencing on May 1. All candidates for the position of Municipal Judge shall be nominated by nomination papers as provided in Wis. Stats. §8.10 and selection at a primary election if such is held as provided in Wis. Stat. §8.11. The state election board shall serve as the filing officer for the candidates.
(b) Electors. Electors in all municipalities that are parties to the agreement shall vote for the judge.
(c) Vacancy. Any vacancy occurring in the office of Municipal Judge shall be filled pursuant to state law.
(4)Jurisdiction. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over incidents occurring upon or after passage as provided in Article VII, §14 of the Wisconsin Constitution, Wis. Stats. §755.045 and 755.05, and as otherwise provided by State Law. In addition, it shall have exclusive jurisdiction over actions in which the municipalities seek to impose forfeitures for violations of municipal ordinances, resolutions and by-laws.
The Municipal Judge may issue civil warrants to enforce matters under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court under §755.045(2), §66.122 and §66.123, Wis. Stats.
Court authority to impose alternative juvenile dispositions and sanctions.
1. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, a court is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in §938.343 and 938.344, Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions of those statutes.
2. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a condition of a dispositional order of the court under §938.343 or 938.344, Wis. Stats., the municipal court is authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in §938.355(6)(d) Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions of those statutes.
3. This section is enacted under the authority of §938.17(2)(cm), Wis. Stats.
(5)Municipal Court.
(a) Hours. Lakeside Municipal Court shall be open as determined by order of the Municipal Judge.
(b) Employees. The Judge shall, in writing, appoint such an Administrator, clerks, deputy clerks, and assistants as are authorized by the Village Board of North Fond du Lac. Their salaries shall be fixed by the Village Board of North Fond du Lac.
(c) Location. The Municipal Judge shall keep his/her office at a location provided by the Board of Trustees of the Village of North Fond du Lac and shall hold court at locations agreed to by members of Lakeside Municipal Court. The Municipal Judge may issue process and perform ministerial functions any place in the State of Wisconsin.
(6)Collection of Forfeiture and Costs. The Municipal Judge may impose punishment and sentences as provided by Wis. Stats. Chapters 800 and 938 and as provided in ordinances of the municipalities that are parties to the agreement. All forfeitures, fees, assessments, surcharges and
General Government - 9
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
costs shall be paid to the treasurer of the Village of North Fond du Lac in accordance with state statute. At such time, the Municipal Court shall report to the treasurer the title, nature of offense and total amount of judgments imposed in actions and proceedings in which such monies are collected.
(7)Contempt of Court. The Municipal Judge, after affording an opportunity to the person accused to be heard in defense, may punish for contempt as provided in Wis. Stats. §800.12, and may impose a forfeiture or a jail sentence in accordance with state statute.
(8)Stipulations and Deposits.
(a) Deposits for ordinance violations. The Municipal Judge shall establish and submit to the Town or Village Boards or City Councils of the member municipalities for approval in accordance with §800.03(3), Wis. Stats., a schedule of deposits for violations of each ordinances, resolutions and bylaws.
(b) Deposits for Traffic and Boating violations. The deposit schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference and the procedures set forth in Chapters 23 and 345, Wis. Stats., shall apply to stipulations and deposits for violations of traffic regulations enacted in accordance with §345.27 and boating regulations enacted in accordance with §30.77, Wis. Stats.
(c) Stipulations and Deposits in Lieu of Court Appearance. Persons cited for violations of the member municipalities ordinances, resolutions or bylaws or violations of traffic or boating regulations for which a deposit has been established, shall be permitted to make a stipulation of no contest and a deposit in lieu of court appearance as provided in §800.03, §800.04, §800.09 Wis. Stats., unless personal appearance is required.
1.06 Elections. The annual village election shall be held according to Wis. Stats. ch 8.
(1) POLLING PLACES. All wards shall vote at the Community Center, 280 Garfield St.
(2) POLLING HOURS. Polling hours will be from 7:00 AM to 8:00 PM each election day.
(3) REDUCTION IN NUMBER OF ELECTION OFFICIALS. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §7.32 the village board elects the provisions regarding local authority to reduce the number of election officials by resolution.
(4) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §7.30(1) and Wis. Stats. §7.32, the clerk may, as necessary, authorize the selection of two sets of election officials to work at different times on election day.
1.07 Village Boundaries. (1) The village boundaries, including future annexations and detachments shall at all times be recorded on the official map of the village as defined by section 10.01 of this code and annexation ordinances adopted after the effective date of the code added to this section.
(2) Annexations and detachments accepted by the village board since the effective date of this code include: None
1.08 Legal Notices. (1) POSTING PLACES. According to Wis. Stats. §985.02(2), the bulletin boards at the following locations are designated as the legal posting places of the village: (a) Village Hall, 16 Garfield Street;
General Government - 10
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
(b) U.S. Bank, 718 Wisconsin Avenue;
(c) Spillman Library, 719 Wisconsin Avenue.
(2) POSTING. Any notice, ordinance or other writing which by law or ordinance directed to be posted in the Village of North Fond du Lac, shall be posted by affixing the notices upon the bulletin boards.
(3) PENALTY. Any person who shall destroy or deface said bulletin boards or who shall remove, deface or destroy any notice posted there, except village officials exercising their official duty, shall be subject to the maximum penalty, prescribed by statute or by section 24.05 of this code.
1.09 Ethics Code. The village elects to prescribe to Wis. Stats. §19.59, code of ethics for local government officials, employees, and candidates. This code shall apply to all employees and officials of the village as well as prospective candidates for local office.
(1) BRIBERY AND OFFICIAL MISCONDUCT. Wis. Stats. §946.10 to §946.17, prohibit certain forms of conduct on the part of all public officials and employees, and provide for the imposition of criminal penalties upon conviction for engaging in prohibited forms of conduct.
(2) OTHER FORMS OF CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
(a) Gifts and favors. No official or employee shall accept any gift or favor, whether an article of value, loan, service or promise, from any individual, business or group which has either a direct or indirect interest in a matter pending before the board, a commission, committee, agency or office. Nor shall any official or employee accept any gift or favor that may tend to influence the discharge of their responsibilities or duties.
(b) Representing private interests before village boards, commissions, committees or agencies. No official or employee, whose salary is paid in whole or in part by the village, shall appear on behalf of private interests before any board, commission, committee or agency of the village, or in any litigation to which the village is a party except when subpoenaed as a witness by a party involved in such litigation. A member of the board of trustees may appear before a board, commission, committee or agency on behalf of constituents providing no compensation is paid or gratuity provided to the member contingent upon a specific outcome in a constituent’s matter of interest.
(c) Disclosure of interests in contracts with the village. Any official or employee having a substantial or controlling financial interest in any business entity seeking or securing a contract with the village, or in the sale of real estate, vehicles, equipment, supplies, materials or services to the village, shall make such interest known in writing to the board. A member of the board with such an interest shall ask to be excused from voting on or otherwise participating in the matter while it is before the board or one of its committees.
(d) Disclosure of interests in legislation. A member of the board who has a financial or other private interest in any legislative matter introduced for consideration before the board shall disclose such interest to the presiding officer and members of the board at the time the matter is introduced and shall ask to be excused from voting on or otherwise participating in the matter while it is before the board or one of its committees.
General Government - 11
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
(e) Disclosure of interests in matters before village boards, commissions and committees. A member of any village board, commission or committee who has a financial or other private interest in a matter in which the body is expected to act shall disclose such interest to the body at the time the matter is introduced and shall ask to be excused from voting on or otherwise participating in the matter while it is before the body.
(f) Use of information. No official or employee shall make use of or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, information not made available to the public.
(g) Political activity. No officials or employee shall, during the hours in which they are performing responsibilities and duties as a village employee, engage in any activity calculated to benefit a political party, partisan or nonpartisan organization, campaign committee or candidate seeking to influence the outcome of an election or referendum. This prohibition extends to the direct or indirect solicitation of campaign contributions, including in-kind contributions, and the use of village owned buildings, facilities, vehicles, equipment, materials or other village property to influence the outcome of an election or referendum.
(h) Outside employment. No official or employee shall engage in any outside employment, which might result in a conflict, or the appearance of a conflict, between the private interests of the employee and the employee's duties and responsibilities as a Village employee.
(3) REQUESTING ADVISORY OPINIONS. The board or any appointed officer or authority acting with the consent of a prospective appointee may request the Village Attorney to issue an advisory opinion regarding the ethical propriety of any matter to which a Village official, employee or prospective appointee is or may become a party. Such action will be taken pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.59 (5).
(4) SANCTIONS. Violation of the code of ethics created by this section should raise the question of whether the official or employee violating the ethics code should voluntarily resign or other action should be taken in the best interests of the village and its citizens. (a) Violation of the ethics code may constitute a cause for removal from office, termination of employment, suspension, censure, reprimand, or other appropriate disciplinary action.
(b) As an alternative or in addition to sanctions imposed herein, any individual violating the ethics code shall be subject to a non-reimbursable forfeiture of not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) as determined the violation of any federal or state law, village code, rule or regulation, the mismanagement or abuse of authority, a substantial waste of public funds, or a danger to public health and safety. Nothing in this section restricts the right of the village as an employer to take appropriate disciplinary action against an employee who knowingly makes an untrue statement or releases information the disclosure of which is specifically prohibited by federal or state law, rule or regulation.
by the board.
(5) EMPLOYEE PROTECTION. No appointing authority, agent of an appointing authority or trustee may initiate or administer, or threaten to initiate or administer, any retaliatory action against a village employee following an employee's disclosure of information related to state law, rule or regulation.
General Government - 12
Village of North Fond du Lac May 15, 2007
1.10 Terms of Office. Pursuant to Wisconsin State Statutes §61.0101, the Village of North Fond du Lac elects to establish terms of office for the Village President and Board of Trustees as follows:
(1) Village President and Board of Trustees Term of Office Charter Ordinance.
(a)Pursuant to Wis. Stat. Sections 61.195 and 66.0101, the Village of North Fond du Lac elects not be governed by those portions of Wis. Stat. §61.19 and §61.20 relating to the term of office of the Village President and Trustees and hereby specifies the following schedule of elections and terms of office:
(1) Beginning with the Spring 2007 election, two trustees shall be elected, whose term of office shall be for 3 years, and, subject to subsection (3), a village President shall be elected, whose term of office shall be for 2 years.
(2) Beginning with the Spring 2008 election, two trustees shall be elected, whose term of office shall be 3 years.
(3) Beginning with the Spring 2009 election, a Village President shall be elected whose term of office shall be 3 years.
(2) All ordinances or parts of ordinances contravening the terms and provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
(3) This Charter Ordinance shall be included in the Village Ordinances as section 1.10 and shall be entitled “Village President and Board of Trustees Term of Office Charter Ordinance”.
(4) This Charter Ordinance shall be published as a class 1 notice, under Wis. Stat. Ch. 985. A certified copy of this Charter Ordinance shall be filed by the Village Clerk with the Secretary of State.
(5) This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect sixty (60) days after its passage and publication, subject to the provisions of Wis. Stat. §66.0101.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Chapter 2
THE GOVERNING BODY
2.01 Meetings
2.02 Standing Rules
2.03 Committee of the Whole
2.04 Other Committees
2.05 Ordinances and Resolutions
2.06 Parliamentary Rules
2.01 Meetings.
(1) REGULAR MEETINGS.
(a) Regular meetings shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month at 6 PM unless otherwise specified by the board and appropriately noticed.
(b) When a regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the first workday succeeding the holiday, unless otherwise scheduled by the village board.
(c) All meetings of the board shall be held in the village hall board room at 16 Garfield Street, North Fond du Lac, unless otherwise specified by the board and appropriately noticed.
(d) The presiding officer shall be the village president in accordance with Wis. Stats. §61.24.
(2) SPECIAL MEETINGS. Special village board meetings shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §61.32. Special meetings of the village board and plan commission may be requested to be called by a citizen.
(a) For items, which in the opinion of the administrator, are routine in nature and could normally have been handled during a regular meeting, but special action is requested by a citizen, the meeting shall be allowed with the following conditions:
1. The village board and plan commission may charge a fee for special meetings as set from time to time by resolution of the village board.
2. The citizen making the request shall, on a form provided by the village clerk, obtain the two signatures of the trustees as required under Wis. Stats. §61.32.
(b) For items, which in the opinion of the administrator, are not routine in nature and must have the immediate attention of the village board, the administrator may request a special meeting of the village board at a Board Meeting with consent of the Board or by obtaining the signatures of two trustees as required under Wis. Stats. §61.32.
(3) PRESIDING OFFICER. The president of the village board shall preside at all meetings of the board as required by Wis. Stats. §61.24.
(4) No business shall be discussed out of order, except by a majority vote with opportunity for debate.
2.02 Standing Rules.
(1) PRESIDING OFFICER. In the president’s absence, the clerk or deputy clerk shall call the
Village of North Fond du Lac February 16, 2005
Governing Body - 2
meeting to order and preside until the remaining trustees select one of their number to preside for that meeting.
(2) APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES. The president shall appoint all committees unless state statute or provisions of this code otherwise designate the method of appointment.
(3) ATTENDANCE OF MEMBERS. The president shall be authorized to issue process to enforce the attendance of any absent member of the board when requested by any two trustees present.
(4) QUORUM. Three trustees shall constitute a quorum.
2.03 Committee of the Whole. The board of trustees is hereby designated as the “Committee of the Whole”.
(a) Three (3) trustees, shall constitute a quorum of the Committee of the Whole.
(b) The Committee of the Whole may meet from time to time to discuss issues of importance when requested by a Board Member or the Administrator, and properly noticed.
(c) All actions of the committee of the whole, be they deliberations or recommendations, shall be thereinafter voted upon at a regular or special meeting of the board of trustees.
2.04 Other Committees. Every committee created by or existing under the Ordinances of the village shall:
(1) REGULAR MEETINGS. Establish a date, time, and place for regular meetings unless otherwise directed by this code.
(2) OPEN MEETINGS LAW. Comply with open meeting laws and requirements established by Wis. Stats. Ch 19 for regular and special meetings.
(3) MINUTES. Record its proceedings showing the consideration, deliberation, recommendations, and vote of each member. The secretary of the committee shall file a copy of the record with the administrator.
(4) APPOINTMENT. The members of all standing committees shall be appointed by the village president and subject to confirmation by the village board.
(5) REMOVAL. The members of all committees may be removed prior to the end of their terms under the provisions of Wis. Stats. §17.13.
(6) VACANCIES. Vacancies on village committees will be filled in accordance with Wis. Stats. §17.24.
(7) CHAIRPERSON. The village president shall designate a chairperson of each committee.
(8) COMPENSATION. Appointed members of committees shall serve without compensation.
(9) TERM OF OFFICE. All citizen members of all committees and subcommittees shall be three years. The terms of the committee members other than the trustee chairperson shall be staggered so that one-third of the membership is appointed annually beginning by May 1 of each year. Members may be reappointed to successive terms, without limitation as to total years of service.
(10) COMMITTEES. (a) Standing Committees. Standing committees of the village board shall be appointed by the village president as needed.
(b) Special Committees. The village president may, from time to time, appoint special
Village of North Fond du Lac February 16, 2005
Governing Body - 3
committees as needed, with the approval of the village board. These committees shall have at least one trustee in their membership. (a) Traffic Safety Committee. The Traffic Safety Committee shall consist of the Village Administrator, The Chief of Police, and the Public Works Director.
1. The committee shall meet when necessary to discuss issues surrounding traffic safety issues.
2. A meeting of the committee can be called by any member.
3. Recommendations of the traffic safety committee shall be made to the village committee of the whole for approval.
2.05 Ordinances and Resolutions. All ordinances and resolutions shall be filed with the office of the clerk and entered into the minutes.
(1) ORDINANCES. (a) The style of all proposed ordinances shall be in accordance with Wis. Stats. §61.50. When ordinances contain more than one subject, the subjects shall be clearly explained in the ordinance title.
(b) All ordinances of the village shall require two readings by the village board at two separate meetings. Suspension of this rule may occur by a 2/3 vote of the board.
(c) Roll call votes are required on all ordinances and by-laws.
(2) RESOLUTIONS. A majority vote of the board is required for adoption of a resolution.
(3) Amending ordinances and resolutions shall be numbered with: a letter prefix, “O” for ordinances, “R” for resolution; the number of the year in which it is passed; and with the chronological number of that year e.g. ordinance number one, of 1998, shall be O-98-1.
2.06 Parliamentary Rules. Meetings of the village board shall be conducted according to section 1.11 of the village operating policies, “Policy Guidelines for Board Procedures”, as periodically reviewed and updated by resolution of the board. In the absence of a rule governing a specific situation, the most current edition of Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised shall be used.
(1) Roll call order shall be changed at each meeting in such a way that all trustees will be the first to vote at some time or other.
(2) The assent of two-thirds of all the members of the board shall be required to suspend, alter, or modify the operating policies.
Village of North Fond du Lac March 10, 2006
Chapter 3
FINANCE, TAXATION, AND PUBLIC RECORDS
3.01 Preparation of Tax Roll and Receipts
3.02 Fiscal Year
3.03 Allowance of Claims
3.04 Budget
3.05 Village Borrowing
3.06 Monthly Reports of Receipts
3.07 Depositories
3.08 Fines & License Fees to Go to the Village Treasury
3.09 Public Records
3.10 Special Assessment Procedures
3.11 Capital Expenditure Limitation
3.12 Treasurer Bond
3.01 Preparation of Tax Roll and Receipts. The treasurer of the village shall annually prepare the tax roll in accordance with Wis. Stats. §70.65.
3.02 Fiscal Year. The fiscal year of the village is established pursuant to Wis. Stats. §61.51(3).
3.03 Allowance of Claims. In addition to Wis. Stats. §66.0609:
(1) No claim shall be allowed unless it is itemized. No account or demand against the village shall be paid unless the department head and administrator have reviewed it.
(2) All claims made shall be reviewed and approved by the village president before presentation to the village board.
(3) All invoices and checks shall be authorized by a majority vote of the village board.
(4) The clerk/treasurer may make such immediate payments as may be necessary for weekly or semi-monthly payrolls, insurance premiums, contracted services, utility bills, and expenses approved by the committee of the whole. The clerk/treasurer may also make regular payments as necessary to avoid paying finance charges.
3.04 Budget. The village will budget on an annual basis pursuant to Wis. Stats. §65.90.
(1) On or before August 15 of each year, each officer, department or board shall file with the administrator an itemized statement of disbursements sufficient to carry out the powers and duties of the offices or departments during the preceding fiscal year, also detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year.
(a) The statement shall be presented in the form prescribed by the administrator.
(b) The department estimate for the current fiscal year shall be designated.
(c) The coming year’s fiscal projections shall consist only of those expenditures necessary to
Village of North Fond du Lac March 10, 2006
Finance, Taxation, and Public Records - 2
efficiently run the operations of the village.
(2) The administrator shall review the coming year’s requests with the department heads prior to presentation to the committee of the whole.
(3) The committee of the whole shall consider the departmental requests and submit a proposed village budget to the board.
(4) All directives, deadlines, and procedures as specified in Sec. 3.04 shall apply to the preparation of the water budget and the wastewater budget.
3.05 Village Borrowing. No village officer shall have power to issue any “Time” or “Negotiable” order, or borrow money, except in the manner and for the purpose expressly provided for by the Wisconsin State Statutes, Chapter 67.
3.06 Monthly Reports of Receipts. Each village officer shall keep an itemized and accurate account of all money received in their official capacity for fees, commissions or otherwise.
(1) By the end of each calendar month, unless otherwise specified by the village board, such officers shall pay to the village treasurer all such money collected.
(2) The clerk/treasurer shall file a duly certified copy of all accounts showing that money has been paid into the village treasury.
3.07 Depositories. The board shall designate by resolution the financial institutions in which all village money shall be deposited, and when such money is so deposited in such banks, the clerk/treasurer and the designated bonds person shall not be liable for the loss thereof by reason of the failure of such financial institution(s).
3.08 Fines and License Fees to go to the Village Treasury. All fines, forfeitures and penalties, recovered for the violation of any ordinance, rule, regulation, by-law or resolution of the village, and all money paid for licenses and permits shall be paid into the village treasury for the use of the village.
3.09 Public Records.
(1) ACCESSIBILITY. Village officials shall comply with Wis. Stats. §19.35 as it pertains to accessibility to public records.
(2) DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
Destruction of public records will be handled according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §19.21(4), (a) Non-Utility Records. Village officials are empowered to destroy the following non-utility records under their jurisdiction after completion of an audit by the Wisconsin Department of State audit, or an auditor licensed under Chapter 442 of the Statutes, but not less than seven (7) years after payment or receipt of the sum involved in the applicable transaction:
1. Bank statements, deposit books and slips or stubs.
2. Bonds and coupons after maturity.
3. Canceled checks, duplicates and check stubs.
4. Licenses and permit applications, stubs and duplicates.
Village of North Fond du Lac March 10, 2006
Finance, Taxation, and Public Records - 3
5. Payroll and other time and employment records of personnel included under the Wisconsin Retirement Fund.
6. Receipt forms.
7. Special assessment records.
8. Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting documents pertaining thereto.
(b) Utility Records. Village officers are empowered to destroy the following records of municipal utilities subject to the regulations of the State Public Service Commission but not less than seven (7) years after payment or receipt of the sum involved in the applicable transaction.
1. Water stubs and receipts of current bills.
2. Customer ledgers.
3. Vouchers and supporting documents pertaining to charges not included in plant accounts.
4. Other utility records with the written approval of the State Public Service Commission.
(c) General. Village officers are empowered to destroy the following records, but not less than seven (7) years after the record was effective:
1. Assessment rolls and related records, including board of review minutes.
2. Contracts and documents relating thereto.
3. Correspondence and communications.
4. Financial papers and reports other than annual financial reports.
5. Insurance policies.
6. Justice dockets.
7. Oaths of office.
8. Reports of boards, commissions, committees and officials duplicated in official board minutes.
9. Resolutions and petitions.
10. Voter record cards.
(d) Notice of Destruction. Notice shall be given to the State Historical Society according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §19.21(4)(a)
(3) FEES. Fees for public record requests shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the village board.
(4) EXCEPTIONS. (a) Assessment Records. Except as otherwise provided by Wisconsin Statutes, information relating to income and expenses provided to the Village Assessor shall be considered confidential. Such information shall only be released to individuals whose need for the information is justified by the discharge of their duties imposed by law, or the duties of their office, or by order of a court.
(b) Unless a court determines that the information is inaccurate, the information is not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats. §19.35(1).
3.10 Special Assessment Procedures.
(1) In addition to other methods provided by law, special assessments for any public work or improvement or any current service may be levied in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0701.
Village of North Fond du Lac March 10, 2006
Finance, Taxation, and Public Records - 4
(2) Whenever the board shall determine that any public work or improvement or any current service shall be financed in whole or in part by special assessments levied under this section, it shall adopt a resolution specifying this intention and the time according to Wis. Stats. §66.0703, before and after completion of the work or improvement, when the amount of assessments will be determined and levied, the number of annual installments, if any, in which assessments may be paid, the rate of interest to be charged on the unpaid balance if known or the method for determining said rate of interest and the terms on which any of the assessments may be deferred while no use of the improvement is made in connection with the property.
(3) The provisions of Wis. Stats. §66.0701, shall apply to special assessments levied under this ordinance except that, when the board determines by resolution that the hearing on the assessments be held subsequent to the completion of the work or improvement or the rendering of the service, the report required by Wis. Stats. §66.0703 (5), shall contain a statement of the final cost of the work, service or improvement in lieu of an estimate of the cost. Alternatively, the board may determine by resolution that the hearing on the assessments be held at some time during the course of the work or improvement or the rendering of the service, and the report required by Wis. Stats. §66.0703(5) shall contain a statement of accrued costs and estimated costs for said work or improvement.
(4) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing on any proposed special assessment and notice of the final assessment and terms of payment thereof shall be given in the manner prescribed by Wis. Stats. §66.0703(7)(a).
(5) Any special assessment levied under this section shall be a lien against the property assessed from the date of the final resolution of the board determining the amount of the levy.
(6) Any person against whose property a special assessment is levied under this ordinance may appeal in the manner prescribed by Wis. Stats. §66.0703 (12), within 90 days after the date of the publication of the final resolution approving the assessment or within 90 days after the date of the notice of the resolution amending, canceling or confirming a prior assessment.
(7) GENERAL ASSESSMENT PROVISIONS. It is the intent of this section to equitably distribute the cost of public improvements to benefited properties.
1. Assessable project costs will include: field surveys; engineering; preparation of plans and specifications; construction; including change orders; inspection; legal expenses; right-of-way acquisition; advertising of bids; and administration costs.
2. Tree removal, when necessary, will be assessed as part of the construction cost and divided equally amongst the entire project assessable frontage.
3. Planting of terrace trees during new construction will be assessed as a part of the street project. Trees will be placed at 35’ intervals or as determined by the director of public works (director) or the director’s agent. The total cost of trees will be divided by the linear feet of the project to determine the cost per foot for tree planting. Total assessment will be based on the cost per linear foot times the property front footage.
4. Assessments will be levied according to the front foot dimension of the abutting property. The front of a property will be the narrowest lot dimension. In the case of a corner lot with equal dimensions the ‘addressed’ side will be considered the front. 5. All new construction costs will be assessed to the affected property at 100% of the village’s cost of construction.
Village of North Fond du Lac March 10, 2006
Finance, Taxation, and Public Records - 5
6. Assessment Exceptions.
a. Corner lots. The first 120' of the longest side will be charged at 50% of the assessment rate. The total balance of the frontage will be charged at 100% of the assessment rate. On corner lots where both sides have an equal frontage or frontage of less than 120’, the side to be considered the front side will be the addressed side.
b. Double frontage lots. The first 120' facing the street that is not considered to be the ‘addressed’ will be charged at 50% of the assessment rate. The total balance of the frontage will be assessed at 100% of the assessment rate. When the second side of the lot is the rear of the lot, and no access is allowed, the abutting property will not be assessed.
c. Triple frontage lots. The front of the lot will be assessed at 100%, the side lot will be assessed at 50% of the first 120’ and 100% of the remaining footage. The third side, if there is no access, will not be assessed.
d. Odd shaped lots. Lots such as those found on a cul-de-sac, will have their assessment rate determined by the total cost of the project for all odd shaped lots divided by the total square footage of the lots involved. The assessment for each lot will be determined by multiplying the assessment rate by the total square footage of each lot.
total cost of the project for all odd shaped lots
total square footage of all lots involved
= assessment rate
assessment = assessment rate X square footage of each lot
e. There will be no assessment made for any frontage to which access is physically or legally precluded, such as unbuildable parcels and rights-of-way.
f. In the event that the state or county participates in the construction of village streets, the state or county contribution will first go to reduce the overall project cost. The balance of the project costs will be assessed to the abutting property owners on a cost per linear foot basis using the total remaining costs of the project and dividing by the front footage, unless otherwise defined in this section.
(8) SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
(a) Street Construction.
1. An improved street is defined as one with curb and gutter and a paved surface. Improved street construction costs will be assessed at a per front foot rate at the time of improvement.
2. The standard street width will be 36' or the width determined by the plan commission at the time of plan review, face-of-curb to face-of-curb. Pavement and granular base thickness will be per DOT standard specifications for similar construction.
(b) Storm Sewer and Storm Water Detention Construction.
1. The cost of a storm sewer including piping, manholes and other appurtenances will be totaled for the entire project and divided equally on a front foot cost.
Village of North Fond du Lac March 10, 2006
Finance, Taxation, and Public Records - 6
2. The village will assume the cost of any over-sizing of storm sewer structures that are installed to serve an area outside of the area being assessed. All excavating, backfill and/or pavement repair for oversized storm sewer structure will be assessable.
3. Any storm laterals installed to private property will be assessed at cost to the property owner.
4. The cost of storm water detention basins, which must be built to accommodate area wide drainage, will normally be absorbed by the village. If a detention basin must be constructed to benefit a specific portion of the village which can readily be identified, those costs will be assessed to the benefited property owner.
(c) Sidewalk Construction.
1. Sidewalks will be constructed on all improved streets as part of street construction except as may be deemed unnecessary by a resolution by the board.
2. All costs associated with sidewalk construction and reconstruction will be assessed to the abutting property owner with the exception of crosswalks, which will be constructed at the village’s expense. Crosswalks will be defined as the area of sidewalk located on a corner that is not assessable to an abutting property.
3. Any sidewalk that is in good condition prior to street reconstruction will be measured and a credit will be given to the abutting property for that portion of sidewalk.
(d) Maintenance of Streets & Sidewalks.
1. Street maintenance such as slurry seal, grinding & resurfacing, and the installation of temporary surfaces will be at the village’s expense.
2. The replacement of sidewalks, deemed to be in substandard condition by the director or the director’s agent that abut private property, will be replaced at the property owners expense, with the exception of crosswalks, as defined in section (c)2.
(e) Driveway Apron Construction & Reconstruction.
1. The construction costs of concrete driveway aprons will be assessed at the time of initial street construction or at the time of reconstruction.
2. If a property owner has a concrete apron that is in good condition at the time of reconstruction as determined by the director or the director’s agent, they will receive a credit for that portion of driveway apron deemed to be in good condition.
3. If a property owner has an asphalt apron that is in good condition at the time of reconstruction as determined by the director or the director’s agent, they will receive a credit of 65% of the cost of replacement for that portion of driveway apron deemed to be in good condition.
4. Property owners will be responsible for all costs of construction associated with the enlargement of an existing driveway apron or of any overbuild in base or pavement.
(f) Sanitary Sewer Construction.
1. Sanitary sewer mains will be assessed on a front foot basis including the installation costs of the main, manholes, and appurtenances, the cost of which will be totaled and assessed on a project wide basis.
Village of North Fond du Lac March 10, 2006
Finance, Taxation, and Public Records - 7
2. A sanitary sewer installed on the side of a lot will not be assessed to a property unless it is the only sewer available to the property. In that case, the side lot will be treated as the front of the lot and assessed accordingly.
3. The standard pipe size for construction will be 8". Any costs associated with the ‘over-sizing’ of a main, for grade or volume reasons, will be absorbed by the wastewater utility.
4. The installation of new sanitary laterals will be assessed at a per foot rate running from the main to the front property line. At the time of reconstruction this portion of the system will be installed at the utility’s expense.
5. Any construction, reconstruction or major maintenance to the portion of the lateral between the house and property line is done at the expense of the property owner. Minor maintenance such as rodding will be the responsibility of the property owner from the house to the sewer main.
(g) Water Main Construction.
1. Water main will be assessed on a front foot basis, including the main, valves, boxes, hydrants, and other appurtenances, the cost of which will be totaled and assessed on a project wide basis.
2. Water main installed on a side lot will not be assessed to the property unless there is no service available to the front of the property. In that case, the side lot will be treated as the front and assessed accordingly.
3. The standard pipe size for construction will be 6". Any costs associated with the ‘over-sizing’ of a main, for volume reasons, will be absorbed by the water utility.
4. Responsibility for lateral construction from the main to the water shut-off box will be as required by the Public Service Commission.
5. Any construction, reconstruction or major maintenance to the portion of the lateral between the house and property line is done at the expense of the property owner.
(i) Miscellaneous
1. Street Signs. The village will normally absorb this cost as a village wide benefit.
2. Bridges. The village will normally absorb this cost as a village wide benefit.
3. Traffic Signals. The village will normally absorb this cost as a village wide benefit.
(9) PAYMENT PROCEDURES
(a) All publicly owned and tax exempt properties, including lands owned or controlled by the village, county, state, and school district, will be assessed at 100% of the assessment rate.
(b) When state or federal aids are available for a specific project, they will be applied first to reduce the village’s share of the cost of the project (if any). Any remaining funds will be applied to reduce assessments.
(c) Improvements which are not directly assessable to abutting property owners or elsewhere covered in this policy, will be averaged into the unit costs over the project limits and apportioned to all affected properties in accordance with the applicable assessment formula.
(d) Method of payment.
1. If the amount owed is less than $500, a lump sum payment must be paid on the due date as specified in the assessment billing. If the amount owed is $500 up to $1200, payment may be made in three equal installments over a three-year period. If the amount owed is more than $1200, payment may be made in five equal installments over a five-year period. If the amount
Village of North Fond du Lac March 10, 2006
Finance, Taxation, and Public Records - 8
owed is more than $5,000, payment may be made in ten equal installments over a ten-year period.
2. Installment payments will be charged interest/administrative costs at the rate specified in the special assessment final resolution. The rate used shall be the prime lending rate on the Monday preceding the adoption date of the final resolution to assess, plus 3ChaChapter%.
3. No interest/administrative cost will be charged against a lump sum payment or the first installment payment if the payment is made by November 1 in the year the payment is due.
4. Separate current year special assessment bills on an individual property may be combined to establish eligibility for the installment payment options. To avoid having the entire amount placed on the tax roll, the Village Treasurer must be notified in writing prior to November 1, if an owner is going to elect an installment option.
5. The total amount of all outstanding special assessments will become due and payable upon sale or transfer of the property. 6. In cases of hardship, assessments may be deferred. Application should be made to the village clerk/treasurer on a form provided by the clerk/treasurer. Applications for deferred assessments will be kept confidential, be reviewed on an individual basis, and considered on the application’s merits.
(10) ASSESSMENTS TO PROPERTIES NOT LOCATED IN THE VILLAGE. 1. If an improvement is made adjacent to a property not located in the village at the time of construction, the assessment will be held, per state statute, until the property is annexed to the village. Upon annexation all assessments will come due and be paid for in accordance with this policy.
(11) Any modification of section 3.10(8) shall require a unanimous vote of the board.
(12) Section 3.10(9) shall apply to all assessments made after April 1, 2001.
3.11 Capital Expenditure Limitation
(1) Prior to the start of any physical construction of any municipally financed (in whole or in part) project requiring a Village capital expenditure of $5 million dollars or more, the Village Board shall submit to the electorate a referendum on the project. The wording of any referendum shall provide the specific purpose, location, benefit, and cost of the project.
Nothing in this provision shall be construed to preclude the Village from exercising its role in the planning or design of such publicly financed projects, or from exercising its rights and duties as a municipality under state law.
3.12 Treasurer Bond
The Village of North Fond du Lac, Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin shall be obligated to pay all state and county taxes to the Fond du Lac County Treasurer, as provided for by Wisconsin Statute 70.67 (2).
(1) If the Village of North Fond du Lac Treasurer should default or fail to pay the taxes, then the
(2) Village shall pay from the
(3) funds that shall be available to the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(4) By adoption of this Ordinance, the Village of North Fond du Lac is exempting itself from posting the bond sufficient to cover all state and county taxes.
Village of North Fond du Lac March 10, 2006
Finance, Taxation, and Public Records - 9
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Chapter 4
PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENTS
4.01 Office of Village Constable Abolished
4.02 Police Department
4.03 Fire Department
4.04 Emergency Medical Services
4.05 Emergency Government
4.06 Equipment and Apparatus
4.01 Office of Village Constable Abolished. The village pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0101 has by its ordinance dated 6/19/50, elected not to be governed by the portion of Wis. Stats. §61.29 providing for the appointment of a village constable.
4.02 Police. The police division of the public safety department of the village shall consist of the chief of police and such other police officers as may be authorized by the village board.
(1) APPOINTMENT OF THE POLICE CHIEF. The police chief shall be appointed as provided in Chapter 1.03 of this code. The chief of police, subject to the rules, regulations, and approval of the police and fire commission, shall select police officers other than the chief.
(2) DISCIPLINE. The chief shall discipline employees pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §62.13.
(3) TERMINATION. The police chief and officers may be terminated only within the provisions of Wis. Stats. §62.13(5m).
(4) POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE POLICE CHIEF. The chief of police shall possess the powers of marshal and constable under Wis. Stats. Ch 61 and perform the following duties in addition to the duties set forth in Wis. Stats. Ch 61: (a) be responsible for the administration and supervision of the police department under the supervision of the administrator;
(b) be responsible for the care and maintenance of the equipment and vehicles used by the department;
(c) develop departmental policies and procedures;
(d) maintain departmental ethics and discipline;
(e) perform all the duties of a police officer during a portion of every regular shift;
(f) participate in recruitment, testing, and selection of new personnel;
(g) monitor and authorize overtime of officers with supporting justification;
(h) submit regular reports to the board and special reports when asked;
(i) foster intergovernmental cooperation with other municipal, state and federal agencies;
(j) keep an accurate and complete record of all complaints, arrests, traffic violations, convictions, and dispositions of the department;
(k) prepare budget recommendations and maintain the budget within approved levels;
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Public Safety Department - 2
(l) the Chief of Police shall order background investigations, including Wisconsin Criminal history reports, local in-house record reposts, and driving record reports, of current or potential employees of the municipality with the authorization of the administrator. It shall also be the duty of the police chief to order background checks, including Wisconsin Criminal History reports, local in-house record reposts and driving record reports, on applications for licenses, as warranted.
(m) perform other duties as requested by the village board and provisions of this code.
(5) POLICE OFFICERS. (a) Each officer of the department shall: preserve the public peace; and enforce the laws and ordinances of the state and village subject to the orders, rules, and regulations of the police chief and the village board.
(b) The chief of police and any police officers shall have the powers conferred by Wis. Stats. §61.31(2).
4.03 Fire. The fire department of the village shall be known as the Village of North Fond du Lac Fire Department. The department shall consist of the fire chief, officers, and staffing levels as authorized by the village board.
(1) OPERATING POLICIES AND GUIDELINES. The fire department shall adopt operating policies and guidelines for the control, management, and regulation of the department. The policies and guidelines are subject to the approval of the village board. Amendments to the policies and guidelines shall be approved in the same manner. The policies and guidelines shall be filed with the office of the administrator.
(2) FIRE CHIEF. The fire chief shall be appointed subject to the provisions of section 1.03 of this code. (a) The fire chief or the chief’s designee shall: 1. be present at all fires and in command of firefighting operations.
2. enforce all fire prevention ordinances of the village and fire prevention laws of the state;
3. obey all lawful written orders of the village president and village board;
4. participate in recruitment, testing, and selection of new personnel to the extent allowed by the police and fire commission.
5. submit regular reports to the village board and special reports when asked;
6. foster intergovernmental cooperation with other municipal, state and federal agencies;
7. prepare budget recommendations and maintain budget within approved levels;
8. shall perform the duties of fire inspector required by Wis. Stats. §101.14, and this code. a) The fire chief shall have the power to appoint one or more deputies to perform the duties in section 4.04(2)(h).
b) No person shall deny access to the fire inspector or the chief’s deputies to any property within the village at any reasonable time for the purpose of making fire inspections;
c) No person shall hinder or obstruct the fire inspector or fire inspection deputies in the performance of their duties.
9. perform other duties as requested by the village board and provisions of this code;
(3) FIREFIGHTERS. (a) Application for membership. Applications for membership in the department shall be filed with the fire chief and forwarded to the police and fire commission.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Public Safety Department - 3
(b) the firefighters may be appointed according to the guidelines in the by-laws of the police and fire commission subject to approval by the police and fire commission.
(4) POLICE POWER OF THE DEPARTMENT.
The fire chief and designated assistants shall have the police powers prescribed by Wis. Stats. §213.095.
4.04 Emergency Medical Service. The North Fond du Lac Emergency Medical Service (EMS) is established for the purpose of providing immediate emergency medical service to residents of the EMS service area as defined by Fond du Lac County, under Wis. Stats. §61.64 and §146.55.
(1) EMS DIRECTOR. The EMS Director shall be appointed according to section 1.03 of this code.
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE EMS DIRECTOR. The EMS Director shall have the powers prescribed under Wis. Stats. Ch 146 and perform other duties as prescribed by the village board.
(3) EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE PERSONNEL. The village elects to adopt the provisions of Wis. Stats. §146.50 pertaining to EMS personnel, licensure, certification, and training. (a) Application for Membership. Applications for membership in EMS shall be filed with the EMS director.
(4) EMT CERTIFICATION. Prior to assuming duty as an Emergency Medical Technician (EMT), each applicant must be able to prove certification and licensing at a level recognized adequate by national standards and in accordance with the license requirements of the State of Wisconsin and the Fond du Lac County EMS contract with the village.
4.05 Emergency Government.
(1) EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT DIRECTOR. The emergency government director shall be appointed in accordance with section 1.03 of this code.
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT DIRECTOR. The emergency government director shall have the power prescribed to the director in Wis. Stat. §166.03(5).
(3) JOINT ACTION BETWEEN NORTH FOND DU LAC AND FOND DU LAC COUNTY IN TIMES OF EMERGENCY. (a) County Ordinance Adopted. The village accepts and ratifies Fond du Lac County’s “Joint Emergency Government Ordinance” as adopted on May 19, 1981, providing for an Emergency Management plan to cover joint county-municipal action in times of emergency.
(b) The village is hereby authorized to enter into a mutual aid agreement as provided by the “Joint Emergency Government Ordinance”.
(c) The County-Municipal Emergency Management Director employed by the Fond du Lac County Board as provided in the annexed ordinance is hereby appointed to serve in conjunction with the village president for the municipality of North Fond du Lac, subject to conditions and provisions as set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes and the “Joint Emergency Government Ordinance”.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Public Safety Department - 4
4.06 Equipment and Apparatus. No Police, Fire, EMS, or Emergency Management apparatus shall be used for any purpose except for emergency services.
(1) With the approval of the EMS Director/Fire Chief, such apparatus may be used for purposes other than emergencies.
(2) A written report of such uses shall be made annually, as required, to the village board.
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Chapter 5
LICENSES AND PERMITS
5.01 Procedures
5.02 Cigarette License
5.03 Hawkers, Peddlers, and Truckers
5.04 Transient Merchants
5.05 Pet Licenses
5.07 Bicycle Licenses
5.08 Regulation of Hotels and Motels
5.09 Sale of Non-Intoxicating Beverages (Soda Water)
5.10 Tavern Keepers Shall Require Proof of Age
5.11 Sale of Intoxicating Liquors and Fermented Malt Beverages
5.12 Operator's License
5.24 Other Permits Required
5.25 Penalty and Injunctions
5.01 Procedures. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, applications for all licenses or permits shall be made to the village clerk, who shall secure the signature of the village president, if necessary, to such license, seal it with the corporate seal, and attest it. If any such application is subject to the approval of the village board, the village clerk must submit the said application to the said board at its next meeting held after the application is so filed. It shall be the duty of the village clerk to keep a separate register for each class of license so granted wherein there shall be stated the nature of the license, the number of the license, and the class to which it belongs, the name of the person to whom issued and the date thereof. All such licenses so granted by the village shall be subject to the revocation of the same by action of the village board.
5.02 Cigarette License. The village elects to adopt the provisions of Wis. Stats. §134.65 as it relates to cigarette licensing. The fee for such license shall be set from time to time by resolution of the village board.
5.03 Hawkers, Peddlers, and Truckers. (1) Hawkers, Peddlers and Truckers shall comply with all ordinances established by Fond du Lac County pursuant to Wis. Stats. §59.55(3).
5.031 Mobile Vendors. No street vendor shall vend, sell or dispose of or offer to vend, sell or dispose of goods, wares or merchandise, produce or any other thing at any place whatsoever within the Village without first obtaining a license/permit as set forth herein. The Village Clerk or designee shall have concurrent authority with the Police Department to enforce the following restrictions on street vending. Any vending conducted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 2
the following:
(1) DEFINITIONS. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Street Vendor means any person who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, or services for sale from any mobile unit which is propelled by human power. Mobile food unit shall mean a pushcart or other device which is on wheels and of sufficiently lightweight construction that it can be moved from place to place by one (1) adult person without any auxiliary power. The device shall not be motorized so as to move on its own power.
(2) PERMITS FOR SELLING ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS. (1) SELLING
PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any item including foodstuffs by putting up a booth or stopping a vehicle or person on foot or in any other manner attempting to publicly sell or offer for sale any such articles or services upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or public square, unless such person shall have first applied for and obtained a mobile food vendor's permit. Such permit shall enable holders to conduct their business in all enumerated areas subject to the limitations of this section. However, a mobile food vendor must obtain and maintain the appropriate permit from the Fond du Lac County Health Department.
(3) EXEMPTIONS. The following shall be exempt from local provisions of this ordinance: Non-profits with scheduled events of not longer than three consecutive days in a Public Park or facility.
(4) APPLICATION. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 5.01, 5.03 and 5.04 of this code, the Village Board may issue licenses for sidewalk cart food vendors for the sale of specified food and beverage items from mobile pushcarts on the public sidewalks, which shall be operated and conducted in accordance with the following conditions:
A. Each applicant shall file an application with the Village Clerk or Designee on forms provided by the Village for each proposed sidewalk cart, and a separate application form for each person who will work at the cart. The Village Clerk or designee may require such information on the application as the Village Clerk or designee considers reasonable and necessary. The applications will be presented to the Village Board for approval after the applicable ordinance and regulation requirements have been met.
B. Each applicant shall pay an annual fee in an amount as stated in the Village Board fees and licenses schedule for each proposed sidewalk cart and one vendor person, and another fee for each additional employee or person.
C. The application shall state the nature of and the place where the business is to be carried on, a general description of the things intended to be sold, disposed of or contracted for, the name, date of birth and permanent address of all the employees to be covered by such license, the name and address of the person the applicant represents, and the place of residence of the applicant for the two (2) years previous. D. Applicants for a Mobile Food Vendor License shall indicate where they intend to locate any mobile unit to conduct their sales, with up to five locations on each application. At the time of filing the application, an application fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk or designee to cover the cost of investigation and license issuing costs.
E. The amount of the application fee(s) shall be on file in the office of the Village Clerk. The
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 3
application shall be sworn to by the applicant and filed with the Village Clerk, and shall contain such additional information as the Chief of Police shall require for the effective enforcement of this division and the safeguarding of the residents of the Village from fraud, misconduct or abuse. F. The Village Board may deny any application based on concerns with health, safety, appearance, traffic or pedestrian flow, parking, or if it deems that a denial is in the best interest of the public. Permits shall be issued by the Village Clerk and be conspicuously displayed at the place where such sales are being made.
(5) ISSUANCE AND TERM OF LICENSE/PERMIT; RESTRICTIONS ON USE; IDENTIFICATION CARD.
A. Licenses required under this division shall be issued to begin on April 1 and expiring on March 31. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the place where the business may be carried on, including the locations of mobile units used by Food Vendors, as well as the kind of goods to be sold, the dates of issuance and expiration of the license.
B. All licensees shall be issued a photo identification card by the Village Clerk at the time the license is issued. Any agent or employee of the licensee shall obtain a photo identification card for a fee. The amount of the fee for the lost license and photo identification card shall be on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
C. Identification cards for each additional employee or partner (in addition to the initial employee included with the license), after investigation, will be issued at any time, and will be prorated from date of issuance, and reissued annually for a fee.
D. No applicant to whom a license has been refused or who has had a license which has been revoked shall make further application until a period of at least six (6) months has elapsed since the last previous rejection or revocation, unless he or she can show that the reason for such rejection or revocation no longer exists.
E. Every license holder, while exercising his or her license, shall post the license and photo identification card of the person working at the time in a conspicuous place on the premises, and shall exhibit the license upon demand of any officer, customer or prospective vendee.
F. A license or I.D. shall not be assignable and any holder of such license who allows it to be used by any other person shall be in violation of this division.
G. Whenever a license or I.D. card is lost or destroyed, a duplicate in lieu thereof may be issued by the Village Clerk under the original application upon the filing with him or her by the license holder of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of the loss and what, if any, search has been made for the recovery of the license.
H. Any licensee under this division who wishes to change the up to five locations of the mobile unit on the license shall be allowed to request a change in locations once during a license year. This may be done only upon completion of an amended application indicating the new locations requested. The new locations must meet all the applicable restrictions herein.
I. Each licensee shall comply with all state and county codes and standards relating to the serving and selling of food or food products. A mobile food vendor must obtain and maintain the appropriate permit from the Fond du Lac County Health Department.
J. No item shall be offered for sale by the mobile food vendor other than food
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 4
and drink. No product of any kind may be sold in glass containers. No alcoholic
beverages may be sold by a mobile food vendor.
K. No licensee shall operate more than two (2) mobile units in the public right-of-way.
(6) APPEAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSE. If the investigating authority denies an application for a license under this division, the Village Clerk shall forthwith notify the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the denial and the reason therefore. The notice shall indicate the date and time of the review of the denial by the Village Board, and the right of the applicant to appear before the Committee of the Whole. The Committee of the Whole shall hear any person for or against granting the license and shall recommend to the Village Board whether to grant or deny the license or permit.
(7) FEES AND DURATION - Mobile Food Vendor permits shall be granted on an annual basis. The fee for an annual permit shall be set by resolution of the Village Board and paid to the Village prior to issuance of the permit. Such permit shall be issued on the first (1st) day of April each year, or thereafter when applied for, and shall expire on the thirty-first) day of March following its issuance.
(8) NON-TRANSFERABLE. Each sidewalk cart shall be separately licensed and such license shall not be transferable to another sidewalk cart.
(9) LICENSE INVESTIGATION. Upon receipt of an application for a license, or permit of an employee, the Chief of Police shall institute such investigation of the applicant as they deem necessary for the protection of the public good, and shall endorse their approval or disapproval upon the application within a reasonable time, not to exceed seven (7) working days, after it has been filed. The Village Clerk shall proceed to the Village Board for consideration of licenses in accordance with such findings. Should the investigations in this division include a recommendation for denial, the Clerk shall proceed under 5.031(5) of this section.
(10) SURRENDER OF LICENSE; ALTERATION OF LICENSE; FAILURE TO DISPLAY LICENSE. On the expiration of a license issued under this division, the holder shall surrender the license to the Chief of Police. No person shall alter or change in any manner any license issued under the provisions of this division, and such alteration or the failure of the holder of the license to display the license in a conspicuous place on the premises or his or her person or to exhibit the license upon demand of any officer or customer or prospective vendee shall be cause for revocation of such license.
(11) INSURANCE. To hold a valid permit, the vendor shall have in force adequate liability insurance for any single accident and for any property damage of not less than $1,000,000 to cover bodily injury and property damage claims arising out of the operation as a mobile food vendor. A certificate of insurance for such coverage shall be delivered to the Village Clerk or designee prior to issuance of a license. The Village of North Fond du Lac shall be named as an additional insured on the policy.
(12) NOISE, LIGHTS, ETC. No cart operator shall use noise-makers, other than bells, lights,
or music to attract customers. Such bells and music shall not be used after 9:00 p.m. on any day.
No person may make any loud unreasonable noise of any kind by vocalization or otherwise for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention to his or her wares.
(13) HOURS OF OPERATION. No cart shall operate before 8:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 5
any day.
(14) LOCATION OF, REQUIREMENTS OF, AND SPACE FOR CARTS.
(a) Storage of carts - No permitted mobile unit shall be left unattended on a sidewalk or amenity strip nor remain on the sidewalk or amenity strip between 11:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. No vending equipment or merchandise may be stored on any street, sidewalk or alley or public square when the vendor is not present. All vending equipment, including carts, tables, apparatus and merchandise shall be removed from the streets, sidewalks, terrace area or other vending location during times when vending is prohibited.
(b) Equipment –
1. Carts, trailers, wagons, or any device or vehicle from which food is sold
under this section must be professionally manufactured for the purpose of vending food. Such devices or trailers shall be transportable, in good repair and shall hold all required Department of Transportation licenses or permits.
2. Each sidewalk cart shall be non-motorized and capable of being moved and kept under control by one person.
3. The Village Board may grant a special license to a handicapped person to operate a sidewalk cart propelled by electric motor, provided that the applicant shall meet all other conditions for a license.
4. The length of the mobile unit shall not exceed eight (8) feet.
5. The height of the mobile unit, excluding canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures, shall not exceed six (6) feet.
6. The mobile unit shall be entirely self-contained in regards to gas, water and electricity.
(c) Siting and orientation -
1. All vending activities shall be conducted so as to maintain a sufficient width of unobstructed public pedestrian walkway adjacent to the vending site.
2. No vendor shall be permitted to use any of the amenities, such as benches, flower planters, trees, bus shelters, kiosks, light poles or any other utility poles for display of merchandise or to attach any ropes or other vending equipment to any of the aforementioned.
3. Vending equipment and displays, including signage, shall be directed away from the street. In addition, merchandise shall be displayed in a manner in which attention to it is not focused from the street and which does not require or encourage prospective buyers to enter or walk upon the street in order to examine it.
4. No cart shall operate in any street, alley, or boulevard.
5. A mobile food vendor permit shall be location specific. A vendor may not
operate at any location other than those specified in the permit, except for special events lasting no more than two days for which the vendor has been invited by the event sponsor.
6. No cart shall operate on any public sidewalk within 500 feet of any business selling the same type product.
7. A mobile food vendor in the public right-of-way shall not operate within 15 feet
of a hydrant, crosswalk, or bus stop.
8. A mobile food vendor in the public right-of-way shall not operate within ten (10) feet of the extension of any building entrance or doorway to the curb line.
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 6
9. A mobile food vendor in the public right-of-way shall not operate within the same block as any two (2) other street vendors.
10. The operating area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of sidewalk/amenity strip area, including the area of the mobile unit, the operator, and when externally located, a trash receptacle.
(15) PRESENCE IN PARKS AND PUBLIC AREAS - (a). Sidewalk carts may be allowed to operate within the publicly owned property of the Pool, Village Parks, and Ballfields. (b). Any vending activities within the Village’s public parks shall only be permitted on the public sidewalks along the outside perimeter of those parks and shall not include the park’s bicycle or walking paths.
(16) VENDOR MUST BE PRESENT -
(a).A vendor shall be present within the vending site at all times during which
items are displayed or sold.
(b). It is unlawful for any mobile food vendor to permit any other person to vend
at his/her site.
(17) Refuse and residue -
(a) All persons conducting business on a sidewalk or amenity strip must pick up any paper, cardboard, wood or plastic containers, wrappers, or any litter in any form that is deposited by any person on the sidewalk or street within twenty-five (25) feet of the place of conducting business. (b) Each person conducting business on a sidewalk or amenity strip under the provisions of this division shall carry a suitable container for placement of such litter by customers or other persons.
(c) Vendors shall maintain their sales location in a clean, hazard-free condition, and shall not discharge materials onto the sidewalk, gutters or storm drain. All liquid residue must be cleaned up, or in the alternative, protective matting may be placed on the amenity strip to absorb any liquid residue. Said matting must be removed when the vendor closes for the day.
(d) All sidewalk carts shall be equipped with at least one leak-proof container for the deposit of waste, garbage, litter, and refuse. All such containers shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids. When leaving the sales area, the licensee and his employee(s) shall be responsible for the removal of all litter resulting from his business or customer’s use of his business.
(e) A licensee shall keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition and the foodstuffs offered for sale well covered and protected from dirt, dust and insects. All food vendors shall comply with the requirements of state and local authorities, including, but not limited to, the provisions of this chapter.
(f) Each mobile food vendor shall maintain its vending areas in a clean and hazard-free condition. Each vendor shall provide a minimum of one waste receptacle and shall empty and clean it/them daily or more often as necessary. Waste that is removed by the vendor shall be disposed of legally and shall not be disposed of in Village receptacles. Waste receptacles shall be removed daily.
(g) Recycling of recyclables is required.
(18) CONDUCT OF BUSINESS GENERALLY – STREET VENDORS.
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 7
A Street Vendor holding a license under this division shall be subject to the following:
(a) A licensee shall not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or quality of any article offered for sale or offer for sale any unwholesome or tainted food or foodstuffs, nor intentionally misrepresent to any prospective customer the purpose of his or her solicitation, the name of the business of his or her principal, if any, the source of supply of the goods, wares or merchandise which he or she sells or offers for sale or the disposition of the proceeds or profits of his or her sales.
(b) A licensee shall not use the license provided by the Village after expiration or revocation of the license.
(19) PENALTIES - The penalty for violation of any provision in this section shall be a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 per day nor more than $200.00 per day for each violation, together with the cost of prosecution. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(20) REVOCATION - A mobile food vendor permit may be revoked at any time by the Village Board for cause, if any of the provisions of this section have been violated, or if the presence of the vendor constitutes a public nuisance.
5.04 Transient Merchants. Pursuant to the authority granted under Wis. Stats. §66.0423(2), the village elects the following: (1) REGISTRATION REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in sales within the village without being registered for that purpose as provided herein.
(2) Definitions. In this chapter: (a) Transient merchant means any individual who engages in the retail sale of merchandise at any place in this state temporarily, and who does not intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of such place. For purposes of this section, sale of merchandise includes a sale in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the merchandise constitutes the greatest part of value for the price received, but does not include a farm auction sale conducted by or for a resident farmer of personal property used on the farm, or the sale of produce or other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state.
(b) Permanent merchant means any person who, for at least one year (twelve months) prior to the consideration of the application of this code to said merchant has continuously: 1. operated an established place of business in the local trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale or
2. resided in the local trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale and now does business from his/her residence.
(c) Merchandise shall include personal property of any kind, and shall include merchandise, goods, or materials provided incidental to services offered or sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
(d) Charitable organization shall include any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be such.
(e) Clerk shall mean the village clerk.
(3) EXEMPTIONS. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this ordinance: (a)
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 8
Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products, or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes;
(b) Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such merchandise;
(c) Any person selling agricultural products which the person has grown;
(d) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders at the home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county and who delivers such merchandise in their regular course of business;
(e) Any person who has an established place of business where the merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested, a home visit by said person;
(f) Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer;
(g) Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of merchandise;
(h) Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law;
(i) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided that there is proof submitted to the clerk that such charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. §440.41. Any charitable organization engaging in the sale of merchandise and not registered under Wis. Stats. §440.41, or which is exempt from that statute’s registration requirements, shall be required to register under this ordinance;
(j) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom complaint has been made to the clerk that such person is a transient merchant; provided that there is proof submitted to the clerk that such person has leased for at least one year, or purchased, the premises from which he/she has conducted business in the market area for at least one year (twelve months) prior to the date the complaint was made;
(k) Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in Wis. Stats. §15.01(7)
(l) This ordinance does not apply to transient merchants while doing business at special events authorized by the village board.
(4) REGISTRATION (a) Applicants for registration must complete and return to the clerk a registration form furnished by the clerk which shall require the following information: 1. name, permanent address and telephone number, date of birth, and temporary address, if any;
2. age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
3. name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the transient merchant represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold;
4. temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any;
5. nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the merchandise, and any services offered;
6. proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable;
7. make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct of his/her business;
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 9
8. most recent cities, village, towns, not to exceed three, where applicant conducted his/her business.
9. place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving this village;
10. statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance
(b) Applicants shall present to the clerk for examination:
1. a driver’s license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required;
2. a state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures where applicant’s business requires use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities;
3. a state health officer’s certificate where applicant’s business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law; such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application license is made.
(c) At the time the registration is returned, a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the village board shall be paid to the clerk to cover the cost of processing said registration. 1. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing his/her agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally.
2. Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the clerk shall register the applicant as a transient merchant and date the entry. The registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in Sec. 5(b) below.
(5) INVESTIGATION. (a) Upon receipt of each application, the clerk may refer it immediately to the Chief of Police (chief) who may make and complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration.
(b) The clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that: 1. the application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement;
2. complaints of a material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in the most recent cities, villages, and towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business;
3. the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant’s fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of Sec. 4(b) above.
(6) APPEAL. Any person refused or denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the board, or if none has been adopted, under the provisions of chapter 23 of this code.
(7) REGULATION OF TRANSIENT MERCHANTS. (a) Prohibited Practices. 1. A transient merchant shall be prohibited from: calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words “No Peddlers”, “No Solicitors” or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked to
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 10
leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
2. A transient merchant shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity, or characteristics of any merchandise offered for sale, the purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the organization he/she represents. a. A charitable organization transient merchant shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of the merchandise being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting.
b. That portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the merchandise.
3. No transient merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
4. No transient merchant shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred foot radius of the source.
5. No transient merchant shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he/she is conducting business.
(b) Disclosure Requirements. 1. After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a transient merchant shall expressly disclose his/her name, the name of the company or organization he/she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of merchandise or services he/she offers to sell.
2. If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant, or any offer for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stats. §423.203; the seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stats. §423.203 (1)(a)(b) and (c), (2) and (3).
3. If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery of merchandise, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in advance whether full or partial, the phone number of the seller, the delivery or performance date, and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
(8) RECORDS. The chief shall report to the clerk all convictions for violations of this ordinance and the clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted.
(9) REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
(a) Registration may be revoked by the village board after notice and hearing, if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statements in the application for registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in transient sales, violated any provision of this code or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant’s fitness to engage in selling.
(b) Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally or pursuant to 4(c) above on the
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 11
registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing; such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
5.05 Pet Licenses.
(1) DOG LICENSE TAX. Every person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog in the village shall obtain a license according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §174.05. The license fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the board.
(2) CAT LICENSE TAX. Every person who owns, harbors or keeps a cat in the village, which cat is more than six months old on January 1st, of any year, shall obtain a license within 30 days of acquisition of the cat. The license fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the board. A $5.00 late payment shall be assessed to owners who fail to license their cat prior to April 1 or within 30 days of acquiring ownership. Proof of vaccination against rabies for each cat is necessary for any cat four months of age or older.
(3) Dogs and cats must wear identification tags at all times when off the premises of the owner, except under any organized show or training situation.
(4) EXCEPTION. (a) No license or permit shall be required of any humane society or municipal animal control facility.
(b) Licenses are required, but fees shall not be charged for seeing eye dogs or governmental police dogs.
(5) Application.
(a) Application for licenses shall be made to the clerk and shall include name and address of applicant, description of the animal, the appropriate fee, information whether the animal is sexed, spayed, or neutered, and a rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian or anti-rabies clinic, illustrating that the animal for which the license is sought has received current immunization for rabies. Written proof is required from a licensed veterinarian that the animal being licensed has been neutered.
(b) Application for a license must be made within thirty days after obtaining a dog or cat over six months, except that this requirement will not apply to a non-resident keeping a dog or cat within the village for no longer than thirty days.
(6) Licenses are issued for the calendar year. Any renewal license issued after April 1 of each year shall pay an additional fee according to Wis. Stats. §174.05(5) or as set from time to time by resolution of the board. No pro-ration of fees shall be considered.
(7) DUPLICATE. A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a replacement fee, which shall be set from time to time by resolution of the board.
(8) CENSUS. The village may, at its option, and at such intervals, utilizing appropriate notice to the public, employ suitable persons upon such terms and conditions as it may see fit, to make a house-to-house census and to issue licenses to owners then and there or a citation according to chapter 24 of this code. The village shall impose an additional fee for each license issued in the course of such census. The license fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the board.
(9) RELEASE FROM IMPOUNDMENT. Any dog or cat which has been impounded as a result of being lost or at large, shall not be released to its owner until the owner can show proof of a current license. In the event that the animal is not licensed, the animal shall not be released until
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 12
the owner has obtained a current license for the animal.
(10) LICENSE TAGS. The clerk, upon issuing a permit or license to keep any dog or cat, shall issue to the owner a durable tag, stamped with an identifying number. Tags should be so designed that they may be conveniently fastened to the animal's collar or harness. These tags should vary in shape or color from year to year for easy identification to animal control personnel. (a) Dogs and cats must wear the license tags at all times when off the premises of the owners, except under any organized show or training situation.
(b) The clerk shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers and shall make this record available to the public.
(11) Number of Licensable Pets. No more than 3 licensable pets, 2 dogs 1 cat, 2 cats 1 dog, shall be kept on any premises without the approval of the Village Board. Owners having more than three (3) pets at the time of Code adoption may continue to keep such animals: however, animals exceeding the prescribed limits shall not be replaced.
5.07 Bicycle License. Every person who owns or keeps a bicycle in the village shall obtain a license pursuant to Wis. Stats. §349.18(2).
(1) The license will be a lifetime license and may be purchased for a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the board. A lost license fee and transfer fee shall also be as set from time to time by resolution of the village board.
(2) Licenses shall be required, but the fee waived for all police department bicycles.
5.08 Regulation of Hotels and Motels. (1) ROOM TAX. (a) Definitions:
1."Hotel" or "motel" has the meaning defined in Wis. Stats. §77.52(2)(a)1.
2. "Gross receipts" has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. §77.51(11)(a)(b) and (c) insofar as applicable.
3. "Transient" has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. §77.52(2)(a)1.
(b) Imposition of Room Tax: 1. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0615, a tax is hereby imposed on hotels and motels in the village. Such tax shall be at the rate of 7% of the gross receipts from the retail furnishing of rooms or lodging.
2. The board shall annually review and appoint an authority to conduct tourism promotion in the village.
(c) The village treasurer shall administer this section.
1. A return shall be filed with the village treasurer, by those furnishing at retail such rooms and lodging on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable.
2. Such return shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishings of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period, and such other information as the village deems necessary.
3. Every person required to file a quarterly return shall, with his or her first return, file an annual calendar year return.
4. Annual returns shall be filed within 30 days of the close of each such calendar year.
5. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain any additional information that the village requires.
6. Annual returns shall be made on forms prescribed by the treasurer.
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 13
7. The person required to file a return shall sign all returns or his duly authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath.
8. The treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer than one month from the filing date.
(d) Any person aggrieved by this section may petition the village board for a determination on the grievance. The village president shall appoint three disinterested persons to review and decide said grievance.
(e) If any person liable for any amount of tax under this section sells out his business or stock of goods or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the village treasurer that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person subject to the tax imposed by this section fails to withhold such amount of tax from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the price of the accommodations valued in money.
(f) The treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the village or the refund due to any person under this section. This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any other information within the village treasurer's possession. One or more such office audit determinations may be made of the amount due for any one period or for more than one period.
(g) The village treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the village or the refund due to any person under this section. The determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or upon any other information within the village treasurer's possession. The village treasurer is authorized to examine and inspect the state sales tax records and memoranda of any person in order to verify the tax liability of that person or of another person.
(h) If any person fails to file a return as required by this section, the village treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts under subsection 2. The estimate shall be made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based upon the state sales tax records and memoranda as stated herein. On the basis of this estimate the village treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the village, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 10% thereof. One or more such determinations may be made for one or more than one period.
(i) All unpaid taxes under this section shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited with the village treasurer. All refunded taxes shall bear interest at 10% per annum from the due date of the return until the first day of the month following the month in which said taxes are refunded. An extension of time within which to file a return shall not operate to extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest computation. If the village treasurer determines that any over payment of tax has been made intentionally or by reason of carelessness or neglect, or if the tax which was overpaid was not accompanied by a complete return, it shall not allow any interest thereon.
(j) Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a $10.00 late filing fee. The tax imposed by this
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 14
section shall become delinquent if not paid: 1. In the case of a timely filed return, within 30 days after the due date of the return, or within 30 days after the expiration of an extension period if one has been granted.
2. In the case of no return filed or a return filed late, by the due date of the return.
(k) Every person liable for the tax imposed by this section shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers for three years in such form as the village treasurer required.
(l) All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to such returns, on file with the village treasurer are deemed to be confidential, except for persons using the information in the discharge of duties imposed by law or of the duties of their office or by court order. Wis. Stats. §66.0615(3).
(m) No person having any administrative duty under this section shall make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is imposed by this section, or the amount of source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person, except as provided in section l. above.
(n) Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this section who fails or refuses to permit the inspection of his state sales tax records by the treasurer after such inspection has been duly requested by the treasurer, or who fails to file a return as provided in this section, or who violates any other provision of this section, shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $100.00. Each day, or portion thereof, that such violation continues is hereby deemed to constitute a separate offense.
5.09 Sale of Non-intoxicating and Soda Water Beverages. Non-intoxicating and soda water beverages shall be issued according to Wis. Stats. §66.0433 with a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the village board.
5.10 Tavern Keepers Shall Require Proof of Age. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §125.07(1), no person may sell, dispense or give alcoholic beverages without requiring proof of age.
5.11 Sale of Intoxicating Liquors and Fermented Malt Beverages
(1) STATE STATUTES ADOPTED. The provisions of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any future amendment, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of alcohol beverage control. (2) DEFINITIONS.
(a) All definitions used in this section shall have the meaning given them by Chapter 125, Wisconsin Statutes.
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 15
(b) Municipality: The Village of North Fond du Lac.
(3) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall vend, sell, deal or traffic in or have in his possession with intent to vend, sell, deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in any quantity whatever, or cause the same to be done, without having procured a license as provided in Wis. Stats. §125.25.
(4) QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS AND PREMISES. Qualifications of applicants shall be as specified in Wis. Stats. §125.04(5).
(5) CORPORATE RESTRICTIONS. Corporate restrictions shall be those specified in Wis. Stats. §125.04(6).
(6) SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF SALE. A separate license shall be required pursuant to Wis. Stats. §125.04(9).
(7) INVESTIGATION. The village clerk shall notify the chief of police, building inspector and fire chief of each new application, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the premises, together with such other investigation as shall be necessary to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing sanitation in restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license. These officials shall furnish to the village clerk in writing the information derived from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused. No license shall be renewed without a re-inspection of the premises and report as originally required.
(8) APPROVAL OF APPLICATION. (a) In determining the suitability of an applicant, consideration shall be given to the moral character and financial responsibility of the applicant, the appropriateness of the location and premises proposed and generally the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed.
(b) No license shall be granted for operation on any premises or with any equipment for which taxes, assessments, forfeitures or other financial claims of the village are delinquent and unpaid.
(c) No license shall be issued unless the premises conforms to the sanitary, safety and health requirements listed on the liquor license inspection checklist as adopted from time to time by resolution of the village board and the regulations of the state board of health applicable to restaurants. The premises must be properly lighted and ventilated, must be equipped with separate sanitary toilet and lavatory facilities, equipped with running water for each sex and must conform to all codes of the village.
(9) GRANTING OF LICENSE. (a) The board shall have the power to refuse to grant any license provided for in this section and, in addition thereto, shall have power to cause any reasonable investigation of the applicant for such license or inspection of the premises from which any such fermented malt beverages are sold to be made.
(b) Opportunity shall be given by the governing body to any person to be heard for or against the granting of any license. Upon the approval of the applicant by the board, the clerk shall issue to the applicant a license, upon payment by the applicant of the license fee to the village.
(c) All licenses shall be granted for a maximum period of one (1) year and shall expire on the
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 16
30th day of June.
(10) TRANSFER OF LICENSE. The procedure for transfer of license shall be the provisions of Wis. Stats. §125.04(12).
(11) LAPSE OF LICENSE. A license holder who closes their business and does not reopen in another location within 60 days shall forfeit the license to the clerk. The board may re-issue the license to another applicant.
(12) NUMBERING OF LICENSE. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee. The clerk shall affix to the license his/her affidavit as provided by Wis. Stats. §125.04(4).
(13) POSTING LICENSES; DEFACEMENT.
(a) All licenses shall be posted as provided in Wis. Stats. §125.04(10).
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to post such license or to be permitted to post it upon premises other than those mentioned in the application or knowingly to deface or destroy such license.
(14) CONDITIONS OF LICENSE. All retail intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverage licenses granted hereunder shall be granted subject to the following conditions, all other conditions of this section, and subject to all other codes and regulations of the village applicable thereto.
(a) Consent to Entry. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the removal from said premises of all things and articles there had in violation of village codes or state laws, and consents to the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses.
(b) Health and Sanitation Regulations. The rules and regulations of the state board of health governing sanitation in restaurants shall apply to all "Class B" liquor licenses issued under this Section. No "Class B" license shall be issued unless the premises to be licensed conform to such rules and regulations.
(c) Restrictions near Schools and Churches. No retail "Class A" or "Class B" license shall be issued for premises, the main entrance of which is less than three hundred (300) feet from the main entrance of any established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. The shortest route along the highway from the closest point of the maintenance entrance of such school, church or hospital to the main entrance shall measure such distance to such premises. This subsection shall not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of real property within three hundred (300) feet thereof by any school building, hospital building or church building.
(d) Clubs. No club shall sell or give away any intoxicating liquors except to bona fide members and guests invited by members.
(e) Gambling Prohibited. The provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 945, relating to gambling, commercial gambling, possession of gambling devices, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth.
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 17
(f) Credit Prohibited. No intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage licensee shall sell or offer for sale any alcohol beverage to any person or persons by extending credit, except hotel credit extended to a resident guest or a club to a bona fide member. It shall be unlawful for such licensee or permittee to sell alcohol beverages to any person on a passbook or store order or to receive from any person any goods, ware, merchandise or other articles in exchange for alcohol beverages.
(15) CLOSING HOURS. Closing hours shall be established in conformance with Wis. Stats. §125.32(3) and further restricted as follows:
(a) No premises for which a "Class B" license or permit is issued may remain open between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m., except as provided in this paragraph.
(b) On Saturday and Sunday, the closing hours shall be between 2:30 a.m. and 6 a.m.
(c) On January 1each year, premises operating under a "Class B" license or permit are not required to close.
(d) Between 12 midnight and 8 a.m., no person may sell fermented malt beverages on licensed premises in an original unopened package, container or bottle or for consumption away from the premises.
(e) "Class A" premises may remain open for the conduct of their regular business and may not sell any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(f) Hotels and restaurants the principal business of which is the furnishing of food and lodging to patrons, bowling alleys, indoor horseshoe-pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf clubhouses may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but may not sell fermented malt beverages during the hours specified in par. (a).
(g) No premises for which a wholesale license has been issued shall be permitted to remain open for the sale of or sell fermented malt beverages between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. except on Saturday when the closing hour shall be 9:00 p.m.
(h) The licensee or permittee and one (1) employee shall be permitted to check out receipts, check the licensed premises for security and do minor cleaning up during closed hours. Under no circumstances shall the consumption of alcohol beverages be permitted after closing hours. Commercial janitorial service personnel shall be allowed to enter the licensed premises for the purpose of cleaning during closed hours. The premises shall be well lit during cleanup. Prior approval must be requested and granted by the village board or its designee for any variance of the above exigent circumstances.
(i) Closing hours may be modified for specific events by a majority vote of the village board.
(16) RESTRICTIONS ON SPECIAL CLASS "B" FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGE SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE. Special Class “B” licenses shall be issued in accordance with Wis. Stats. §125.26(6) with the following restrictions:
(b) Posting of Signs and Licenses. All organizations issued a special Class "B" license shall post in a conspicuous location at the main point of sale and at all remote points of sale a sufficient number of signs stating that no fermented malt beverage shall be served to any under-age person without proper identification.
(c) Fencing. If necessary for proper control, all organizations shall install a fence around the
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 18
main point of sale to control ingress and egress and shall continually station a licensed operator or security guard at the entrance for the purpose of checking age identification. There shall be only one (1) point of ingress and egress.
(d) Underage Persons Prohibited. No underage persons as defined by the Wisconsin Statutes shall be allowed to assist in the sale of fermented malt beverage at any point of sale, nor shall they be allowed to loiter or linger in the area of any point of sale.
(e) Permitted Cups Only. Intoxicants will be sold only in foam or plastic cups.
(f) Additional Requirements. In addition, requesting organizations shall comply with the following requirements: 1. When the event sponsored by the requesting organization is to take place on village park property, the organization shall work closely with village officials in locating, setting up and identifying the size of the fenced area, if one is required. Such information shall be made part of the special Class "B" permit application.
2. When the event sponsored by the requesting organization is to take place on village owned property other than park property and/or privately owned property, the organization shall work closely with the police department in locating and setting up the fenced area. The chief of police shall work closely with the requesting organization to identify the appropriate size of the fenced-in area and the exact location. Such information shall be made part of the special Class "B" permit application. For indoor events, the structure used must have suitable exits and open spaces to accommodate the anticipated attendance. It shall contain adequate sanitary facilities to accommodate the size of the group.
(g) Insurance. The applicant for a special Class "B" fermented malt beverage license may be required to indemnify, defend and hold the village and its employees and agents harmless against all claims, death of any person or any damage to property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the permit, the applicant may be required to furnish a Certificate of Comprehensive General Liability insurance with the village. The applicant may also be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted the permit.
(17) BEER GARDEN LICENSES REQUIRED FOR OUTDOOR CONSUMPTION AT CLASS "B" PREMISES. (a) Required For Outdoor Consumption. Except as otherwise specified and authorized in a valid Alcohol Beverage License, no licensee shall permit the consumption of alcohol beverages on any part of the licensed premises not enclosed within the building, except under permit granted by the village board. The permits are a privilege in which no rights vest and, therefore, may be revoked by the village board at its pleasure at any time or shall otherwise expire on June 30 of each year. No person shall consume or have in his or her possession alcohol beverages on any unenclosed part of a licensed premises which is not described in a valid Beer Garden permit.
(b) Limitations on Issuance of Beer Garden Permits. No permit shall be issued for a Beer Garden if any part of the Beer Garden is within one hundred (100) feet of a structure used for residential purposes, except residential uses located in the same structure as the licensed premises. No permit shall be issued for a Beer Garden if the Beer Garden area is greater than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the adjoining licensed premises. Each applicant for a Beer Garden permit shall accurately describe the area intended for use as a Beer Garden and
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 19
shall indicate the nature of fencing or other measures intended to provide control over the operation of the Beer Garden. Every Beer Garden shall be completely enclosed with a fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height. No amplified sound or music is permitted outside the enclosed (building) premises. Amplified sound or music is not permitted in the Beer Garden. There shall be a licensed operator with the Beer Garden at all times the Beer Garden is in operation.
(c) Adjoining Property Owners to Be Notified of Pendency of Applications. All property owners within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the proposed beer garden shall be notified of the pendency of application for a Beer Garden permit by first class mail.
(d) State Statutes Enforced Within Beer Garden. Every permittee under this Section shall comply with and enforce all provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., applicable to Class "B" licensed premises, except insofar as such provisions are clearly implacable. Violation of the provisions of Chapter 125, Wis. Stats., shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the Beer Garden permit by the village board.
(18) REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES. (a) Procedure. Whenever the holder of any license under this section violates any portion of this section or Wis. Stats. Chapter 125, proceedings for the revocation of such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure established by this section.
(b) Abandonment of Premises. Any licensee holding a license to sell alcohol beverages who abandons such business shall forfeit any right or preference he may have to the holding of or renewal of such license. Abandonment shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of any alcohol beverage license. Losing a licensed premises for at least six (6) months shall be prima facie evidence of the abandonment, unless this period is extended by the village board. All persons issued a license to sell alcohol beverages in the village for which a quota exists limiting the number of such licenses that may be issued by the village shall cause such business described in such license to be operated on the premises described in such license for at least one hundred (100) days during the terms of such license, unless such license is issued for a term of less than one hundred eighty (180) days, in which event this Subsection shall not apply.
(c) License Revocation or Suspension. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §125.12(2) shall apply in regard to revocation or suspension.
(19) NON-RENEWAL OF LICENSE. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §125.12(3) shall apply in regard to non-renewal.
(20) OTHER PROVISIONS. Any license issued pursuant to this Section shall be subject to such further regulations and the board may impose restrictions as by amendment to this section or by the enactment of new ordinances. If any licensee shall fail or neglect to meet the requirements imposed by such new restrictions and regulations his license may be revoked in accordance with this section. In case of revocation of any license or any violation of any provision of this section in accordance with this section or by the court or for any reasonable cause except the imposition of new restrictions, no refund shall be made of any part of the license fee.
(21) POINT VALUES FOR ALCOHOL BEVERAGE VIOLATIONS, REVOCATIONS AND SUSPENSIONS. The purpose of this subsection is to establish an alcohol beverage demerit point system to assist in determining which license holders should be subject to suspension or revocation procedures.
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 20
(a) Point Schedule. The scale of demerit points is listed according to the type of alcohol beverage violation. This demerit point system is used to identify habitually troublesome license holders who have repeatedly violated state statutes and village codes for the purpose of recommending suspension or revocation of their alcohol beverage licenses.
Type of Violation Point Value
1. Violation of Controlled Substance Laws
200
2. Participating in or permitting Sexual Activity on Premises 150
3. Sale of Alcohol Beverages without License or Permit 150
4. Sale of Alcohol Beverages to Underage Persons 100
5. Sale of Alcohol Beverages to Intoxicated Person 100
6. Underage Person on Premises 100
7. Intoxicated Employee 100
8. After Hours Consumption 100
9. Refusal to Allow Police to Search Premises or Refusal to Cooperate with Lawful Police Investigation 100
10. Licensee, Agent or Licensed Operator Not on Premises at all Times 100
11. Persons on Premises after Closing
Hours 100
12. Violation of Carry-out Hour 100
13. Licensee Permitting Person to Leave
Licensed Premises With Open Alcohol Beverage 100
14. Disorderly Conduct/Loud Noise on Premises 100
15. All Other Violations of this Section 100
(c) Violations, How Calculated. In determining the accumulated demerit points against a licensee within twelve (12) months, the village shall use the date each violation was committed as the basis for the determination.
(d) It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to bring licenses with 200 or more points, according to the guidelines listed above, to the attention of the village board.
(e) Suspension or Revocation of License. 1. A Special Committee of the Village Board shall be appointed according to Wis. Stat. §125.12 and call before it for purposes of a revocation or suspension hearing all licensees who have accumulated two hundred (200) points in a twelve (12) month period as a result of court-imposed convictions or who have had referred to it reports from the village attorney which, if believed, would result in two hundred (200) demerit points in twelve (12) months.
2. If the demerit point accumulation, calculated from the date of violation exceeds two hundred (200) points in a twelve (12) month period, two hundred fifty (250) points in a twenty-four (24) month period or three hundred (300) points in a thirty-six (36) month period, the suspension shall be for not less than ten (10) days nor more than ninety (90) days. If the license(s) is revoked, no other license shall be granted to such licensee or for such premises for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of revocation.
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 21
3. The procedure to be used for suspension or revocation shall be that found in subsection 18 (c) above.
5.12 OPERATOR'S LICENSE.
(1) ISSUANCE. Operator’s licenses shall be issued in accordance with Wis. Stats. §125.17.
(2) DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each license issued under the provisions of this section shall be posted on the premises or in the operator's possession whenever the operator dispenses beverages.
(3) REVOCATION OF OPERATOR'S LICENSE. Violation of any of the terms or provisions of the state laws or of this section relating to operator's licenses by any person holding such operator's license shall be cause for revocation of the license.
(4) SPECIAL EVENTS LICENSE.
(a) There shall be on the premises of all special events held in the village for which a Class “B” or “Class B” license has been issued, an operator licensed by the village. Requirements for the receipt of a temporary operator’s license shall be those established by Wis. Stats. §125.74(4) and other provisions of §125.17 as they apply.
(b) The village clerk, upon completion of a criminal background check, shall grant licenses.
(c) The fee for this license shall be set from time to time by resolution of the village board.
5.24 Other Permits Required. In addition to the permits specified in this chapter, other permits may be required by this code. They include but are not limited to:
(1) Chapter 8 - various building permits
(2) 8.15 Building Mover’s License
(3) 8.14 Demolition Permit
(4) 8.20(8) Private Well Permit
(5) 10.03 Sidewalk Layer’s License
(6) 10.04 Driveway Installation Permit
(7) 10.05 Street and Terrace Openings
(8) 10.10 Waste Hauler’s License
(9) 11.03 Permit to connect to sewer mains
(10) 12.03 Water Service Installation
(11) 14.01 Burning Permit
(12) 14.17(3) Bow and Arrow Practice Range
(13) 15.16 Permit to operate a Sexually Oriented Businesses.
(14) 16.12 Bicycle Licenses
(15) 19.04 Stormwater Management Permit
(16) 20.08 Erosion Control Permit
5.25 Penalty and Injunctions.
(a) In addition to penalties provided by Wisconsin State Statutes or other provisions of this code, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or regulations made hereunder,
Village of North Fond du Lac July 1, 2002
Licenses and Permits - 22
shall be subject to the maximum penalty prescribed by statute and/or by section 24.05 of this code.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Chapter 6
FRANCHISES
6.01 Public Utility Section of Wisconsin Statutes Adopted
6.02 Permits Required
6.03 Procedure
6.04 Poles and Wire Supporting Apparatus
6.05 Existing Franchises
6.06 Cable Television
6.25 Penalty
6.01 Public Utility Section of Wisconsin Statutes Adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §196.54 and §196.58 so far as applicable, are hereby adopted by reference thereto.
6.02 Permits Required. No person shall operate, manage or control any plant, or equipment or part of any such production, transmission, delivery or furnishing of heat, light, water or power, either directly or indirectly to or for the public until such person or corporation shall have first obtained permission therefor from the village board and shall receive from the State of Wisconsin all necessary certificates or permits to engage in said business.
6.03 Procedure. Any person or corporation applying for a permit as required by section 6.02 of this chapter shall present a petition therefor to the board and if the same shall be approved by a majority vote of the board, then a permit shall be granted by the village in the form of an ordinance, which shall determine the quality and character of each kind of product or service to be furnished or rendered by any public utility, and all of the terms and conditions upon which such public utility may be permitted to occupy the streets, highways or other public places within the municipality and shall contain such other provisions as shall be deemed necessary by the board.
6.04 Poles and Wire Supporting Apparatus.
(1) No poles or other apparatus for the support of wires for telephone or telegraph purposes, shall hereafter be placed or erected upon any public street or highway in the village.
(2) No poles or apparatus for the support of wires for telephone or telegraph purposes shall hereafter be placed or erected in any of the lanes, alleys or public grounds of said village, unless the person or corporation so desirous of placing or erecting the same shall make application therefor, by petition in writing to the village board designating in such petition the particular place or places where such poles or apparatus are to be placed or erected and the general course in which said wires thereon shall run, nor until such request made in said petition shall, by resolution, be duly granted by said board.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 2
(3) Any excavation or displacing of any part of the sidewalk, lanes, alleys or streets, for the purpose of laying any conduit or for the purpose by any such person or corporation shall be done only upon permission being first received from the board as provided by Sec. 10.04 of this code.
6.05 Existing Franchises. Except as provided in section 6.01 of this code and in Wis. Stats. §196.58 of the 1977 Wisconsin Statutes, nothing contained in this chapter shall affect in any way and right theretofore granted to any public service corporation, for the distribution of gas, elec-tricity or water, within the corporate limits of said village, except that all renewals or extensions of said franchises shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
6.06 Cable Television
(1) SHORT TITLE. This section shall be known as the "Village of North Fond du Lac Cable Communications Code.
(2) PURPOSES. The purpose of this code is to:
(a) Protect the public health, safety and welfare:
(b) Provide for the granting of one or more franchises to permit the use of village streets and other public ways for cable communication systems;
(c) Provide for the regulation by the village of the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing, repair and use of such systems in, upon, along, across, above, over and under or in any manner connected with the streets or other public ways within the Village, as it now or in the future may exist;
(d) Provide for the payment of fees and other valuable considerations to the village for the use of village streets and other public ways by such systems as well as to compensate the village for costs associated with such use;
(e) Provide for the development of cable communication systems as a means to improve communications between and among, and to otherwise serve the present and future needs of, the citizens, government and private and public institutions, organizations and enterprises of the village and surrounding communities; and
(f) Provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violations of this code and any franchise agreements executed pursuant to this code.
(3) CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
(a) This section is adopted pursuant to the authority of the village under the constitutions and statutes of the State of Wisconsin and the United States of America, including but not limited to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. 521 ff.) and Wis. Stat. §66.0419. Where any provision of this section conflicts with any provision of state or federal law, this section shall control to the full extent permitted by law.
(b) In the case of an express conflict or any ambiguity between a provision in this section and either a provision in a franchise agreement executed pursuant to this section or a provision in a franchise proposal that is incorporated by reference into such franchise agreement, this section shall control.
(4) DEFINITIONS.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 3
(a) When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number.
(b) For the purposes of this section the following terms, phrases and words and their derivations have the meanings given herein, unless it is clearly stated that another meaning is intended. 1. VILLAGE. The Village of North Fond du Lac, County of Fond du Lac, State of Wisconsin, in its present incorporated form or in any later recognized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.
2. CABLE SYSTEM. Coaxial cables, wave guides or other conductors and equipment for transmitting video, audio and data services by cable or through its facilities as herein contemplated, and including closed-circuit special event programs and educational television.
3. CONTROL or CONTROLLING INTEREST. Actual working control or ownership of the cable system in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttal presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, group of persons acting in concert (except underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the public) or entity of 49 percent or more of the North Fond du Lac cable system or the franchise under which the system is operated. A change in the control or controlling interest of a parent of a grantee shall constitute a change in the control or controlling interest of the North Fond du Lac cable system under the same criteria. Control or controlling interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person, group of persons or entities.
4. BOARD. The present village board or any future body constituting the legislative body of the village.
5. FRANCHISE. An authorization issued by the village to construct and operate a cable system.
6. GRANTEE. Any entity including a corporation, joint venture, association, partnership or individual to whom or which a franchise under this code is granted or lawfully transferred.
7. GROSS REVENUES. Any revenue derived directly or indirectly by a grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents and any persons or entities in which a grantee has a financial interest of five percent or more, from or in connection with the operation of a village cable system including, but not limited to, basic subscriber service fees, pay channel service fees, installation and reconnection fees, leased channel fees, converter and remote control rentals, enhanced telecommunication services, studio rentals and production equipment rentals. The term does not include any taxes on services provided by a grantee and imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, village or other governmental unit and collected by a grantee on behalf of said unit.
8. STREET or PUBLIC WAY. The surface of and space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the village. A franchise granted under this code shall be deemed to confer only such rights to use property in the village as the village may have the right and power to grant in such agreements.
9. SUBSCRIBER. Any person or entity lawfully receiving for any purpose the cable system
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 4
services of a grantee herein.
(c) Any word, phrase or term defined in Section 522 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 but not defined in this section shall have the meaning set forth in Section 522 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.
(5) FRANCHISE TERRITORY. A franchise granted under this section is for the present territorial limits of the village, unless otherwise granted by the board. Any area henceforth added to the village during the term of the franchise shall become part of the franchise territory. For any area within the franchise territory not served under the franchise, service under the franchise must be offered within one year, weather permitting, when household density reaches the equivalent of 20 households per mile from existing cable plant.
(6) GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
(a) This code allows the village to grant a franchise to install, maintain and operate a cable system for a term of up to 15 years, provided that the grantee conforms to the conditions, limitations and requirements of this section. No portion of a franchise or any right granted thereunder may be separated or transferred, except as provided in subsection nine (9).
(b) The board will use its discretion and judgment to determine if the granting of one or more franchises under this section will serve the public's needs and protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
(c) No provision of this section shall be deemed or construed to require the board to grant a franchise.
(d) A franchise granted under this section shall not take the place of any other license or permit legally required of a grantee, unless expressly provided in a franchise agreement made pursuant to this section.
(e) On or about the fifth and tenth anniversaries of the effective date of a franchise granted under this code, the village may schedule a public meeting or meetings with the grantee to review the franchise performance, plans and prospects. The village may require the grantee to make available specified information to determine if the grantee is supplying a level and variety of services equivalent to those being generally offered in comparable markets.
(7) DESCRIPTION OF A SYSTEM.
(a) The minimum capacity for a cable system in the village shall be 50 channels.
(b) A grantee shall, as part of the acceptance of a franchise, provide the village with a written description of the cable system within the village, including technical characteristics, channel capacity, channel carriage and a strand map. The grantee shall provide the village with an updated description as substantial changes in the system are made.
(8) FRANCHISE ACCEPTANCE. To accept a franchise granted under this section a grantee must file any required bonds, funds and proof of insurance, as well as written notice of acceptance with the clerk within 45 days of the offer of the franchise being made by the board.
(b) Such written notice shall include a certification that the grantee: 1. Will comply with this section, any franchise agreements made pursuant to this section, and all applicable city, county, state and federal regulations in regard to the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system;
2. Accepts the franchise relying on its own investigation and understanding of the power and
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 5
authority of the village to grant the franchise and the terms and conditions thereof;
3. Acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or by other statement, whether written or verbal, by or on behalf of the village or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise or code not expressed herein;
4. Shall have no recourse whatsoever against the village for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of a franchise or the enforcement thereof, or for the failure of the village to have authority to grant any or all parts of the franchise;
5. Agrees that, in the event of any ambiguity in an ordinance, franchise or franchise agreement or any dispute over the meaning of any terms or conditions thereof, the same shall be construed against the grantee and in favor of the village; and
6. Will not at any time set up against the village in a claim for proceeding any condition or term of the franchise or code as unreasonable, arbitrary or void, or that the village had no power or authority to make any such term or condition, but shall accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise and code in their entirety.
(c) Grantees of a franchise granted or transferred under this section shall, at the time of acceptance of the franchise, provide an initial payment to the village in the amount of the village's cost of granting or, in the case of a transfer, transferring the franchise. The amount of such payment shall be considered as reimbursement for administrative costs incurred before the granting or transferring of the franchise, and shall not be considered a part of the franchise fee.
(9) TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
(a) Forty-nine percent (49%) or more of the ownership of a franchise granted hereunder, or control or controlling interest of it, shall not be sold, assigned or transferred in any manner, nor shall the title, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest relating to a franchise or system, pass to or vest in any person or entity without the written permission of the board, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The grantee shall provide written notification to the village before transferring ownership of at least 10% but less than 49% of a franchise. This section shall not apply to the granting of a security or mortgage interest in the grantee's assets by the grantee to a financing institution for the purpose of financing either the construction, maintenance or operation of the cable system. This section shall also not apply to the grantee's transfer or assignment of its rights and obligations to any subsidiary or to any partnership of which the grantee is the controlling managing partner.
(b) A grantee wishing to transfer control of or a controlling interest in a village cable franchise or system shall make a written request to the board for such approval.
(c) Upon receipt of any request contemplated in subsection (a) of this subsection, the village may require the grantee or any other party involved in the transfer to provide such information as is necessary to evaluate the transfer.
(d) The village may approve the transfer, deny the transfer with cause, or conditionally approve the transfer, provided that the village shall not unreasonably refuse to approve the transfer upon unreasonable conditions. The conditions the village may attach to the transfer approval may include, but are not limited to: reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in evaluating the transfer request; remedy of any existing or historical
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 6
violations of village codes or the franchise agreement; payment of all fees and penalties owed by the grantee at the time of transfer approval; and a guarantee by the prospective new grantee to abide by any and all codes, agreements and conditions placed upon the franchise and system by the village and existing grantee, unless mutually removed by the village and grantee.
(e) When the village approves a transfer under this section, the new grantee shall indicate acceptance of the franchise as specified in subsection 8, including the filing of all necessary bonds, funds, proofs of insurance and certifications.
(10) FRANCHISE TERM AND RENEWAL.
(a) A franchise granted pursuant to this section shall be effective for a period of up to 15 years. The village may grant a franchise for a shorter term if the board deems it in the best interest of the village to do so.
(b) The village may decide to renew a franchise granted under this if the grantee files a written request of such a renewal. The village may use the written request as a signal to update this code and reevaluate the community needs served by the grantee.
(c) To the extent applicable, Section 546 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 shall govern the procedures and standards for renewal of any franchise awarded pursuant to this section.
(d) To the extent that Section 546 of the Cable Communications Act of 1984 is not applicable, the village in its sole discretion and judgment shall have the right to grant, deny or conditionally grant renewal of a franchise, provided that the village shall not unreasonably refuse to renew the franchise or unreasonably condition the renewal. The conditions the village may place on its approval shall include, but are not limited to: reimbursement for reasonable expenses incurred in evaluating the request for renewal, updating the code and surveying community cable needs, provided, however, that this section shall not preclude an agreement by the village and grantee to share in the costs incurred in evaluating a request for renewal; remedy of historical or existing violations of the franchise or code payment of all fees and penalties owed by the grantee at the time of the renewal; and acceptance of any updated code or franchise agreement.
(e) Unless otherwise agreed upon, any amended cable ordinance or provision thereunder adopted before the franchise renewal shall take effect at the franchise renewal.
(f) When the village approves a franchise renewal, the grantee shall accept the renewed franchise under the procedures set out in subsection 8.
(11) REVOCATION AND EXPIRATION.
(a) The village shall have the right to revoke a franchise in the event that the grantee:
1. violates any material provision of this section, a franchise or an applicable franchise agreement;
2. attempts to evade or violate any provision of this code, franchise or an applicable franchise agreement;
3. practices any deceit or fraud upon the village or any subscriber;
4. performs any act or fails to cure any event that requires the approval or consent of the village without securing such approval or consent; or
5. triggers any provision in this section that provides for revocation as a remedy.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 7
(b) If the board chooses to revoke a franchise, the board shall provide the grantee with written notice of its intent and describing the reasons constituting cause for revocation. The grantee shall have at least 30 days, or longer if the board agrees, to remedy the cause. If the grantee fails to remedy the cause to the satisfaction of the board during this period, the board may, after public hearing at which the grantee is provided an opportunity to be heard, revoke the franchise.
(c) Should a franchise be revoked or expire and there is no judicial or administrative review of the revocation or expiration taking place, the grantee shall begin to remove, within 90 days of revocation or expiration, all property owned by the grantee and placed on a public right-of-way unless permitted by the village to abandon said property to a purchaser.
(d) In the event that a franchise has been revoked or has not been renewed, the village shall have the option, to the extent then permitted by law, to purchase the tangible assets of the grantee's cable television system previously governed by the franchise at its fair market value, to assign such rights to purchase, or to require removal of all grantee's property located within the public ways of the village at the grantee's expense. Such an option must be exercised within 90 days from the date of the revocation or expiration of the franchise, the entry of a final judgment by a court reviewing the question of the revocation or expiration, or the entry of a final order upon appeal of the same, whichever is later.
(12) VILLAGE RIGHTS.
(a) The village may amend this section and a franchise granted hereunder to incorporate amendments to federal law which are applicable to the grantee's cable system. Any provision herein in conflict with or pre-emptied by federal law shall be superseded.
(b) The village reserves the right to further amend this section or adopt additional codes, if it finds it necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such amendments and new codes shall be reasonable and not be in substantial conflict with the rights granted in this section or with federal or state law.
(c) In the event that the federal government cedes any power vested in the federal government at the time a franchise is granted under this section, the village reserves the right to exercise that power.
(d) During the term of a franchise and within the village limits, the village may, where aerial construction exists, maintain free-of-charge upon any poles owned by the grantee wire and pole fixtures necessary for a police and fire alarm system. Such wires and fixtures shall be constructed and maintained to the satisfaction of the grantee in accordance with standards set out in this section.
(e) The village may inspect all construction or installation work during such construction or installation, or at any time after completion thereof, in order to insure compliance with the provisions of this section and all other governing codes.
(f) A grantee shall provide free basic service consisting of one outlet to any and all existing public buildings, public libraries, fire stations and schools, whether private, public or parochial, within the franchise territory. Additional outlets shall be provided at the grantee's cost for time and materials. In the event of the addition of a new building eligible for service under this section during the life of the franchise, the grantee shall provide such service as soon as it is
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 8
reasonably accessible from the grantee's distribution plant.
(13) GRANTEE RULES. A grantee may promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise and to assure uninterrupted service to all its subscribers. However, such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this section, other village codes or the laws of the state.
(14) TECHNICAL PERFORMANCE.
(a) The cable system shall be operated to comply with or exceed all guidelines and standards set by the FCC for signal quality and leakage. The village reserves the
right to test the system and independently measure the signal quality. The system shall at all times comply with or exceed standards set by the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association.
(b) A grantee shall at all times keep its cables and other appurtenances used for transmitting signals shielded in such a manner that there will be no interference with electronic equipment not connected to the grantee's service.
(c) The village reserves the right to adopt and enforce technical standards to the extent allowed by federal law. If such village authority is expanded during the duration of a franchise granted under this code, the village may choose to exercise its authority at its own discretion.
(15) CONDITIONS ON STREET OCCUPANCY.
(a) All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the village shall be so located as not to cause interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and not to cause interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways and places.
(b) The grantee shall obtain permission from the village before stringing cable or commencing disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, and shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the village, replace and restore all pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good condition as before such work commenced. The grantee shall comply with all village codes relating to street openings and utility facility placement and operation.
(c) If, at any time during a franchise, the village shall elect to alter or change the location or grade of any street, alley or other public way, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the village, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. If any construction by the grantee is in violation of the provisions of subsection (a), the grantee shall likewise, upon reasonable notice by the village, remove, relay and relocate its property in such a manner as to remedy such violation at its own expense.
(d) The grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone or other fixture, water hydrant or main. All such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed between the outer edge of sidewalk and the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on such alley in such a
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 9
manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on the streets, alleys and public ways. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use by the grantee of existing public utility poles where practical, providing mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into.
(e) A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building-moving permit issued by the village, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expenses of such temporary raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee may require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given at least 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
(f) The grantee, after obtaining permission from the village in each instance, may trim trees that overhang streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the village so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee.
(16) WORK PERFORMED BY OTHERS.
(a) A grantee shall give prior notice to the village specifying the names and addresses of any entity, other than the grantee, that performs construction services in excess of $10,000 pursuant to the franchise, provided, however, that all provisions of the franchise remain the responsibility of the grantee.
(b) All provisions of a franchise shall apply to any subcontractor or others performing any work or services pursuant to the provisions of the franchise.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as allowing the transfer of any rights or responsibilities of the grantee without village approval.
(17) INDEMNITY.
(a) The grantee shall defend, indemnify, protect and save the village and its agents and employees harmless from all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including consultant and attorney's fees, sustained by the village on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of:
1. The enactment of this section and granting of a franchise thereunder, except such claims as may arise from the village's selection of a grantee to be awarded a franchise pursuant to this section.
2. The installation, operation or maintenance of the cable system except for acts of the village, its agents or employees, unless said acts are at the request of and under the direction or supervision of the grantee.
(b) The village shall notify the grantee within 10 days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the village on the part of the grantee.
(c) The grantee shall furnish to the village, before any franchise becomes effective, satisfactory evidence in writing that the grantee has in force and will maintain in force during the term of the franchise public liability insurance.
(d) A grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise a general comprehensive liability insurance policy naming as additional insured the village, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by and in a form satisfactory to the village attorney. The policy shall protect the village and its agencies and employees against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death or property damage occasioned by the operations of grantee under any franchise granted hereunder, in the amounts of:
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 10
1. $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person with the limit however of $10,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident, and
2. $1,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. The village reserves the unilateral right to revise the levels of insurance required under this section to reflect conditions on or about the fifth and tenth anniversaries of the effective date of a franchise granted under this section. The village shall be named as an additional insured under such insurance and a copy of the current in-force policy shall be deposited with the village administrator.
(18) BOND AND SECURITY FUND.
(a) During the initial construction of a cable system, or any major reconstruction or upgrading thereof, the grantee shall file with the village a performance bond in the amount of $15,000.00. The bond shall be released when the grantee certifies to the village that the construction is complete, and the village accepts such certification as proven.
(b) At the time a franchise is accepted, the grantee shall deposit into an account established by the village and maintain on deposit through the term of the franchise the amount of $2,000.00 as a security fund for the faithful performance of the grantee of all terms and conditions of the franchise. Interest accrued on this deposit shall be paid to the grantee on an annual basis. Provision shall be made to permit the village the sole authority to withdraw funds from the security fund. The grantee shall not use the security fund for other purposes and shall not assign, pledge or otherwise use this security fund for any purpose. Within ten days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn by the village from the security fund pursuant to this code, the grantee shall deposit money sufficient to restore such security fund to the required amount.
(19) REMEDY OF GRANTEE VIOLATION. (a) In the event of any violation by a grantee, its vendor, lessee or successor of the provisions of a franchise or any material portion or portions thereof, or the failure promptly to perform any of the provisions thereof, the village may, after prior written notice is given to the grantee and the grantee has had 30 days from the notice to cure the violation, cause the grantee to be fined up to $100.00 a day from the security fund for each day after written notice is provided until proper correction is made. If the grantee cures the violation within 30 days after notice under this section, the village may not levy such fine and the notice shall be void.
(b) A grantee is not responsible for failure to provide adequate service when that failure is caused by acts of God, strikes, governmental or military action, or other conditions beyond its control including the lack of materials or parts, providing that those materials and parts have been diligently pursued by the grantee.
(20) FRANCHISE FEE AND ANNUAL REPORT.
(a) As compensation for permission to use the streets and public ways of the village for the construction, operation, maintenance, modification, and reconstruction of a cable system, and for the village's costs in establishing a regulatory program for a grantee, the grantee shall pay to the village an annual amount equal to 5% of the grantee's annual gross revenues in the village or, if higher, that amount allowed under federal law following 90 days written notice by the village informing the grantee of the requirement of such higher amount.
(b) The franchise fee shall be paid on a semi-annual basis according to the following schedule: revenues for January through June shall be reflected in an August 15th payment;
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 11
revenues for July through December shall be reflected in a February 15th payment. Any late franchise fee payments shall be subject to interest charges at the rate of one percent per month for the overdue balance.
(c) Each year, the grantee shall present to the village a report of system finances for the previous calendar year, which shall include gross revenues from all sources. Upon request of the village, the grantee shall also provide a report of its operating expenses, net income and an end-of-year balance sheet. In addition, the requested report must contain a summary, by type, of customer complaints received during the previous year as well as their resolutions; a summary of material physical changes in the cable system and changes in services offered in the past year; any rate or fee changes; a current listing of each officer, director, and manager of the cable system, and each person or entity holding control or controlling interest in the grantee; and a summary of the grantee's plans for the cable system in the coming year. Any discrepancy between the previous year's franchise fee paid and the amount verified in the annual report shall be paid within 30 days of the verification of the discrepancy.
(d) No acceptance of any payment by the grantee to the village shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the village may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee.
(21) RATES CHARGED BY THE GRANTEE. (a) Rates charged by a grantee for service under a franchise granted under this section shall be fair and reasonable. Before any service is sold to any customer, the grantee shall file with the clerk its schedule of rates for installation and monthly service charges, together with a statement of the rights and obligations of subscribers.
(b) Subsequent increases in rates, or service charges or changes to rights and obligation statements shall likewise be filed with the clerk at least 21 days before the same become effective. The grantee must also provide subscribers to the cable system with written notification of any such increases at least 14 days before the same become effective.
(c) In the event that any federal or state law or regulation is at any time after the effective date of this section changed, modified, interpreted, amended, repealed or invalidated so as to allow for the village's regulation of rates paid by cable subscribers, the village shall, at its option, regulate such rates.
(d) To the extent allowed by state and federal law, nothing in this section shall prevent the grantee from applying a surcharge or late payment penalty to subscriber bills to reflect delinquent balances due the grantee.
(22) OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS.
(a) A grantee shall manage all of its operations in accordance with the policy of totally open books and records in respect to the village. The authorized officers and agents of the village shall have the right to inspect, upon at least 24 hours notice, during normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results, record of request for service for at least the previous five years and other like materials of the grantee that relate to the operation of the franchise.
(b) A grantee shall, at its own expense, prepare and furnish to the village, at the items and in the form prescribed by the village, such reasonable reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions and property as the village deems necessary.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 12
(c) The village may order an audit of the grantee's records, which may be conducted by a city employee or by an independent entity.
(23) SUBSCRIBER RIGHTS.
(a) No monitoring of any terminal connected to the system shall take place without, on each occasion, specific written authorization by the user of the terminal in question and written notice to the village. Written permission shall not be required for the conducting of system wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for the purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of billing, nor shall it prevent the introduction of additional services agreed upon, such as two-way communications and security systems.
(b) A grantee shall not, except as required by governmental action, provide any data concerning specific subscribers or users or their use of subscriber services except in compliance with the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.
(c) Subscribers and users shall retain the right to deactivate their terminals, but shall continue to be responsible for charges until the grantee is notified to terminate service. The subscriber shall not be charged any fee for the cancellation or downgrading of cable service.
(d) During standard business working hours, the grantee's office must be open and able to accept payments; exchange or accept return of converters; schedule and conduct service or technician calls; and answer subscriber inquiries.
(e) The grantee shall provide subscribers with a local or toll-free line, either staffed or with answering capabilities, which shall be available to subscribers 24 hours a day. Under normal conditions, telephones must be answered within 30 seconds; subscribers should reach a customer service representative within two minutes in all cases. Less than three percent of callers to the grantee shall receive a busy signal.
(f) The grantee shall answer subscribers' service requests within 24 hours, including weekends and holidays. Problems should be rectified within 48 hours or, in case of a dispute, in fewer than 10 days. Customers shall be able to schedule with the grantee that a service visit occur during a four-hour block in either the morning or the afternoon.
(g) Upon interruption of subscriber's cable service, except for acts of God or with express prior permission of the village, the following shall apply:
1. For interruptions of over 24 hours and up to seven days, the grantee shall provide a credit of one-thirtieth of one month's fees for affected services for each 24-hour period for all affected subscribers.
2. For interruptions of seven days or more in one month, the grantee shall provide a full month's credit for affected services for all affected subscribers.
(h) Once a cable system is in place, all normal service installations must be made within seven business days. Upon initial installation and at least once annually, each subscriber shall receive written notice of all services available, rates for such services and all grantee policies affecting customer services.
(24) PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL CHANNELS.
(a) The grantee shall provide at least one access channel, which may be shared for public, educational and governmental programming.
(b) The grantee shall have sole authority and responsibility for the administration of the
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 13
shared access channel.
(c) The grantee shall provide at least the minimum equipment necessary to perform good quality playback of prerecorded programming, and to make it possible to record programs at remote locations with battery-operated portable equipment. Grantee shall also provide at least the minimum equipment and technical assistance for programming produced on behalf of the village.
(d) If the village and grantee agree that the amount of local access programming warrants a second access channel, the grantee shall have 90 days to provide such a channel. Administration of the second access channel shall be under the same terms as set for the first access channel.
(25) EMERGENCY ALERT OVERRIDE SYSTEM. The grantee shall incorporate into its cable system the capability for a temporary emergency override whereby a designee of the village, in times of emergencies, may introduce a message on all channels in the system simultaneously. The grantee shall provide and maintain all equipment necessary for the use of this capability, which shall be capable of being invoked by a telephone line, provided acceptable security for the override can be accomplished.
(26) UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation or governmental body or agency, without the express consent of the grantee, to make or possess, or to assist in making or possessing, any connection, extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of the system.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation or governmental body or agency to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct or damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of the System for any purpose whatsoever.
(c) Any firm, person, group, company, corporation or governmental body or agency found guilty of violating this section may be fined not less than $50.00 and the costs of the action or more than $500.00 and the costs of the action for each and every subsequent offense. Each continuing day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(27) FORECLOSURE; CONDEMNATION; RECEIVERSHIP. Upon the occurrence of any event that may lead to the foreclosure, condemnation or receivership of any part of the village cable system, the grantee shall immediately provide written notification to the village. Such notification shall be notice of cause for revocation of the franchise, and the village may revoke the franchise under procedures set in this section.
(28) NONENFORCEMENT BY THE VILLAGE. The grantee shall not be relieved of any obligation by reason of any failure of the village to enforce prompt compliance with any provision of this section, a franchise or a franchise agreement.
(29) GENERAL RIGHTS AND REMEDIES. All rights and remedies given to the village under this section, a franchise and a franchise agreement shall be in addition to and cumulative with each other and with any and all other rights or remedies, existing or implied, now or hereafter available to the village, at law or in equity, and such rights and remedies shall not be exclusive, but each and every right and remedy specifically provided or otherwise existing or given may be exercised from time to time and as often and in such order as may be deemed expedient by the
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Franchises - 14
village in its sole judgment and discretion, and the exercise of one or more rights or remedies shall not be deemed a waiver of the right to exercise at the same time or thereafter any other right or remedy nor shall any such delay or omission be construed to be a waiver of or acquiescence to any default. The exercise of any such right or remedy by the village shall not release the grantee from its obligations or any liability under this section, a franchise or a franchise agreement.
(30) WAIVER OR EXEMPTION. The village reserves the right to waive provisions of this section, or exempt a grantee from meeting provisions of this section, if the village determines such waiver or exemption is in the public interest.
(31) SEVERABILITY. Should any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or portion of this section and or a franchise thereunder be declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of
this section and or the franchise as a whole, but shall only affect the portion thereof declared to be invalid; and the board hereby expressly states and declares that it would nonetheless have passed this code and or granted the franchise had it known that any such word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or portion of said code and or franchise were invalid.
6.25 Penalty. In addition to penalties provided by Wisconsin State Statutes or other provisions of this code, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or regulations made hereunder, shall be subject to the maximum penalty prescribed by statute and/or by section 24.05 of this code.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Chapter 7
LAND DIVISION REGULATIONS
7.01 General Provisions
7.02 Definitions
7.03 Procedure
7.04 Design Standards
7.05 Required Improvements
7.06 Variances & Exceptions
7.07 Building Permit
7.08 Occupancy Permits
7.09 Violations
7.10 Record of Plats
7.11 Permits for Utility Services
7.12 Fee for Filing Preliminary Plat
7.13 Approval and Inspection Fees
7.14 Public Site Fee
7.15 Multiple Unit Site Fee
7.25 Penalty
7.01 General Provisions.
(1) The provisions of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes governing the subdivision and platting of land, and such other state laws as may apply and any revisions or amendments thereof enacted by the State Legislature; the rules of the Department of Natural Resources relating to lot size and lot evaluation if the subdivision is not served by a public sewer and provisions for such service have not been made and relating to safety of access and preservation of the public interest and investment in the streets if the subdivision abuts on a state trunk highway or connecting street; are all made a part hereof with the same force and effect as if here set out in full verbatim except that where the provisions of this code are more restrictive the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(2) Any division of land within the village or its extra territorial plat approval jurisdiction which results in a subdivision as defined herein shall be and any other division may be, surveyed and a plat thereof made, approved and recorded as required by this code and by Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Any division of land other than a subdivision within the village or its extra territorial plat approval jurisdiction, of which a plat has not been approved and recorded, shall be surveyed and a certified survey map of such division approved and shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds as required in section 7.03(4) of this chapter and Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(4) The provisions of this chapter insofar as they may apply to divisions of less than 5 parcels
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 2
shall not apply to: (a) transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
(b) leases for a term not to exceed ten (10) years, mortgages, or easements.
(c) the sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances.
7.02 Definitions.
(1) GENERAL. In this chapter all terms used which are defined in Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall have the same meaning as ascribed thereto in the chapter, and as the chapter may hereafter be amended, unless otherwise defined in this code or unless the context and/or subject matter clearly indicates otherwise. All words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word "person" includes associations, co-partnerships, or corporations; and the term "shall" is mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
(2) DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
(a) Alley A permanent public service way or right-of-way dedicated to public use, other than a street, place, road, or easement, designed to provide a secondary means of access for the accommodation of abutting property.
(b) Block: A unit of property entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, railroad right-of-ways, waterways, or other barriers, or a combination thereof.
(c) Building Inspector: The building inspector of the village or the inspector’s duly authorized representative.
(d) Building Setback Line: A line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on a preliminary plat which denotes the area between such line and the adjacent street right-of-way line where an enclosed building and other obstructions are prohibited, except those obstructions that are permitted by zoning code regulations.
(e) Commission: The Plan Commission of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(f) Director: The Director of Public Works of the village.
(g) Drainage Right-of-way: The lands required for the installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches. They are required along a natural stream or water course for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
(h) Easement: A quantity of land set aside over or under which a liberty, privilege, or advantage in land without profit, is dedicated and is distinct from ownership of the land, is granted either to the public, a particular person, or a combination of both.
(i) Final Plat: The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is presented to the plan commission and village board for final approval in accordance with these regulations, and which, if approved by the village board, shall be entitled to be filed with the proper county recording officer.
(j) Gross Land Area: The total amount of land to be subdivided including lots, streets, alleys, easements, any other land dedicated to the public, and any existing abutting right-of-way measured to the centerline of such right-of-way.
(k) Jurisdiction: The corporate area of the village and the unincorporated area contiguous
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 3
thereto that is within 1? miles of the corporate limits.
(l) Land Improvement: Any sanitary sewerage system, storm sewer system, water supply and distribution system, roadway, terrace, sidewalk, pedestrian pathway, no-access strip, off-street parking area or other improvement which the village requires under this chapter.
(m) Lot: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development.
(n) Lot Types:
1. Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if tangent lines to the curve along the right-of-way line, drawn from the intersection of the right-of-way line and each side lot line form an angle of less than 135 degrees.
2. Butt Lot: A lot located at the end of a block between two corner lots.
3. Interior Lot: Defined as a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street.
4. Double Frontage Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street.
(o) Lot Frontage: The narrowest portion of the lot having access to a public street.
(p) Master Plan: The composite elements of the master plan of the village and its environs, or any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, and textural material, as adopted by the plan commission.
(q) Mini Storm Sewers: A small diameter storm sewer installed by the developer to insure proper yard drainage and for the direct connection of sump pump lines directly into the storm sewer system.
(r) Net Land Area: The amount of land to be subdivided, exclusive of streets, alleys, any other land dedicated to the public.
(s) "No-access" Strip: A strip of land of at least 12 feet wide along the rear lot line of a double-frontage lot and abutting a thoroughfare.
(t) Occupied Lot: Any lot which contains a residential structure fit for human habitation.
(u) Official Map: An official policy guide adopted by the board on the location of streets, recreation areas, schools, parks, and other municipal facilities.
(v) Owner: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or any other group acting as a unit having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided or divided to commence and maintain proceeding under the provisions of this chapter.
(w) Pedestrian Pathway: A public way, usually running at right angles to streets, which is intended for the convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public right-of-way for utilities.
(x) Preliminary Plat: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with the requirements of section 7.03(2) of this code.
(y) Preliminary Plan: A generalized sketch or map of a tract of land used for preliminary study and discussion.
(z) Protective Covenants: Contracts entered into between private parties or between private parties and public bodies pursuant to Wis. Stats. §236.293, which constitute a restriction on the use of all private or platted property within a minor land division or subdivision for the benefit of the public or property owners and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 4
development which would tend to impair stability of values.
(aa) Right-of-way: A strip of land used or intended to be used for pedestrian, vehicular, and utility line circulation and access for the general public. Said strip of land is that total area between the boundary lines of a street, alley or easement and not reserved for the exclusive right of any individual property owner and subject to the rights of the public usage.
(bb) Roadway: That portion of the street designated for vehicular use.
(cc) Shorelands: Those lands within the following distances: one thousand (1,000) feet from the high-water elevation of navigable lakes, ponds and flowages or three hundred (300) feet from the high-water elevation of navigable streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever is greater.
(dd) Sidewalk: That portion of a street designated for pedestrian use.
(ee) Street: A right-of-way that affords primary means of access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, or however otherwise designated.
(ff) Street Types:
1. Expressway: A vehicular right-of-way with the roadway designed, planned and intended entirely for the task of high volume traffic movement. Access to such expressway shall be fully controlled. All federal highways shall be designated as expressways.
2. Major Thoroughfare: A street with a high degree of continuity, which also serves as an arterial traffic-way between the various districts of the village and its environs.
3. Minor Thoroughfare: A street within a subdivision which has a wider roadway width than that of a minor street, and which is a prime entrance or circulation street. Its primary function is to collect and distribute traffic from minor streets.
4. Minor Street: A street of limited continuity. Its primary purpose is to serve abutting properties.
5. Frontage Road: A minor street which is parallel to and either adjacent to or within the right-of-way of an expressway or a major thoroughfare.
6. Cul-de-sac: A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by an adequate vehicular turn-around.
7. Half Street: A street of less than the total required width along one or more property lines of a subdivision.
(gg) Street Width: The shortest distance between the right-of-way lines of a given street.
(hh) Subdivider: Any owner who proposes to or is engaged in developing or improving a tract of land that complies with the definition of subdivision as defined in this chapter.
(ii) Subdivision: A division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner thereof or his agent for the purpose of sale or of building developments, where:
1. the act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites any one of which is 4 acres each or less in area; or
2. five or more parcels or building sites any one of which is 4 acres each or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of 5 years;
3. The public acquisition either by purchase or predication of additive strips of land for the widening and or opening of street or other right-of-ways shall be exempt from the definition of
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 5
subdivision.
(jj) Subdivision Standards: The basic land-planning principles established as guides for the preparation of preliminary plats.
(kk) Surveyor: A person certified by the Wisconsin Examining Board of Architects and Professional Engineers as a Registered Land Surveyor.
(ll) Terrace: An unpaved strip of land situated within the street.
(mm) Vacant Lot: Any lot not containing a residential structure fit for human habitation. A lot containing only a garage, barn, shed or other types of utility structures is considered vacant.
(nn) Village: The Village of North Fond du Lac.
(oo) Board: The Village Board of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(pp) Clerk: The Village Clerk of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(qq) Wetlands: An area where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions. (Wis. Stats. §23.32(1))
7.03 Procedure. (1) PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION.
(a) Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may consult with the commission or staff and present a preliminary plan or sketch plan of the proposed plat together with information pertaining thereto, such as the existing physical conditions on the property, the type of development proposed, outstanding legal encumbrances, and proposed improvements. This pre-application procedure does not require formal application or the payment of fees and shall be considered to be advisory only.
(b) The purpose of the pre-application procedure is to afford the subdivider an occasion to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the commission or staff, before preparation of the preliminary plat and before formal application for its approval, in order to conserve time and expense, and to make the most of the opportunities related to the proposed plat.
(c) The commission or staff will advise the subdivider as to subsequent procedure, the provisions of applicable laws and codes, the desirability of the proposed land design and improvements, and the degree of conformity or non-conformity of the proposed plat with the master plan.
(d) The results of this consultation shall be deemed as the guiding basis for the preparation of the preliminary plat, which will be submitted to the commission for its approval.
(2) PRELIMINARY PLAT.
(a) General. Any person or firm contemplating the subdivision of land within the village, or within its extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction, before submitting a final plat for approval, shall file with the clerk at least ten days prior to a regular meeting of the commission, black or blue line prints of a preliminary plat prepared by a surveyor and conforming to the master plan, and applicable regulations contained in this code governing preliminary plats. The subdivider shall provide eight such prints, at his expense.
(b) Official Filing. The submission of the prints of the preliminary plat shall constitute official filing and the clerk shall note on each print the date filed and shall forthwith forward copies to the following: 1. One copy for the official file
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 6
2. Five copies to the commission
3. Two copies to the director, with a request for a report which shall be forwarded to the commission not less than one week prior to its meeting when such preliminary plat is to be acted upon: and
4. State Director of Regional Planning - if so directed by the director in which event six additional copies shall be provided by the subdivider.
(c) Official Approval.
1. The commission shall, within 40 days of the submission of the preliminary plat to said body, review said plat and negotiate with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable, and approve or reject such plat for good and sufficient reason. The subdivider shall be notified in writing of any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
2. Upon such approval by the commission, four copies of the approved preliminary plat shall be signed by the chairman of the commission. One copy shall be retained for the commission file, and three copies transmitted to the clerk for distribution as follows:
a. One copy for the official file;
b. One copy to the subdivider;
c. One copy to the director;
d. One copy to the surveyor
3. Notice of approval of preliminary plat “Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of the subdivision shown hereon has received approval by the Plan Commission of the Village of North Fond du Lac, and upon compliance by the subdivider with revisions and stipulations required as stated hereon, if any, the Village Board will receive the final plat for consideration when submitted by the subdivider in such form and within such time as required by the village code chapter 7.”
The Plan Commission of the Village of North Fond du Lac, Wisconsin.
Date: day of ,
By
Chairman
4. Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the subdivider to final approval of the layout shown by such plat if the final plat conforms substantially to such layout and conditions of approval have been met.
(d) Preliminary Plat Data
1. Proposed name of subdivision, not duplicating name of any plat heretofore recorded in Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin.
2. Graphic (engineering) scale not smaller than one inch to 100 feet.
3. North-point.
4. Date of preparation.
5. Names of the owner, subdivider and surveyor preparing the plat.
6. Location of proposed subdivision by: government lot, quarter section, township, range,
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 7
county and state.
7. Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly indicated.
8. Total acreage in gross land area.
9. Existing zoning districts on and adjacent to tract.
10. Location, widths, and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other right-of-ways, railroad and utility right-of-ways, parks and other public open spaces, easements, section lines, and corporation lines within the tract and to a distance of at least 100 feet beyond the boundaries of the subdivision.
11. Location of permanent buildings and other structures, within the subdivision and to a distance of 50 feet beyond its boundaries.
12. Location map, drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet, indicating boundary lines of adjoining un-subdivided or subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries, type of use of adjoining land, and alignments of existing streets.
13. Location of water courses, marshes, wooded areas and other significant features, shall be shown.
14. Contours at vertical intervals of not more than one foot and a defined contour line showing the 100 year flood plain and elevation.
15. The preliminary plat shall be in substantial accord with the master plan.
16. Layout of streets showing street widths and names (not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the village or its environs, unless the street is an extension of or in line with an already named street, in which event that name shall be used). Proposed collector streets shall be designated and through streets shall be extended to boundaries of the subdivision.
17. Location and width of alleys, pedestrian pathways, utility easements, "no access" strips and conservancy strips.
18. Layout, numbers, and typical dimensions of blocks and lots scaled to the nearest foot.
19. Minimum front and side street building setback lines indicating dimensions.
20. Areas (other than those listed in 16, 17, and 18 above), if any, intended to be dedicated or reserved for non-residential purposes, indicating in each the approximate acreage. Such areas shall be designated by letter or number.
21. Proposed zoning districts on tract.
22. Proposed protective covenants.
(e) Qualifications Covering Conditional Approval of Preliminary Plat.
1. The commission may require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the community, in keeping with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Subsequent to the conditional approval of the preliminary plat, and prior to the submittal by the subdivider of a final plat, the commission shall require proposed plans and specifications pertaining to storm-water runoff and proposed detailed grading plans of blocks and lots. All elevations to be shown in United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) Datum.
3. No land will be approved for subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains inadequate drainage facilities, unless the resultant divisions become unified parts of contiguous lots or parcels. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements, which will
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 8
in the opinion of the director, make such land completely safe for residential occupancy and provide adequate drainage, the preliminary plat for subdivision may be approved. Such approval will be based upon specific engineering data shown on the preliminary plat.
(3) FINAL PLAT. (a) Official Filing.
1. Within twenty-four (24) months after receiving the approval by the commission of the preliminary plat, or a period of time beyond twenty-four months that may be granted by the commission, there shall be submitted to the clerk by the subdivider at his expense the original inked drawings and the required number of prints of the final plat prepared by a surveyor containing all or a part of the land area included in the preliminary plat, and it shall retain the design characteristics of the approved preliminary plat.
2. Where less than the entire land area shown in the preliminary plat is contained in the final plat to be filed for record, the recordations of such final plat shall automatically extend the approval of the unrecorded balance of the preliminary plat for successive 6 month periods.
3. Within 2 days following receipt of any such final plat, the clerk, shall forward copies to the following agencies: a. One copy to the official file.
b. The original drawing and two copies to the commission.
c. One copy to the director.
d. Two copies to the State Director of regional planning.
e. If the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway, or connecting street, as defined in section 7.03, two copies to the department of transportation; and
f. If the subdivision is not served by a public sanitary sewer and public domestic water supply, and provision for such services has not been made, two copies to the Department of Natural Resources.
g. If the subdivider or his agent submits the original drawing of the final plat to the required state agencies then d, e, and f above do not need to be completed by the clerk.
(b) Official Approval. 1. The commission shall make its report in writing, indicating approval or disapproval of the final plat within 40 days after receipt of such plat from the clerk; and in the event its advice is negative, the report shall set forth the basis for disapproval. However, should the commission require amendment of the final plat, the time for ruling by the commission on the amended final plat may be extended 40 days after receipt of such amended plat. The amended final plat shall be refiled, in keeping with the provisions of this section, with the clerk for referral to the commission.
2. When the commission has approved the final plat, it shall be signed by the chairman and attested by the recording secretary on the form approved.
3. After approval by the commission, the original drawing and one copy of the final plat shall be forwarded to the board, together with a letter of transmittal calling attention to variations (if any) recommended by the commission and its reasons for recommending them, and conveying to the board such other information as the commission may deem necessary. The commission shall also submit to the board the supporting documents submitted with the final plat.
4. The board shall approve or reject the final plat within 60 days of its submission by the subdivider, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider and the time of such extension is entered upon the minutes of the board. In the event the plat is rejected, the reasons
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 9
shall be stated in the minutes of the board meeting and a copy thereof or a written statement of such reasons shall be supplied to the subdivider and his surveyor.
5. The clerk shall certify on the face of the original drawing that the copies referred to above were forwarded to said state agencies as required and the date thereof, and that no objections to the plat have been filed within a 20 day limit set by section 236.12(4) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
6. Upon approval by the board, the clerk shall secure from the subdivider at his expense one linen or Mylar tracing of the final plat, and three copies of supporting documents, if any. The clerk shall file for the record with the register of deeds, the final plat, in exact form as approved by the board. The clerk shall also have the recording data placed upon the above linen tracing. The subdivider shall pay recording fees.
7. The clerk shall deliver to the director for retention in his files the linen or Mylar tracing of the final plat as recorded.
8. The clerk shall receive from the director two copies of the final plat, as recorded, one for the official file and the other for the commission.
(c) Final Plat Data. All information required by the Wisconsin Platting Law is to be shown accurately and drawn in conformity with the requirements of Wis. Stat. §236.20 and §236.21.
(4) LAND DIVISIONS - OTHER THAN SUBDIVISIONS (a) Procedure. The division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land not a part of a subdivision as described herein shall be governed by the following:
1. The owner shall file with the clerk three copies of a certified survey map.
2. Within two days after receiving such certified survey map, the clerk shall forward the original drawing and one copy to the commission and one copy to the director; and
3. Within five days following the next regular meeting of the commission, the commission shall make its report in writing to the divider, approving, approving conditionally, or disapproving the certified survey map.
a. In the event its action is conditional approval or negative, the report shall set forth the basis of its decision.
b. For the purpose of this chapter however, the division of a lot or lots of record, as herein defined, shall not be deemed to be a division, provided that such division does not create more than two parcels of land which meet all the requirements of the zoning code, and that no new street is sought thereby to be dedicated or is contemplated or projected through said lands.
c. All of such division of a lot or lots of record shall be shown on a map which shall be filed with the director in triplicate. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels, all of which resultant parcels exceed 5 acres, and if a new street is not involved, shall also not be deemed to be a division.
(b) Requirements.
1. To the extent practicable the certified survey map shall comply with the provisions of this code relating to general requirements and design standards.
2. The certified survey shall be performed and the map prepared by a registered surveyor.
3. All corners shall be monumented in accordance with Wis. Stats. §236.15(1)(c) and (d).
4. The certified survey map shall be prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats. §236.20(2)(a), (b), (c), (e), (f), (g), (I), (j), and (k), on tracing cloth, or opaque, or on durable white paper 8?"
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 10
wide x 14" long. All lines shall be made with non-fading black ink to a scale of not more than 100 feet to 1 inch.
5. If any lot in the land division is not to be served by a public sanitary sewer, soil and site evaluations shall be submitted according to the procedures designated under the rules of the State Administrative Code, Comm. 83 & 85, applicable to subdivision.
(c) Certificates.
1. The certified survey map shall include the certificate of the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel, typed, lettered, or reproduced legibly with non-fading black ink, giving a clear and concise description of the land surveyed by bearings and distances, commencing with some corner marked and established in the U.S. public land survey or some corner providing reference to a corner marked and established in the U.S. public land survey. Such certificate shall include the statement of the surveyor to the effect that he has duly complied with the requirements of this section.
2. The certificate of approval of the commission shall be typed, lettered, or reproduced legibly with non-fading black ink on the face of the map.
(d) Recording. Upon approval by the commission, the clerk shall secure from the subdivider at his expense one linen tracing of the certified survey map for retention by the director. The clerk shall file the certified survey map in its exact form as approved by the commission for record with the Register of Deeds. The clerk shall also have the recording data placed upon the above linen tracing, and then transmit the same to the director. The divider shall pay recording fees.
7.04 Design Standards. The subdivider shall conform to the following principles and standards of land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof.
(1) GENERAL. The subdivision plan shall conform to design standards that will encourage good development patterns and particularly to the principles and standards of the master plan. (a) The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks, playgrounds, and other public facilities shown on the officially adopted master plan or official map shall be considered in the approval of subdivision plats.
(b) The dedication or reservation of the above may be required of the subdivider by the village.
(2) STREETS.
(a) All right-of-way widths shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
1. Expressway: Governed by State or Federal Highway Agency.
2. Major Thoroughfare: 80-100 feet
3. Minor Thoroughfare: 66-80 feet
4. Minor Street: 60-66 feet
5. Frontage Road: Governed by State or Federal Highway Agency or 60-100 feet as required by the commission.
6. Cul-de-sac: 60 feet
7. Half Streets: Not permitted
(b) The street layout shall provide access to all lots and parcels of land within the subdivision.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 11
(c) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
(d) Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 500 feet in length, unless necessitated by extreme topography.
(e) Neighborhood streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic.
(f) Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
(g) Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended to the boundary of the tract to be subdivided so as to provide for normal circulation of traffic within the vicinity.
(h) Wherever a dedicated or platted portion of a street or alley exists adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the street or alley shall be platted to the prescribed width within the proposed subdivision.
(i) Reserve strips controlling the continuation of streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the board under conditions approved by the commission.
(j) Widths of all streets shall conform to the widths determined by the plan commission.
(k) Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with a minimum diameter of 100 feet.
(l) Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to the required widths shall dedicate additional width along either or both sides of said street. If the subdivision is along one side only, one-half of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
(m) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect at right angles.
(n) Intersection of more than two streets at one point shall be prohibited.
(o) Where parkways or special types of streets are involved, the commission may apply special standards to be followed in the design of such parkways or streets.
(p) Whenever the subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or a highway designated as a "Limited Access Highway" by the appropriate highway authorities, provision shall be made for a marginal access street or a parallel street at a distance acceptable for the appropriate use of the land between the highway or railroad and such streets.
(q) No street shall have a name that will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with the name of an existing street, unless the proposed street is an extension of an existing street, in which case the duplication shall be mandatory.
(r) Alleys shall be prohibited in residential areas but should be included in commercial and industrial areas where needed for loading and unloading or access purposes, and where platted, shall be at least 24 feet in width.
(s) Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited.
(3) BLOCKS.
(a) Block lengths shall not exceed 1200 feet and not be less than 600 feet. Exceptions to the minimum and maximum lengths may be permitted if these limitations prove impractical due to terrain.
(b) Super blocks of greater length or width than normal may be permitted if used in conjunction with an open space plan or planned unit development.
(c) Pedestrian access-way of not less than 30 feet in width shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 12
transportation, and other community facilities.
(4) LOTS.
(a) The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
(b) Individual lots with a depth of more than 4 times their frontage shall be discouraged except under unusual circumstances.
(c) Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning code.
(d) Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.
(e) Corner lots for residential use shall have sufficient width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
(f) The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street.
(g) Double frontage lots will not be permitted except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least 10 feet, and across which there shall be no right-of-access or fence of uniform design, and approved by the commission, shall be installed by the subdivider along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use of topography and orientation.
(h) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. While some variation from this rule is permissible; very irregular lot shapes shall be avoided.
(i) Wherever possible, unit shopping centers based on sound development standards should be designed in contrast to the platting of lots for individual commercial use.
(j) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot for its intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions, or similar circumstances, the commission may withhold approval of such lots.
(5) EASEMENTS.
(a) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide.
(b) Where a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream within a subdivision traverses a subdivision, such watercourses shall be enclosed if the flow is capable of being carried in one 42-inch pipe. If such flow exceeds the capacity of a single 42-inch pipe, an adequate width shall be dedicated by the subdivider for cleaning and maintenance of such watercourse. In no case shall such dedication be less than 40 feet in width.
(6) PUBLIC USE AREAS.
(a) Dedication and Reservation of Lands. The purpose of this section is to assist the community to provide the proper public lands for use by residents of the tract.
1. Whenever a proposed playground, park, school site or other public land, other than streets or drainage-ways, designated in the master plan or on the official map, is located all or in part within the subdivision, the proposed public lands shall be made a part of the plat and shall be
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 13
dedicated to the public by the subdivider at the rate of 1,250 square feet for each proposed dwelling unit. Said proposed public lands, other than streets or drainage-ways, in excess of the rate established herein shall be reserved for a period not to exceed 3 years unless extended by mutual agreement for purchase by the public agency having jurisdiction.
2. In lieu of number 1, the village will, if land within the tract is not designated for a proposed playground, park, school site or other public land, other than streets or drainage-ways, in the master plan or on the official map, levy a public site fee against the subdivider at the time of application for final plat approval at the rate and according to the procedures established in section 7.14.
3. If no playground, park, school site, pedestrian pathway or other public land has been proposed as of the date of the application of the subdivider, but the village determines at the time of preliminary plat submission that a public facility should be provided in the area of the proposed plat to carry out the spirit and intent of this code, the village may require dedication as set forth above.
4. In the subdividing of any land within the jurisdiction, due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as trees, water courses, historical sites, or other similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness to the proposed development.
(7) SIDEWALKS.
(a) Sidewalks eight (8) feet in width shall be required along all business streets.
(b) Sidewalks 4.5 feet in width shall be required on both sides of all residential streets.
(c) Sidewalks of a width acceptable to the commission may also be required through the center of long blocks to connect cul-de-sac streets and to provide access to school, park and playground areas, and to river or lake frontages.
7.05 Required Improvements. Before a final plat of a subdivision located within the corporate limits will be approved, the subdivider shall file with the plat a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit insuring that the required improvements including but not limited to sewer, storm sewer, curbing and gutters, sidewalks, street lighting, detention ponds, and paving will be installed within the time required by the board. Plans for all required improvements shall be submitted to the director for approval at least 20 days previous to the commencement of the construction of such improvements.
(1) FEASIBILITY STUDIES. The village will be responsible for any feasibility studies required to determine the nature and cost of public improvements required to accommodate the development of adjacent land areas.
(a) Any developer wishing to have an area studied should notify the village of that intention six months prior to wishing to begin development.
(b) Requests to conduct feasibility studies will be evaluated based upon available funding, sound planning principles, required public improvements, and other considerations.
(c) The village reserves the right to deny a developer's request for a feasibility study; such denial will be construed the same as denial of a preliminary plat submittal.
(d) Under no circumstances shall the requirement for prior study be waived if, in the opinion of the director, the proposed development may have a negative impact on existing or future
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 14
development.
(e) Exceptions. In situations where a developer may want to proceed with a project, but the village is unwilling to finance the needed studies, the developer may offer to reimburse the village for the cost of the studies.
1. The village will then request an estimated study cost from the engineer and the developer shall pay the village that estimated cost prior to start the study.
2. The acceptance of the study financing from the developer in no way obligates the village to approve any present or future development requests that may be submitted by the developer or to refund any of the cost, even if the study recommends actions that are unfavorable to the developer.
(2) STREETS. The developer shall be responsible for all engineering required for street and utility construction and shall have all plans and specifications approved by the director prior to start of construction. (a) The developer shall construct the street base at his expense and shall be responsible for the application of dust control if determined by the director to be necessary.
(b) The developer shall be responsible for all street base maintenance until acceptance by the village at which time the village shall assume maintenance responsibilities only.
(c) At the time of preliminary plat approval the village shall set the date for completion of street construction; the date shall be 5 years from the first building permit issuance for the subdivision or subdivision phase unless otherwise decided and included with the developers agreement.
(d) Paving of the binder coat shall take place not more than 2 years after the first building permit is issued for the subdivision or subdivision phase.
(e) Final paving shall take place not more than 5 years after the first building permit is issued or when 75% of the lots have been improved for the subdivision or subdivision phase.
(f) 100% of the required improvement costs will be paid by the developer in the year of improvement for all lots in the subdivision including those sold to private individuals.
(g) The village shall install appropriate street name signs.
(3) ALLEYS. When alleys are constructed they shall meet the standards of street construction as established by the director.
(4) SIDEWALKS. Sidewalks shall be installed on all improved lots at the time of curb and gutter installation. Sidewalks will be installed on all unimproved lots if either of the following criteria are met:
(a) at least 75% of the lots within the subdivision have been improved; or
(b) it has been five (5) or more years since the acceptance of the first building permit for the subdivision or subdivision phase. The sidewalk costs will be assessed to the owner of the abutting property.
(5) DRIVEWAY APRONS. Any improved lot will, as part of the street construction, have a concrete apron installed for each driveway. Vacant lots will have the apron installed at the time of the home construction. No residential apron shall exceed 24´ in width at the curb. The apron cost will be specially assessed to the owner of the abutting property in conjunction with the levying of assessments for street improvements.
(6) STORM WATER DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 15
(a) The developer according to Chapter 19 of this code shall provide adequate surface and subsurface drainage-ways for the removal of storm water. The extent to which area storm drainage facilities shall be required will be based upon an analysis of need prepared for the developer by the village, and shall be so designed that it may be incorporated into a comprehensive drainage system. The analysis shall be based upon the rational method of computing storm water runoff using the Madison design curve. Times of concentration, soil infiltration, soil infiltration rates, and other variable factors to be used in the analysis shall be discussed with and approved by the director prior to construction.
(b) The storm water sewer system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system. Surface inlets shall be provided by the developer where evidence indicates such a system is necessary.
(c) Storm sewers shall be constructed at the developer's expense in a manner adequate to handle the storm runoff of their development. Any oversizing as determined by the village engineer, to handle additional development shall be incorporated into the developer’s plan. Any additional cost due to pipe over-sizing, greater depth or lift stations to accommodate additional development shall be at the village's expense. In situations where a development requires an improvement of great cost, the village will attempt to program the improvement into its 5-year capital improvements program; eventual approval of the development may therefore depend upon the availability of funding.
(d) Mini-storm sewers shall be installed at the developer's expense and shall be constructed to accommodate storm water from yard drainage and sump pumps within the subdivision. Mini-storm sewers may be laterals run from the storm sewer in the street or may be tile lines run down the rear lot lines with occasional catch basins. The director prior to construction must approve a mini-storm sewer plan.
(7) SANITARY SEWER. The developer shall provide the subdivision with a means of sanitary sewage disposal. This may be done in one of the following ways:
(a) Public Collection System. In all cases where such public collection system is located within 1000 feet of the subdivision, the developer shall, at his expense, construct a sanitary sewer system that shall connect to the sewerage system of the Village and provide a connection to each lot.
(b) Private Disposal System. Where above is not feasible, the developer may be permitted to install on each lot an individual sewage disposal system consisting of a septic tank and tile absorption field or any other disposal system which is approved by the State of Wisconsin and the director.
(c) Subdivision Collection System. The developer shall install sewer mains of sufficient size to serve his development. If, in the opinion of the director, additional size is required to serve potential or existing developments beyond that proposed, the village shall pay for such additional costs. All plans and specifications for the sanitary sewer system shall be prepared for the developer by a registered engineer, and shall be approved by the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the director.
(8) WATER SYSTEM. The developer shall provide the subdivision with an approved source of water.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 16
(a) If an approved public source is located within 1000 feet of the property being developed, the developer shall be required to extend such service to the proposed development at his expense and to use that as the water supply source for the subdivision.
(b) The developer shall install water mains of sufficient size to serve the needs of the proposed development. If, in the opinion of the director, additional size is required to serve potential or existing developments beyond that proposed, the village shall pay for such additional costs. All plans and specifications for the water supply system shall be prepared for the developer by a registered engineer, and shall be approved by the State of Wisconsin and the Director.
(9) PUBLIC UTILITIES All public utilities shall be installed at developer's expense.
(a) A system of utility easements shall be provided for the entire subdivision. 1. Gas mains shall be located within easements or public right-of-ways so as not to conflict with other utilities.
2. Telephone and/or electric service lines shall be placed underground throughout the subdivision. The conduit or cables shall be located within easements or public right-of-ways in a manner that will not conflict with other underground services. All transformers and terminal boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
(b) When presenting a final plat for approval of the commission and the board, the developer shall present a plan showing where all public street lighting will be installed. The director shall approve all street lighting poles, fixtures, locations, and installations. All final plats shall designate the street lighting by correct engineering symbols on the final plat plan. The installation of public street lighting shall be done at the developer expense. within 2 years of the issuance of the first building permit for the subdivision or subdivision phase.
(10) LANDSCAPE DEVELOPMENT.
(a) All unpaved or otherwise unimproved areas within the public right-of-ways or public use areas shall be graded and seeded in an approved manner.
(b) At the time a building permit is taken out the home owner will, as part of the building permit, pay a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the village board for trees to be planted in the terrace.
1. The trees shall be planted by the village at the time all street improvements are completed.
2. The building inspector will determine the number of trees to be planted on each lot by examining the site plan provided by the homeowner.
3. Trees will be a minimum of 1 1/species guidelines used in the Village Terrace Tree Program.
(c) Within the areas designated for screen planting, the subdivider shall provide a continuous planting of evergreen or deciduous shrubs and, for each 100 feet of such planting screen, he shall provide one deciduous tree and two flowering trees arranged in accordance with an approved landscape development plan.
(d) All trees shall be from a commercial nursery and guaranteed healthy for a period of 1 year after planting and shall be approved by Building/Zoning Administrator.
(e) All dirt piles, whether generated from street/sidewalk excavations, from the excavation of basements, or from subdivision improvements shall be removed from the subdivision at the developers expense within one year of their piling.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 17
1. The penalty for violation of this requirement shall be as provided in section 7.25.
2. A time extension may be granted if, in the opinion of the director, weather conditions do not allow the contractor to remove dirt piles, to grade topsoil, or the dirt piles will be used to finish grade the subdivision lots.
(11) INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS. The village shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and insure their satisfactory completion.
(a) Fee. The applicant shall pay to the local government a per lot inspection fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the board.
1. The commission shall not sign the subdivision plat unless such fee has been paid at the time of application.
2. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the local government and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid.
(b) If the local government engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the local government's construction standards and specifications, the subdivider shall be responsible for the necessary corrections. Wherever a performance bond covers the cost of improvements, the subdivider and the bonding company shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements according to specifications.
(12) MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
(a) The developer shall be responsible, for a period of one year after construction, for the maintenance of all utilities installed to accommodate the new subdivision. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, settling trenches, dirt or gravel deposits in catch basins and manholes and any other maintenance deemed necessary by the director.
(b) If the developer fails to complete the necessary maintenance within a specified period of time the Director shall have the work done and charge the developer for all costs incurred.
(c) The developer will be responsible for clearly marking all manholes, catch basins and water boxes with stakes, fence posts or barricades to protect them against damage from construction equipment.
(13) ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS. The village will not accept the required improvements nor release nor reduce a performance bond until the director has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the director, through submission of detailed as-constructed drawings indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the director, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with the construction plans approved for the subdivision.
(14) AS-CONSTRUCTED DRAWINGS. Upon completion of the sanitary sewer mains and laterals, water mains and laterals and storm sewer mains and laterals, the subdivider shall provide the village as-constructed drawings of said improvements. Such drawings shall
(a) show the actual field location of all the above improvements, including lateral locations, and the actual manhole and catch basin rim and invert elevations for the sanitary and storm sewers.
(b) be prepared in an electronic format approved by the director and one full set of drawings
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 18
shall be printed on 24 x 36 paper.
7.06 Variances and Exceptions.
(1) Where, in the judgment of the board, on the recommendation of the commission, it would be inappropriate to apply literally the provisions of this chapter because exceptional or undue hardship would result, the board may waive or modify any requirements to the extent deemed just and proper. Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration, stating fully all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the commission and board in the analysis of the proposed project.
(2) The commission shall not recommend nor shall the board grant variances or exceptions to the regulations of this chapter unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: (a) The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;
(b) The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable generally to other property;
(c) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, financial hardship or self-imposed hardship, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
(d) Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other similar properties in the vicinity.
(3) Any recommendations by the commission shall be transmitted to the board. The board, if it approves of the variance, shall do so by a three-quarter (3/4) vote of its membership and instruct the village administrator to notify the commission and the subdivider.
(4) Such relief shall be granted without detriment to the public good, without impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter or the desirable general development of the village in accordance with any village comprehensive plan or component thereof, this chapter, or the zoning code. A three-quarters (3/4) majority vote of the entire membership of the board shall be required to grant any modification to this chapter, and the reasons shall be entered in the minutes of the board.
(5) The board may waive the placing of monuments, required under Wis. Stats. §236.15(b), (c) and (d), for a reasonable time on condition that the subdivider execute a surety bond to insure the placing of such monuments within the time required by the village.
7.07 Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector for the construction of any building, structure, or improvement to the land or any lot within a subdivision as defined herein which has been approved for platting or re-platting until all requirements of this code and other pertinent codes have been fully complied with.
7.08 Occupancy Permits.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 19
(1) REQUIREMENTS. No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the use of any structure within a subdivision or land division approved for platting or re-platting until required utility improvements have been installed and made ready to service the property and until roadways providing access to the subject lot or lots have been constructed or are in the course of construction and are suitable for vehicular traffic.
(a) Required public improvements shall include: sanitary sewer mains and laterals; water mains and laterals; storm sewers; and street excavation and street base construction.
(b) Required building and lot improvements include but are not limited to: gutters and downspouts; water meter; lot grades to ? 1" of drainage plan; house numbers; mail box (where applicable); paved driveway; and a thorough clean-up of construction materials.
(2) CONDITIONAL PERMITS. A conditional occupancy permit may be issued if, in the opinion of the building inspector, an unavoidable situation exists that would cause undue hardship to a homeowner. At the time a conditional permit is issued, a compliance date will be set for completion of each remaining requirement.
(3) WAIVER OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS. As a condition of approval and issuance of a conditional permit, the village may require the applicant to execute a waiver of special assessments to guarantee a good faith completion of the permit conditions.
(a) This waiver would allow the village to levy special assessments without notice and hearing if the village is required to complete the required improvements and the homeowner refuses to pay the costs incurred.
(b) The cost of work performed by village staff or other authorized agents plus interest and administrative charges at a rate approved by the board shall be billed to the homeowner. In the event a homeowner fails to pay the amount due, the clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0703(7)(b).
7.09 Violations.
(1) It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record or monument any land in violation of this chapter or the Wisconsin Statutes and no person, firm or corporation shall be issued a building permit by the village authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any subdivision, land division or re-plat with the jurisdiction of this chapter not of record as of the effective date of this code until the provisions and requirements of this chapter have been fully met.
(2) The village may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this chapter or the applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
7.10 Record of Plats. All plats of subdivisions, after the same have been submitted and approved as provided in this code, shall be filed and kept in a master book of plats to be maintained by the village among its permanent records.
7.11 Permits for Utility Services.
(1) PRIVATE. A master permit shall be obtained from the building inspector for the
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 20
installation of communication, cable television, electric power, gas and any other private utilities in public or private right-of-ways or easements as shown on the final plat, and a fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the board, shall be paid before installation is started. The master permit shall be issued to the developer and shall cover the installation of private utilities throughout the subdivision.
(2) PUBLIC. Approval shall be obtained from the director for the extension of public utilities such as water, sanitary sewer, laterals and storm sewer. The cost of the per lot permit shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the board, and shall include the cost of plan review and inspection of utilities prior to acceptance by the village.
7.12 Fee for Filing Preliminary Plat. The subdivider shall pay a fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the board, to the village at the time of filing the preliminary plat with the office of the clerk.
7.13 Approval and Inspection Fees. In addition to an inspection fee as set from time to time by resolution of the village board, any extraordinary costs incurred by the village for the approval of improvement plans and or inspection during the course of construction shall be paid by the subdivider.
7.14 Public Site Fee. If the subdivider has elected not to dedicate public lands within his plat as provided in Sec.7.04(6), a fee, equal to the developer’s investment value of the land specified in section 7.04(6)1 is required to be set aside, for the acquisition or capital improvement of public sites to serve the future inhabitants of the proposed subdivision shall be paid to the Village for each dwelling unit within the plat. The value of dedicated lands must be equal the number of dwelling units times the fee set by the board.
7.15 Multiple Unit Public Site Fee.
(a) Multiple Unit Public Site Fee. If the developer has elected not to dedicate public lands within their developments provided in Sec. 7.04(6), a fee, equal to the developers investment value of land specified in Sec. 7.04(6)(a)(1) is required to be set aside, for the acquisition or capital improvement of public sites to serve the future inhabitants of the proposed development. A fee shall be paid to the village for each dwelling unit within the development. The total site fee must be equal to the number of dwelling units times the unit fee set by the board.
(b) The village board may at its opti9on choose to adjust the dwelling unit fee based on the type of usage being proposed by the developer.
1. Condo’s or duplex’s can be reduced to 90% of the per unit site fee.
2. Apartments can be reduced to 80% of the per unit site fee.
7.25 Penalty.
(1) PENALTIES.
(a) In addition to penalties provided by Wisconsin State Statute or other provisions of this code, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or regulation made hereunder,
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Land Division Regulations - 21
shall be subject to the maximum penalty prescribed by state statute or by section 24.05 of this code.
(b) Recordation improperly made has penalties provided in Wis. Stats. §236.30.
(c) Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats has penalties provided for in Wis. Stats. §236.31.
(d) Monuments disturbed or not placed have penalties as provided for in Wis. Stats §236.32.
(e) Assessor's plat made under Wis. Stats. §70.27 may be ordered by the village as a remedy at the expense of the subdivider when a subdivision is created by successive divisions.
(2) APPEALS. Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat may appeal therefrom, as provided in Wis. Stats §236.13(5) and §62.23(7)(e)10, 14 and 15, within thirty (30) days of notification of the rejection of the plat. Where failure to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made a party to the action. The court shall direct that the plat be approved if it finds that the action of the approving or objecting agency is arbitrary, unreasonable or discriminatory.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Chapter 8
BUILDING CODE
8.01 Authority
8.02 Purpose and Scope
8.03 Appointment of Building Inspectors
8.04 Uniform Dwelling Code Adopted
8.05 Village Dwelling Code
8.06 Commercial Building Code
8.07 Administration and Enforcement
8.08 Right Of Access To Buildings and Property
8.09 Other Codes and Ordinances Enforced
8.10 Licenses and Certificates
8.11 Requirements Specific to the Village of North Fond du Lac
8.12 Certificate of Compliance Required
8.13 Occupancy Permits
8.14 Wrecking of Buildings and Structures
8.15 Moving Buildings
8.16 Police Officers to Report
8.17 Building Permit Required for Alterations
8.18 Building Permit Fees
8.19 Condemnation
8.20 Plumbing Code
8.21 Electrical Code
8.25 Penalty
8.01 Authority. These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §101.65.
8.02 Purpose and Scope.
(1) The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the general health, safety and welfare and to maintain required local uniformity with the administrative and technical requirements of the Village Building Code.
(2) The scope of this ordinance includes the construction and inspection of new-detached garages and one and two family dwellings built after June 1, 1980 covered under the Wisconsin One and Two Family Dwelling Code. It also includes the alterations and additions to dwellings built prior to June 1, 1980 covered under the Village Dwelling Code and the Commercial Building Code.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 2
8.03 Appointment of Building Inspectors.
(1) BUILDING INSPECTOR. The building inspector shall be appointed according to section 1.03 of this code.
(2) ASSISTANT BUILDING INSPECTOR. During peak workloads or natural disasters, the Village Board may appoint Assistant Building Inspectors that are certified by the Department of Commerce, Safety and Buildings Division to perform inspections.
8.04 Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code Adopted. The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code was adopted June 2, 1980. All amendments thereto, are adopted and incorporated by reference and shall apply to all buildings covered under the Wisconsin One and Two Family Dwelling Code.
8.05 Village Dwelling Code. In cases where homes or accessory buildings were built prior to June 1, 1980 and alterations and additions are made, the Building Inspector will use the following chapters as
the enforcement standard. The most recent code adopted by the State of Wisconsin
(1) COMM. 20 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
(2) COMM. 21 - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
The most recent code adopted will be used as a guideline and the Building Inspector will determine what is repair/maintenance and what must be corrected with new construction in order to eliminate a situation that could affect the general health, safety or welfare of the occupant. The inspector is responsible for maintaining local uniformity of the administrative and technical requirements.
(3) COMM. 22 – ENERGY CONSERVATION.
(4) COMM. 23 - HEATING, VENTILATION, AND AIR CONDITIONING STANDARDS.
(5) COMM. 24 ELECTRICAL.
(6) COMM. 25 PLUMBING.
8.06 Commercial Building Code. The following Wisconsin Administrative Codes, their referenced codes and standards, and subsequent revisions are adopted for municipal enforcement by the Building Inspector, who shall be commercially certified by the WI Division of Safety & Buildings.
(1) COMM. 50-64 WISCONSIN BUILDING AND HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING CODE
(2) COMM. 66 UNIFORM MULTI-FAMILY CODE
(3) COMM. 69 - BARRIER-FREE DESIGN
(4) COMM. 75-79 - EXISTING BUILDING CODE
(5) COMM. 70 - HISTORIC BUILDING CODE
8.07 Administration And Enforcement. All construction not covered by the One and Two Family Uniform Dwelling Code or the Commercial Building Code will be handled as follows.
(1) DEFINITIONS. Use the most current Comm. 20.07 of the One and Two Family Uniform
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 3
Dwelling Code.
(2) PERMIT FORM. There shall be 3 copies of the permit: one copy for the Village Clerk, one copy for the Building Inspector, and one copy to the applicant.
(3) PROCEDURES FOR OBTAINING A PERMIT. Application for a village construction permit shall be done on the forms obtained from the Building Inspector. (a) All permits, other than permits issued under the Uniform Dwelling Code, expire six (6) months from the date of issuance.
(b) No application shall be accepted that does not contain all the information requested on the form.
(c) The Building Inspector may request a plot plan, floor plan, structural plan or any data related to the project as deemed necessary by the Building Inspector.
(d) The Building Inspector may issue an early start permit for footings and foundations using the same criteria specified in Comm. 20.09 of the One and Two Family Uniform Dwelling Code.
(e) The plan review may take up to five business days if the applicant provides all the material requested by the Building Inspector.
(f) If the applicant fails to provide the information or provides inadequate information, the Building Inspector may need additional time to review the building plans.
(g) If a permit is denied to the applicant, the Building Inspector shall provide a reason or reasons for the denial.
(h) If the applicant does not agree with the Building Inspector reason(s) or requires a variance, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Appeals. See 21.19 of the North Fond du Lac Zoning Code for Board of Appeals information.
(4) INSPECTIONS. All inspections shall be performed as specified in Comm. 20.10 of the One and Two Family Uniform Dwelling Code.
(5) ADOPTION OF STANDARDS. The Village of North Fond du Lac will accept standards as specified in Comm. 20.24 of the One and Two Family Uniform Dwelling Code.
8.08 Right Of Access To Buildings And Property. If a permit has been obtained to perform work at a public building, private building or a property within the limits of the Village of North Fond du Lac, the inspector has the right, during reasonable hours, to inspect the work performed. Failure to grant access to a property may result in an inspection warrant being requested by the inspector.
8.09 Other Codes And Ordinances Enforced. The Building Inspector must enforce all ordinances and codes adopted by the village that regulate the construction of, the moving of, the drainage of, or the occupancy of a building.
8.10 Licenses And Certificates. The village and the State of Wisconsin require contractors to possess licenses and certificates in order to perform certain kinds of work. Homeowners and contractors must check the village electrical code, the village plumbing code, and other village
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 4
ordinances for detailed information about licenses and certificates that relate to specific trades.
8.11 Requirements Specific to the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(1) EAVES AND DOWN SPOUTS. All new one or two family dwellings shall have eaves and down spouts. The Building Inspector shall determine the location and number of eaves and down spouts (Adopted June 2, 1980).
(2) OUTSIDE WATER METER TOUCH PADS. All dwellings must have a touch pad installed, according to the provisions of section 12.06 of this code, on the outside of the building that connects to the water meter. The charge for the water meter shall be in accordance with the approved rates established by the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin.
(3) TIME OF CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS. It shall be unlawful to conduct any construction operations between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. in any place where a majority of the buildings within a radius of 400 feet are used in part or exclusively for residential purposes.
(4) DRAINAGE PLANS. Drainage plans must be submitted and approved by the Director of Public Works before any addition, new home, garage or building is built. A drainage plan is also required for filling yards for the purposes of landscaping or raising ground elevations.
(a) All new subdivisions or developments must have a master drainage plan that is reviewed and approved by the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works is the only individual authorized to modify the master drainage plan once it has been adopted for use.
(b) By request, the Building Inspector will provide a sample drainage plan and a list of required items to assist contractors and homeowners in preparing a drainage plan for individual lots.
(c) It will be the responsibility of the owner or developer to provide adequate drainage facilities to deal with any water running off their property.
(d) Any person creating a drainage problem on adjacent property is responsible for correcting the situation either by surface or underground drainage of this area. The corrections must be done by accepted engineering practices and must be approved by the Director of Public Works.
(e) In certain cases, the village offers technical assistance to improve drainage. Refer to the Village Operating Policy 7.01.
(5) SANDBLASTING CONTROL. Any sandblasting of buildings or structures in the Village of North Fond du Lac requires the contractor or owner of the property to follow certain precautions to prevent property damage or injury to pedestrians.
(a) All work shall be done in such a manner that no waste, dust or abrasive materials shall permeate the air or be deposited on any public street, public sidewalk, public property, or personal property without permission granted by the Building Inspector and the owner of the property.
(b) The Building Inspector will require clean up of the site on a regular basis. Generally, the site shall be cleaned up at least once in every twenty-four hour period or prior to anticipated precipitation.
(6) STORING MATERIALS ON STREETS. No building material or machinery or equipment shall be placed upon any street, sidewalk, or parkway without the approval of the Public Works
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 5
Director.
8.12 Certificate Of Compliance Required. Any land, vacant on the effective date of the Village Zoning Ordinance (November 2, 1959), and any building, structure or addition or major alteration thereto, constructed after November 2, 1959 shall not be used or occupied until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the Building Inspector, except temporary occupancy pending completion of the building when approved in writing by the Building Inspector.
(1) No new use shall be made of any land, building, or structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued.
(2) Failure to comply with all provisions of this code may result in the withholding of required certificate of compliance pending compliance with code requirements.
8.13 Occupancy Permits.
(1) Occupancy permits must be issued prior to occupancy of a new home, mobile home, apartment building, or commercial building. All the Commercial Codes, Residential Codes, Uniform Dwelling Codes, HUD Codes, Zoning Codes and Village Ordinances must be met in order to obtain an occupancy permit.
(a) The Building Inspector must address the following items on the occupancy form:
1. Confirm gutters and downspouts are installed.
2. The smoke detectors are installed.
3. The lot conforms to the drainage plan.
4. The sidewalks and driveway approaches are installed.
5. Address numbers are installed adjacent to the front door.
(b) The Building Inspector shall provide a copy of the occupancy inspection results to the owner(s) of the property or the owner’s agent.
(c) Failure to obtain an occupancy permit or a conditional occupancy prior to moving into the home may result in the police department evicting all persons from the structure until the issues are resolved.
(d) The Building Inspector has citation powers according to section 24.04 of this code and may elect to exercise that authority to obtain compliance. Citations may be written to the contractor or the homeowner.
(2) CONDITIONAL OCCUPANCY PERMITS. The Building Inspector may grant conditional occupancy in cases where unavoidable situations exist that would cause undue hardship to a homeowner.
(a) At the time a conditional occupancy is issued, a compliance date will be set for the completion of each remaining requirement.
(b) The homeowner will sign the conditional occupancy permit. As a condition of approval and issuance, the village may require the owner to execute a waiver of special assessments to guarantee a good faith completion of the permit conditions. This waiver would allow the village to levy special assessments without notice and hearing if the village is required to complete the required improvements and the homeowner refuses to pay the costs incurred.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 6
(c) Rather than using the special assessment procedure, the Building Inspector may elect to exercise his citation authority and cite the homeowner or contractor to obtain compliance.
(d) The Building Inspector at his own discretion may withdraw a conditional occupancy for good cause at any time and order the police to evict all persons from the dwelling.
8.14 Wrecking Of Buildings And Structures. No building or structure shall be demolished without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector. The Village of North Fond du Lac requires all utilities to be abandoned properly, the basement hole must be filled in, and the lot must be seeded. If there is a sewer lateral or a water service serving the property, the Plumbing Inspector must inspect the abandonment. The contractor or individual demolishing the structure must ensure that all by passers are protected from falling or blowing debris. Sidewalks should be fenced and debris shall remain on the owner’s property. No citizen shall intentionally burn any building or structure as a method of demolition. The North Fond du Lac Fire Department may do controlled burns.
8.15 Moving buildings. (1) PLAN COMMISSION TO REVIEW. No building shall be moved into or within the village limits without the plan commission reviewing the site plan prior to it being moved on to a lot of land located in the village. (a) The plan commission is responsible to ensure that the architectural design of the building fits with the neighborhood into which the building is being moved and does not depreciate the value of the homes located around it. The plan commission must review: 1. pictures of the building in its present condition,
2. site plan of the proposed location of the building,
3. landscaping plan,
4. floor plan of the building and
5. timeline for all the improvements that will be done to the building.
6. The individual requesting the building to be moved must be prepared to supply the plan commissions with copies of all signed contracts for the moving and improvements on the building site.
(b) The village staff must review the drainage plan, construction plans, and the zoning prior to the meeting.
(c) The plan commission may require that a performance bond be obtained as a condition of approving the building relocation.
(d) Exception. Village staff may review a residential garage, 720 square feet (30 feet by 24 feet) or less, and allow the garage to be moved on to a lot in the village without plan commission review.
(2) If the building is moved outside of the village limits, the plan commission does not have to review the proposed site plan.
(3) PERMIT REQUIRED, LOTS IN THE VILLAGE. In order to obtain a permit to move a building on to a lot in the Village of North Fond du Lac, the following requirements must be met:
(a) The applicant shall file with the permit application a $5,000 cashier’s check or a $5,000
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 7
bond payable to the Village of North Fond du Lac with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the clerk, conditioned to save and keep the village harmless from all liability. The bond shall indemnify the village against any and all judgments, claims of every nature whatsoever, costs and expense resulting from moving the building, including damage caused to the utilities, street, curb, landscape, or sidewalk.
(b) The applicant must have the Police Chief and the Public Works Director review and approve the route to be used for the moving of the building.
1. The Police Chief will provide a time for the applicant to move the building.
2. The Building Inspector will issue the permit with the condition that the approved route and times will be used.
(c) The lot receiving the building must be prepared in advance. The driveway/tracking pad, foundation, sewer and water must be ready. The building must be set on the foundation immediately. No building will be allowed to be stored temporarily on blocks, a trailer, a street, a parking lot or on a lot in the village.
(d) If the building was removed from a lot in the village, the utilities must be abandoned properly, the hole must be filled in, and the lot must be seeded.
(e) The plan commission or staff must review the site plan of the receiving lot as described above.
(f) The contractor hired to move the building must mark the building. Lighted lanterns displaying a red light shall be attached to every building being moved along a street during the period from sunset to sunrise. The lighted lanterns shall be attached to the building to be moved, one at each corner and in every case, lighted lanterns shall not be placed farther apart than 12 feet.
(g) The contractor hired to move the building is responsible to notify the Building Inspector that the move is complete within 48 hours after the move is complete. 1. The Building Inspector will notify the Public Works Director and the Public Works Director or his designee will inspect the route taken by the mover. If the removal of the building has caused damage to the streets, alleys, curbing, sidewalks, landscaping, etc, the building mover shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were before the permit was granted.
2. If the repairs are not completed in 10 days, the Village of North Fond du Lac shall repair the damage and use the cashier’s check or hold the sureties on the bond given by the building mover/permit holder responsible for the payment.
(h) The contractor hired to move the building must provide proof of liability insurance.
(4) PERMIT REQUIRED, LOTS OUTSIDE OF THE VILLAGE. In order to obtain a permit to move a building out of the Village of North Fond du Lac, the following requirements must be met:
(a) The applicant shall file with an application a $5,000 cashiers check or a $5,000 bond payable to the Village of North Fond du Lac with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the clerk, conditioned to save and keep the village harmless from all liability. The bond shall indemnify the village against any and all judgments, claims of every nature whatsoever, costs and expense resulting from moving the building, including damage caused to the utilities, street, curb, landscape, or sidewalk.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 8
(b) The applicant must have the Police Chief and the Public Works Director review and approve the route to be used for the moving of the building. The Police Chief will provide a time for the applicant to move the building. The Building Inspector will issue the permit with the condition the approved route and times will be used.
(c) No building will be allowed to be stored temporarily on blocks, a trailer, a
street, a parking lot or on a lot in the village.
(d) If the building was removed from a lot in the village, the utilities must be abandoned properly, the hole must be filled in, and the lot must be seeded.
(e) The contractor hired to move the building must mark the building. Lighted lanterns displaying a red light shall be attached to every building being moved along a street during the period from sunset to sunrise. The lighted lanterns shall be attached to the building one at each corner and in every case lighted lanterns shall not be placed farther apart than 12 feet.
(f) The contractor hired to move the building is responsible to notify the Building Inspector that the move is complete within 48 hours after the move is complete.
1. The Building Inspector will notify the Public Works Director and the Public Works Director or his designee will inspect the route taken by the mover. If the removal of the building has caused damage to the streets, alleys, curbing, sidewalks, landscaping, etc, the building mover shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were before the permit was granted.
2. If the repairs are not completed in 10 days, the Village of North Fond du Lac shall repair the damage and either use the cashier’s check or hold the sureties on the bond given by the building mover/permit holder responsible for the payment.
(g) The contractor hired to move the building must provide proof of liability insurance.
8.16 Police Officers To Report. It shall be the duty of all police officers to report at once to the Building Inspector any building or remodeling activities within their respective districts which are being carried on without a building permit as required by this Village Building Code.
8.17 Building Permit Required for Alterations.
(1) No person shall alter, in excess of $300 of value in any twelve month period, build, add onto or alter any building within the scope of this ordinance without first obtaining a building permit for such work from the Building Inspector.
(2) Value is determined by using one of the following methods:
(a) basing it on a contractor’s quote, taking the materials used for the project and doubling them or
(b) by having the Building Inspector estimate the value.
(3) Any structural changes or major changes to mechanical systems that involves extensions shall require permits.
(4) Restoration or repair on an installation to its previous code-compliant condition as determined by the Building Inspector is exempted from permit requirements. Re-siding and re-roofing require permits. No permit is required for painting, wall papering, floor covering, or kitchen cabinetry.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 9
8.18 Building Permit Fees. The building permit fees shall be determined by resolution of the village board.
8.19 Condemnation. See section 9.04 of this code
8.20 Plumbing Code.
(1) DEFINITIONS.
(a) Primary Residence. A primary residence is determined to be the address where a person claims permanent residency for voting and receipt of state or federal tax mailings, etc. A primary residence is not a cabin, summer home, rental property business, etc.
(b) Occupy The Home. Prior to occupancy, the home must meet the Village of North Fond Du Lac occupancy standards and the Wisconsin Plumbing Code which requires at least one toilet, one washbasin, one kitchen sink, one bathtub or shower, and a water heater to meet basic requirements for sanitation and personal hygiene.
(2) STATE OF WISCONSIN PLUMBING CODE. The Village of North Fond du Lac hereby adopts the Wisconsin Plumbing Code, Comm. 82 to 87. Any future changes or additions to the Wisconsin Plumbing Code are adopted and the inspector will enforce the most current code adopted by the State of Wisconsin.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to safeguard persons and property from hazards arising from the use of a plumbing product, installation of a product or the use of materials used during the installation of a product.
(b) Scope. The scope of this section provides for the design, construction and installation of plumbing for sanitary drainage, storm water drainage, fresh water supplies, and sewage disposal.
(3) PLUMBING INSPECTOR. The Plumbing Inspector shall be appointed according to section 1.03(7)(k). The inspector shall administer and enforce this section and shall be certified as a UDC Plumbing Inspector by the Department of Commerce, Division of Safety and Buildings as specified in Comm. 5.
(4) PLUMBING LICENSE REQUIRED. No person may engage in or work at plumbing in the State of Wisconsin unless licensed to do so by the Department of Commerce, Safety and Buildings Division.
(a) Exception. A single-family dwelling owner may do plumbing inside the building if it is their primary residence and they occupy the home.
(5) PLUMBING PERMIT REQUIRED. No plumbing or drainage of any kind shall be installed or altered, except that leakage or stoppage repairs may be made, without first securing a permit from the Plumbing Inspector.
(a) The permit applicant must describe the work to be performed. This can be done by either using the permit form or by providing a set of plans.
(b) The plumbing inspector may require information related to the work performed. New home plumbing permits shall expire per the Uniform Dwelling Code. All other plumbing permits shall expire six (6) months from the date the permit is issued.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 10
(6) INSPECTIONS. Upon completion of the plumbing work on any premises, the person doing the work shall notify the Plumbing Inspector before such work is covered up. The Plumbing Inspector shall schedule an inspection time within the time allotted by the Wisconsin One and Two Family Dwelling Code and the Wisconsin Plumbing Code. The Plumbing Inspector shall require all plumbing to be exposed at the time of the inspection. Failure to have it exposed may result in the Plumbing Inspector requiring the plumbing to be uncovered.
(7) PLUMBING PERMIT FEE. The plumbing permit fee shall be determined by resolution of the village board.
(a) If a permit expires, a new permit shall be obtained prior to recommencing the work at a fee of one-half the amount required for a new permit.
(b) Re-inspection and special inspection may be charged at a rate of $30 per inspection.
(8) DRILLING OF PRIVATE WELLS. If municipal water is available, no person, firm, or corporation shall drill any well for the purpose of obtaining water.
(a) If unusual conditions demonstrate a need for a private well, the Public Works Director or the director’s designee, may bring the issue to the plan commission.
1. The plan commission may allow a well where municipal water is available only if it is in the best interest of the public and the village is unable to provide the capacity needed for the person, firm, or corporation.
2. The Public Works Director or the director’s designee must be provided plans and specifications for the well and a map showing the location of the well.
3. In the event that the plan commission recommends the construction of a private well, and a permit is issued, the permit holder must comply with all of the provisions of section (9) Use of Private Wells, below.
(9) USE OF PRIVATE WELLS. The use of a private well located on any premise, which is served by the municipal water system of the village, shall be prohibited unless the Public Works Director or the director’s designee has issued a valid Private Well Operation Permit for that well.
(a) To qualify for a Private Well Operation Permit the applicant must meet the following requirements.
1. The well and pump installation shall meet the requirements of Chapter NR 112, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and a well constructor’s report shall be on file with the Department of Natural Resources; or certification of the acceptability of the well shall have been granted by the Private Water Supply Section of the Department of Natural Resources.
2. No physical cross-connection shall exist between the piping of the municipal water system and the private well.
3. Water from the private well shall not be used for human consumption.
4. The village shall have the right to inspect and sample the private well at its discretion and terminate the permit in the event that the water quality does not meet the drinking water standards established by the Private Water Supply Section of the Department of Natural Resources.
5. The owner of a private well that has a current permit may request the village to test their private well for coliform bacteria once a year. They must call and schedule a time for a utility
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 11
employee to collect a sample of the well water. The cost of the test will be covered under the permit fee.
6. The village will terminate the permit in the event that the water quality does not meet the drinking water standards established by the Private Water Supply Section of the Department of Natural Resources.
(10) ABANDONMENT OF WELLS. Any private well that is located on a premise served by municipal water system of the village and for which no valid Private Well Operation Permit has been issued shall be properly abandoned by November 1, 1988, or within one (1) year of the municipal water service having been made available.
(a) The purpose of this requirement is to prevent unused and/or improperly constructed wells from serving as a passage for contaminated surface or near-surface waters or other materials to reach the useable ground water.
(b) Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the procedures outlined in Chapter NR 112, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
1. The pump and piping shall be removed and the well checked for obstructions prior to plugging.
2. Any obstruction or liner shall be removed.
3. A well abandonment report shall be submitted by the well owner to the Department of Natural Resources on forms provided by that agency. The report shall be submitted immediately upon completion of the filling and sealing of the well.
4. A designated representative of the village shall observe the filling of the well.
(11) GARAGE DRAINS. Garage drains must discharge to the sanitary sewer. No garage drain may discharge to the grade or to the storm sewer within the village.
(12) SUMP PUMP. Every dwelling or building containing a sump pump shall discharge to a point away from the foundation walls, but shall not pump directly onto adjacent property. Any owner of a dwelling or other building whose sump pump discharges onto a sidewalk or through the curb and onto the street, shall disconnect said discharge pipe during the months the winter parking regulations are in effect.
8.21 Electrical Code. This section shall be known as the Electrical Code of North Fond du Lac. The purpose of this section is to safeguard persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity. This section is not intended to be a design specification or as an instruction manual. The village has the same scope as Wisconsin Administrative Code, Comm. 16 - Electrical. (1) DEFINITIONS. Terms used in this chapter have the following meaning:
(a) Electrical Work. The installation, superintending or inspection of electrical wiring and equipment for production, modification, regulation, control, distribution, utilization, or safeguarding of electrical energy as covered by the Wisconsin Administrative Code, Comm. 16 - Electrical.
(b) Electrical Contractor. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of erecting, installing, altering repairing, servicing or maintaining electrical wiring. The contractor must hold a master electrician’s license, or have a master electrician regularly employed in a
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 12
supervisory manner.
(c) Master Electrician. A person having the necessary qualifications, training, experience, and technical knowledge to properly plan, layout, and supervise the installation of wiring, servicing, erecting, or maintaining electrical wiring in accordance with the Wisconsin Administrative Code, Comm. 16 - Electrical.
(d) License & Certificate. No person shall undertake to alter, plan, install or supervise electrical wiring and equipment without first having obtained a license, or a certificate. The Village of North Fond du Lac will honor the license and certificates issued by any community in the State of Wisconsin.
(e) State Electrical Code. Wisconsin Administrative Code, Comm. 16 - Electrical, is hereby adopted and made part of this code with the same force and effect as thus set out herein in full. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of Comm.16 shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Any future changes or additions to the Wisconsin Administrative Code, Comm. 16 - Electrical are adopted and the inspector will enforce the most current code adopted by the State of Wisconsin.
(2) ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. The position of UDC Electrical Inspector and Commercial Electrical Inspector shall be appointed according to section 1.03(7)(k) and shall administer and enforce this ordinance. The electrical inspector shall be certified by the Department of Commerce, Division of Safety and Buildings as specified by Wis. Stats. §101.88(2). The Electrical Inspector may appoint, as necessary, subordinates, whose appointments shall be subject to confirmation by the Board.
(a) Right Of Access To Buildings. If an electrical permit has been obtained to perform electrical work on a public or private building, the Electrical Inspector or his assistants shall have the right during reasonable hours to inspect the work performed. The board has granted all village inspectors the authority to inspect property within the village limits. Failure to grant access to a property may result in an inspection warrant requested by the village inspector.
(b) Authority To Discontinue Electrical Operations. The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to cause the electrical currents to any equipment to be turned off which he finds to be in an unsafe condition, and cut or discontinue electrical service in case of emergency and where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. No person shall reconnect any equipment thus cut off until written permission is given by the Electrical Inspector.
(c) Periodic Inspection. The Electrical Inspector may periodically inspect any existing electrical wires or electrical equipment within the village. If an unsafe condition is discovered during a periodic inspection, the owner-occupant-operator-user will be notified. The notification must include the date of the inspection, a description of the unsafe condition, and a time frame to correct the unsafe condition. The time frame for the correction cannot exceed 30 days from the date the owner is notified. Failure to correct the violation within the time allotted will be considered a violation of the Village Electrical Code.
(3) ELECTRICAL PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall perform any electrical work, that requires $50.00 of materials or $100.00 of contracted labor and materials in any 12 month period,
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 13
without obtaining an electrical permit for such work from the village. Any work that requires less than $50.00 of materials or less than $100.00 contracted labor and materials requires no permit. Permits will be issued only to a licensed contractor, licensed industrial firm, corporation, or institution. If a resident occupies an existing single family home as their primary residence, he/she may obtain a permit for any electrical work with the exception of installing, modifying or upgrading an electrical service. New home electrical permits expire per the Uniform Dwelling Code. All other electrical permits shall expire if the electrical work is not commenced within six (6) months from the date of such permit.
(4) ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEE. The electrical permit fee shall be determined by resolution of the village board. Permit fees may be doubled for failure to secure a permit prior to the start of a job. If a permit expires, a new permit shall be obtained prior to recommencing the work at a fee of one-half the amount required for a new permit. Re-inspection and special inspection may be charged at a rate of $30 per inspection.
(5) PLANS REQUIRED. At the time of the issuance of a permit, the Electrical Inspector may require the manufacturer, owner, installer, or user to submit plans (drawings), data, and specifications.
(6) INSPECTIONS. The applicant or an authorized representative shall, in writing or orally, request inspections to the village. The village inspector shall perform the requested inspection within 2 business days after notification. The electrical work must not be concealed for a rough in electrical inspection. If the inspection is not completed within the 2 business days after notification, the work may proceed. All inspections must be recorded. Electrical service connections will be completed by the utility after a Permit for Connection is filed. If an Electrical Inspector is not available to file the Permit for Connection, contractors may make arrangements with the Electrical Inspector to fulfill Wis. Stats. §101.865 requiring proof that wiring complies with code prior to current being provided. Any code violations discovered during the inspection(s) must be documented by the inspector. The inspector must notify the responsible party with a description of the code violation and establish a re-inspection time.
(7) LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES.
(a) Required. No person shall alter, or install electrical wires and apparatus for the utilization of electric current for light, heat or power in the village without first having procured a license or certificate. The village will honor the license and certificates issued by any community in the State of Wisconsin.
(b) Classes Of Licenses And Certificates. There shall be one class of electrical contractor certificates and two classes of licenses. 1. Electrical Contractor’s Certificate.
2. Two Classes of Licenses:
a. Master Electrician’s License
b. Community Licenses/Certificates
(c) Working Without A License Or Certificate.
1. Employees of electrical telephone and railway may perform the planning or superintending and installation, operation and maintenance of equipment and materials required for the operation of business of such utilities without a license, but when said employees perform
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Building Code - 14
said work on property or premises of other persons except when making service connections and installing and testing transformers, meters, and other equipment ordinarily furnished by and remaining the property of said utility, they shall be licensed in the manner provided in this chapter.
2. A licensed electrical contractor, an individual holding a master electrician license that is insured, or an individual holding a license from a community in Wisconsin that is insured shall be required for all electrical work done in the village.
a. Exception: A person who owns a single family dwelling and resides in the home may be allowed to obtain the permit and do interior wiring on the home, residential garage, or residential shed.
b. No work on the electrical service may be done by the homeowner. To be considered as residing in a single family dwelling the person must have all utilities in their name, have no tenants, make their permanent address at the property and must reside at the property after the completion of the work.
8.25 Penalty. In addition to penalties provided by Statutes or other provisions of this code, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or regulations made hereunder, shall be subject to the maximum penalty as prescribed by state or by section 24.05 of this code.
(1) In addition to penalties, the inspector may withhold permits, double the regular permit fee for failure to obtain a permit prior to the start of the job, issue a stop work order, impose injunctive action or issue a municipal citation.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Chapter 9
HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
9.01 Scope
9.02 Applicability
9.03 Enforcement Authority
9.04 Condemnation
9.05 Right of Appeal
9.06 Definitions
9.07 Exterior Property Areas
9.08 Exterior Structure
9.09 Interior Structure
9.10 Basic Facilities
9.11 Installation and Maintenance
9.12 Occupancy Requirements
9.13 Light and Ventilation
9.14 Minimum Requirements for Safety from Fire
9.15 Smoke Detectors in One and Two Family Dwellings
9.16 Owner and Occupant Responsibilities
9.17 Rooming Houses
9.18 Maintenance of Property and Storage of Motor Vehicles
9.19 Noxious Weeds Prohibited
9.20 Rat & Rodent Control
9.21 Fair Housing
9.22 Non-residential Structures
9.23 Fraud in Housing Assistance
9.25 Violations
9.01 Scope. This chapter contains the minimum property standards code for all structures and properties in the village and shall be referred to throughout this section as the housing code.
(1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare in buildings and on the premises as hereinafter provided by:
(a) establishing minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space heating and sanitation; for safety from fire; for space, use and location; for safe and sanitary maintenance; and for cooking equipment in all structures now in existence; and
(b) fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all structures; and
(c) providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
(2) MATTERS COVERED. The provisions of this code shall apply to all structures and
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 2
premises, which are now, or may become in the future, substandard with respect to: structure, premises, protection against fire hazard, equipment or maintenance, inadequate provisions for light and air, lack of proper heating, unsanitary conditions, overcrowding, or other conditions which may be deemed to be harmful to the safety, health or welfare of their occupants, the neighborhood or the general public. The existence of such conditions, factors or characteristics adversely affects public safety, health and welfare and leads to the continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight. Adequate protection of the public, therefore, requires the establishment and enforcement of these minimum standards.
(3) TRAVEL TRAILERS AND MOBILE HOMES. All moveable units used for human occupancy, and the areas, grounds or parcels on which they are located, insofar as they are applicable thereto and not in conflict with, shall comply with the requirements of this code.
9.02 Applicability. Every portion of a building or premise used or intended to be used shall comply with the provisions of this code, irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered, or repaired, except as hereinafter provided.
(1) APPLICATION OF BUILDING CODE. Any alterations to buildings, or changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be done in accordance with applicable sections of the building code of the Village.
(2) APPLICATION OF ZONING LAW. Nothing in this code shall permit the establishment or conversion of a multi-family dwelling in any zone except where permitted by the zoning law, nor the continuation of such nonconforming use in any zone except as provided therein.
(3) CONFLICT WITH OTHER CODES. Except as provided in Section (4), in any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health code of the village existing on the effective date of this code, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the village existing on the effective date of this code which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people, the provisions of this code shall prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this code.
(4) EXISTING BUILDINGS. This code establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings and structures and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration, or use of buildings, equipment or facilities except as provided in this section.
(5) EXISTING REMEDIES. Nothing in this code shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the village or its buildings, which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe, or unsanitary.
9.03 Enforcement Authority. (1) ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Whenever in this chapter the term "building official of the village" is used, it shall mean the "building inspector". It shall be the duty and responsibility of the building inspector and or police department to enforce the
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 3
provisions of this code as herein provided.
(2) COORDINATION OF ENFORCEMENT. Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this code shall be the exclusive responsibility of the inspection department of the village. Wherever, in the opinion of the building official it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by any other department, he shall arrange for this to be done in such a manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. No order for correction of any violation under this code shall be issued without the approval of the building official, and it shall be the responsibility of that official before issuing any such order to determine that it has the concurrence of any other department or official of the government concerned with any matter involved in the case in question.
(3) ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY. Except as may otherwise be provided by the statute or local law or ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the village charged with the enforcement of this code shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this code. No person who institutes or assists in the prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this code shall be liable to damages hereunder unbelieving that the person accused or prosecuted was guilty of any unlawful act or omission. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the village, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this code, shall be defended by the legal representative of the village until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
(4) INSPECTIONS. The building official shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine the conditions of all structures and premises in order to safeguard the safety, health, and welfare of the public under the provisions of this code.
(a) The building official is authorized, upon proper notice, to enter any structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his duties under this code. Upon receipt of proper notice, the owner, occupant, or operator of every structure or premises, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the building official free access thereto and to all parts thereof and to the premises on which it is located at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance to or to impede an inspector or officer authorized under this code in the performance of his duties, and every such inspector or officer shall have the right, upon proper notice, to enter, examine and survey all premises, grounds and structures and every part thereof at all reasonable times upon display of proper identification.
(c) If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this code is sought, the administrative authority may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner, occupant or other person in charge cease and desist with such interference.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 4
(5) COMPLAINT PROCEDURES AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
(a) Any occupant who desires to file a complaint about substandard conditions in a dwelling unit must do so in writing. In signing the complaint form, the occupant must verify that the complaint is real and of a serious nature and that a reasonable effort has been made to have the owner correct the problem.
(b) Upon receipt of a valid complaint about a substandard condition that does not pose an immediate threat to the health or safety of the occupant(s), the housing inspector shall make a reasonable effort to contact the owner by telephone or by certified mail. 1. The purpose of the contact shall be to confirm that the tenant had notified the owner of the problem and to encourage the owner or his authorized operator or representative to accompany the Housing Inspector during the inspection.
2. If the owner does not respond within three (3) working days, or if the owner waives his right to accompany the inspector, the housing inspector may conduct the inspection without owner representation.
(c) Upon receipt of a valid complaint about a substandard condition that does pose a potential threat to the health or safety of the occupant(s), the housing inspector shall be authorized to make an immediate inspection without prior notification to the owner.
(d) If a complaint form filed by an occupant(s) is found to be fraudulent or frivolous, the complainant shall be subject to a forfeiture of $25 to $500 to the village for each such report that is filed.
(6) ACCESS BY OWNER OR OPERATOR. Every occupant of a structure or premises shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such structure or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this code.
9.04 Condemnation. Structures may be condemned as dangerous structures or unsafe for human occupancy as provided below.
(1) DANGEROUS STRUCTURES. If all or part of any building or structure (including among others a fence, billboard or sign) or the equipment for the operation thereof (including among others the heating plant, plumbing, electric wiring, moving stairways, elevators and fire extinguishing apparatus) shall be found, in the opinion of the building official, to be in an unsafe condition, that is dangerous to life, limb, or property; the inspector shall proceed to have the same condemned pursuant to the applicable provisions of codes of the village pertaining to unsafe structures.
(2) STRUCTURES UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY. Whenever the building official finds that any structure constitutes a hazard to the safety, health, or welfare of the occupants or to the public because it lacks maintenance; or is in disrepair, unsanitary, vermin-infested or rodent-infested; or because it lacks the sanitary facilities or equipment, or otherwise fails to comply with the minimum provisions of this code, but has not yet reached such state of complete disrepair as to be condemned as a dangerous structure as hereinbefore provided he may declare such structure as
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 5
unfit for human occupancy and order it to be vacated. (a) If any structure, or any part thereof, is occupied by more occupants than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law, such structure shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building official may cause such structure to be vacated.
(b) It shall be unlawful to again occupy such dwelling until it or its occupation, as the case may be, has been made to conform to the law.
(3) NOTICE. Notice of the declaration of any building under this code as unfit for human occupancy and order to vacate it shall be served as provided in this code and such other codes or ordinances of the village or state pertaining to unsafe buildings.
(4) POSTING OF NOTICE. Any structure declared as unfit for human occupancy shall be posted with a placard by the building official. The placard shall include the following information:
(a) name of village;
(b) name of the authorized department having jurisdiction;
(c) chapter and section of the code under which it is issued;
(d) orders that the structure when vacated must remain vacant until the provisions of the order are complied with and the order to vacate is withdrawn;
(e) the date that the placard is posted, and
(f) a statement of the penalty for defacing or removing the placard.
(5) FORM OF NOTICE. Whenever the building official has declared a structure as unfit for human habitation, he shall give notice to the owner of such declaration and shall placard the structure as unfit for human occupancy. Such notice shall: (a) be in writing;
(b) include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(c) include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued;
(d) state the time to correct the conditions, and
(e) state the time occupants must vacate the structure.
(6) SERVICE OF NOTICE. Service of notice to vacate shall be as follows:
(a) by delivery to the owner personally, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the owner with a person of suitable age and discretion; or
(b) by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at his last known address with postage prepaid thereon; or
(c) by posting and keeping posted for twenty-four (24) hours a copy of the notice in placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises to be vacated.
(7) REMOVAL OF PLACARD OR NOTICE. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any structure that has been declared or placarded as unfit for human habitation except by authority in writing from the building official.
(8) VACATING OF DECLARED BUILDING. Any structure which has been declared and placarded as unfit for human occupancy by the building official shall be vacated within a reasonable time as required by the building official, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to let to any person, for human occupancy, such structure, and no person shall occupy any structure which has been declared or placarded by the building official as unfit for human occupancy after the date set
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 6
forth in the placard.
(9) OCCUPANCY OF BUILDING. No structure, which has been declared or placarded as unfit for human occupancy, shall again be used for human occupancy until written approval is secured from the building official. The building official shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the declaration and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
(10) REPORT OF NOTICE TO VACATE. The building official shall furnish a copy of each notice to vacate a building to the fire chief, police chief, and any other designated official of the village concerned therewith.
9.05 Right of Appeal. Any owner or person who is aggrieved with the ruling or decision of the enforcing officer in any matter relative to the interpretation or enforcement of any of the provisions of the Housing-Property Maintenance Code may appeal the decision or interpretation.
(1) This appeal must be filed with the Administrative Review Board as provided in chapter 23 of this code, in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of the rendition of the decision or interpretation.
(2) The appeal may be decided by one of the following methods of procedure:
(a) A decision may be rendered by the Administrative Review Board;
(b) The matter may be resolved by the normal procedure for appeals by the appropriate courts of the various governmental units;
(c) The decisions of either body shall be subject to the appeal provisions as established by the appropriate courts of the various governmental units.
9.06 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this code, have the meanings indicated in this section.
(1) INTERCHANGEABILITY. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
(2) TERMS DEFINED IN BUILDING CODE. Where terms are not defined in this section and are defined in the building code, they shall have the same meanings assigned to them as in the building code.
(3) TERMS NOT DEFINED. Where terms are not defined under the provisions of this code or under the provisions of the building code, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context herein may imply.
(4) APPLIED MEANING OF WORDS AND TERMS.
(a) Acceptable Standards. Standards of care or workmanship that are of a type that does not create a nuisance or cause a property or area to appear in a blighted condition or tend to depreciate property values in the neighborhood or area.
(b) Approved. Approved as applied to a material, device, or method of construction shall mean approved by the building official under the provisions of this code, or approved by other
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 7
authority designated by law to give approval in the matter in question.
(c) Basement. A portion of the building partly underground, but having less than half its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground (see "cellar").
(d) Building Code. The building code officially adopted by the legislative body of this jurisdiction, or such other code as may be originally designated by the legislative body of the jurisdiction for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures.
(e) Building/housing Inspector. The official designated by the village to enforce building, zoning or similar laws and this code, or his duly authorized representative.
(f) Cellar. The portion of a building partly underground, having half or more than half of its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
(g) Debris. Any junk, wood, bricks, cement, concrete blocks, abandoned vehicles or machinery or parts thereof, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, and other appliances or any other unsightly accumulation of items or material, such as may tend to depreciate property values in the area, or create a blighted condition, or create a nuisance or hazard shall not be allowed on any property, except when such materials are properly housed and out of public view.
(h) Dwellings.
1. One-family Dwelling means a building containing one dwelling unit with not more than five (5) lodgers or boarders.
2. Two-family Dwelling means a building containing two (2) dwelling units with not more than five (5) lodgers or boarders but not more than twenty (20) individuals.
3. Multi-family Apartment House means a building containing more than two (2) dwelling units.
4. Boarding House, Lodging House, Tourist House means a building arranged or used for the lodging with or without meals, for compensation, more than five (5) and not more than twenty (20) individuals.
5. Dormitory means a building arranged or used for lodging six (6) but not more than twenty (20) individuals and having common toilet and bathroom facilities.
6. Hotel means a building arranged or used for the sheltering, sleeping, or feeding, for compensation, of more than twenty (20) individuals.
7. Whenever the words "multi-family dwelling", "residence building", "dwelling unit", "rooming house", "rooming unit", or "premises" are used in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
(i) Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms arranged for the use of one (1) or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
(j) Enforcement Officer. The official designated herein or otherwise charged with the responsibilities of administering this code, or his authorized representative.
(k) Exterior Property Areas. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 8
(l) Extermination. The control and elimination of insect, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
(m) Family. Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage or legal adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit, including domestic servants. A related family may also include not more than two roomers, boarders or permanent guests (whether or not gratuitous) in addition to the related family and servants. A group including servants and/or roomers, boarders, or permanent guests of not more than four unrelated individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, shall also constitute a family.
(n) Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
(o) Gross Floor Area. The total area of all habitable space in a building or structure. The floor area of rooms shall be measured by interior dimensions unless otherwise noted.
(p) Habitable Room. A room or enclosed floor space arranged for living, eating, and sleeping purposes (not including bathrooms, water closet compartment, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and other accessory floor spaces).
(q) Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
(r) Motel. For purposes of this code, a motel shall be defined the same as a hotel.
(s) Occupant. Any person over one year of age (including owner or operator) living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual possession of said dwelling or rooming unit.
(t) Openable Area. That part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
(u) Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which are let or offered for occupancy.
(v) Owner. The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possessions, assignee or rents, receiver, executor, trustee, less or other person, firm or corporation in control of a building or of premises, or their duly authorized agents.
(w) Person. An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
(x) Plumbing or Plumbing Fixtures. Water heating facilities, water pipes, gas pipes, garbage and disposal units, waste lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, or other similar equipment, catch basins, drains, vents, or other similarly supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, gas, sewer or vent lines.
(y) Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon.
(z) Proper Notice. Proper notice may consist of a personal visit, telephone conversation (not at a recorded message), or personal letter sent by certified mail to the owner-occupant, owner-landlord or authorized representative, or tenant.
(aa) Reasonable Notice. For a substandard condition that does not pose an immediate threat to the health or safety of the occupant(s), proper notice of the planned inspection shall be given to
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 9
a tenant at least 24 hours in advance of the inspection. For an owner-occupant or owner-landlord, the advance notice required shall be three (3) working days. No advance notice need be given to inspect a condition that is believed to pose a threat to the health or safety of the occupant(s).
(bb) Residence Building. A building in which sleeping accommodations or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided; except when classified as an institution under the building code.
(cc) Rooming House. Any residence building, or any part thereof, containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to more than five (5) persons who are not members of the family, under section 9.06(4)(h)4 of this code.
(dd) Rubbish. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimming, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
(ee) Structure. An assembly of materials forming a construction for occupancy or use, including among others, buildings, stadiums, tents, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio towers, water tanks, trestles, piers, wharves, open sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences and display signs.
(ff) Supplied. Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
(gg) Ventilation. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 1. Mechanical - ventilation by power-driven devices.
2. Natural - ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks without wind driven devices.
(hh) Workerlike. Whenever the words "workerlike state of maintenance and repair" are used in this code, they shall mean that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
(ii) Yard. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending along the entire length of a street, or rear, or interior lot line.
9.07 Exterior Property Areas. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum conditions of property and buildings. Every building or structure occupied by humans and the premises on which it stands, shall comply with the conditions herein prescribed as they may apply thereto. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any structure or premises which does not comply with the following requirements. The building official of the village shall cause periodic inspections to be made of all premises to secure compliance with these requirements.
(1) SANITATION. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, garbage, or debris.
(2) GRADING AND DRAINAGE. All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building or structure located thereon.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 10
(3) NOXIOUS WEEDS. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from species of weeds or plant growth, which are noxious or detrimental to the public health.
(4) INSECT, RODENT, VERMIN OR OTHER PEST HARBORAGE. Every owner of a structure or property shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests in all exterior areas of the premises, except that the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination in the exterior areas of the premises of a single-family dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the shared or public parts of the premises of other than a single-family dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(5) ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. All accessory structures, including detached garages, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
(6) MOTOR VEHICLES. See section 9.18.
(7) LAWN AREAS.
(a) Lawn Height. Lawn areas where provided on any property shall not be allowed to deteriorate to such condition as to be a seriously blighting influence on the neighborhood or the village in general. The growth of grass in excess of 6 inches in height or the maintenance of property with a lack of vegetation renders the yard unsightly and results in the diminution of the appearance of the property and adjacent properties and is prohibited.
(b) Non-Lawn Areas. Where lawn areas are not provided or have been removed, such areas shall be landscaped with garden beds or other ground cover so as not to be a public nuisances or a serious blighting influence.
(c) Enforcement. In addition to the building inspector, the weed commissioner may also enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
9.08 Exterior Structure. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any structure or portion thereof which does not comply with the following requirements. (1) FOUNDA-TIONS, WALLS, AND ROOF. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workerlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to exclude rodents.
(2) FOUNDATIONS. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points.
(3) EXTERIOR WALLS. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions that might admit rain, or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surface material must be painted in accordance with acceptable standards, and all siding material must be kept in repair.
(4) ROOFS. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects that might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building.
(5) STAIRS, PORCHES AND RAILINGS. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided in the building code and shall comply with the following sections.
(a) Structural Safety. Every outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 11
is subjected as required by the building code and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(b) Handrails. Where the building official deems it necessary for safety, every flight of stairs, which is more than two (2) risers high, shall have handrails which shall be located as required by the building code, and every porch which is more than two (2) risers high shall have handrails so located and of such design as required by the building code. Every handrail and balustrade shall be firmly fastened and shall be maintained in good condition.
(6) WINDOWS, DOORS AND HATCHWAYS. Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair.
(7) WINDOWS TO BE GLAZED. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass windowpanes or an approved substitute which are without open cracks or holes.
(8) WINDOWS TO BE TIGHT. Every window sash shall be in good condition and fit reasonably tight within its frame.
(9) WINDOWS TO BE OPENABLE. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by window hardware.
(10) DOOR HARDWARE. Every exterior door, door hinge, and door latch shall be maintained in good condition.
(11) DOORS TO FIT IN FRAME. Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its frame.
(12) WINDOW AND DOOR FRAMES TO FIT IN WALL. Every window, door, and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible, and to substantially exclude wind from entering the dwelling or structure.
(13) BASEMENT HATCHWAYS. Every basement hatchway shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain, and surface drainage water into the dwelling or structure and strong enough to support a 250 lb. load.
(14) EXIT DOORS. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being opened from the inside easily and without the use of a key.
(15) SCREENING. Guards and screens shall be supplied for protection against rodents and insects in accordance with the following requirements.
(a) Guards for Basement Windows. Every basement or cellar window which is openable shall be supplied with corrosion-resistive rodent-proof shields of not less than No. 22 U.S. gage perforated steel sheets, or No. 20 B&S gage aluminum, or No. 16 U.S. gage expanded metal or wire mesh screens, with not more than one-half (½) inch mesh openings, or with other material affording equivalent protection against the entry of rodents, including storm windows.
(b) Insect Screens. From June 1st to October 15th of each year, every door opening directly from any dwelling or multi-family dwelling to the outdoors, and every window or other outside opening used for ventilation purposes, shall be supplied with approved screening, and every swinging screen door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition, except that no such screens shall be required for a dwelling unit on a floor above the fifth floor. 1. The
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 12
building official has authority to waive the requirement for screen doors on newer homes that have ornamental entrance doors and air conditioning where there is no need for screen door ventilation.
2. Window type air conditioning units are not included in this exception.
9.09 Interior Structure. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any structure or portion thereof which does not comply with the following requirements.
(1) FREE FROM DAMPNESS. In every building, cellars, basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure as required by the building code.
(2) STRUCTURAL MEMBERS. The supporting structural members of every building shall be maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads in accordance with the provisions of the building code.
(3) INTERIOR STAIRS AND RAILINGS. Stairs shall be provided in every structure as required by the building code. No stairway may be located in a closet.
(4) MAINTAINED IN GOOD REPAIR. All interior stairs of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting a load as required by the provisions of the building code.
(5) HANDRAILS. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs, which is more than two (2) risers high, shall have handrails or railings located in accordance with the provisions of the building code. Every handrail or railing shall be firmly fastened and must be maintained in good condition. Properly balustraded railings, capable of bearing normally imposed loads as required by the building code, shall be placed on the open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
(6) BATHROOM AND KITCHEN FLOORS. Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Approved kitchen and bathroom carpeting will be permitted.
(7) SANITATION. The interior of every dwelling and structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Rubbish, garbage, and other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary storage facilities as required under sections 9.10 (6) and (7) of this code.
(8) INSECT AND RODENT HARBORAGE. Buildings shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents are found, acceptable processes shall promptly exterminate them, which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
(9) EXTERMINATION FROM BUILDINGS. Every owner of a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests whenever
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 13
infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units, or in the shared or public parts of the structure.
(10) EXTERMINATION FROM SINGLE DWELLING UNITS. The occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for such extermination within the unit occupied by him whenever his dwelling unit is the only unit in the building that is infested.
(11) RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, whenever infestation of rodents is caused by failure of the owner to maintain any dwelling or multi-family dwelling in a rodent-proof condition, extermination of such rodents shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(12) INTERIOR WALLS, CEILINGS AND FLOORS. All interior walls, ceilings and floors shall be structurally sound, in good repair, free from defects, clean and painted and decorated.
9.10 Basic Facilities. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein which does not comply with the following requirements.
(1) SANITARY FACILITIES. The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be supplied and maintained in sanitary, safe working condition.
(a) Water Closet. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which afford privacy and which is equipped with a water closet.
(b) Lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory which, when a closet is required, shall be in the same room with said water closet.
(c) Bathtub or Shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room that affords privacy to a person in said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower.
(d) Kitchen Sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the lavatory required under paragraph b above.
(2) WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower and water closet required under the provisions of section 9.10 (1) shall be properly connected to either a public water and sewer system or to an approved private water and sewer system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
(3) WATER HEATING FACILITIES. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly maintained, and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to be supplied with hot water under paragraph (2) above. Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility or other similar units, at a temperature of not less than one hundred thirty (130) degrees Fahrenheit at any time needed.
(4) HEATING FACILITIES. Every dwelling and multi-family dwelling shall have heating facilities, and the owner of the heating facilities shall be required to see that they are properly installed, safely maintained and in good working condition, and that they are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein, to a
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 14
temperature of at least an average of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit with an outside temperature of ten (10) degrees below zero (0). The owner shall maintain a minimum average room temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms, including bathrooms and toilet rooms when rented, at all times on the basis of ten (10) degrees below zero (0) outside. The temperature shall be existent at a level of three feet above the floor level and three (3) or more feet from an exterior wall.
(5) OPERATION OF HEATING FACILITIES AND INCINERATORS. Every heating or water heating facility and incinerator shall be installed and shall operate in accordance with the requirements of the building code or the air pollution control ordinances of the village.
(6) RUBBISH STORAGE FACILITIES. Every dwelling, multi-family dwelling and dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of such rubbish.
(7) GARBAGE STORAGE OR DISPOSAL FACILITIES. Every dwelling or multi-family dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be any adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling unit or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the building official, in the structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can or cans.
9.11 Installation and Maintenance. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any building or structure that does not comply with the following requirements.
(1) FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT. All required equipment and all building space and parts in every building or structure shall be constructed and maintained so as to properly and safely perform their intended function in accordance with the provisions of the building code.
(2) MAINTAINED CLEAN AND SANITARY. All building facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as not to breed insects and rodents or produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors.
(3) PLUMBING FIXTURES. In buildings and structures, water lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and capable of performing the function for which they are designed. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the building code or plumbing code of the village.
(4) PLUMBING SYSTEMS. In buildings and structures, every plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be so installed and maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the building code or plumbing code of the village.
(5) HEATING EQUIPMENT. Every space heating, cooking, and water heating device located in a building or structure shall be properly installed, connected, and maintained, and shall be capable
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 15
of performing the function for which it was designed in accordance with the provisions of the building code.
(6) ELECTRICAL OUTLETS AND FIXTURES. Every electrical outlet and fixture shall be installed, maintained and connected to the source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the building code or electrical code of the Village.
(7) CORRECTION OF DEFECTIVE SYSTEM. Where it is found, in the opinion of the building official, that the electrical system in a building constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, he shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
9.12 Occupancy Requirements. No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following requirements.
(1) MINIMUM CEILING HEIGHTS. Habitable rooms in existing buildings, except as provided in section 9.02 (4), shall have a clear ceiling height over the minimum area required by this code at not less than seven and one-third (7 1/3) feet, except that in attics or top half-stories the ceiling height shall be not less than seven (7) feet over not less than one-third (1/3) of the minimum area required by this code when used for sleeping, studying or similar activity. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area of the room having a clear ceiling height of five (5) feet or more may be included.
(2) REQUIRED SPACE IN DWELLING UNITS. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet for the first occupant, and one hundred (100) square feet for each additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable rooms.
(3) REQUIRED SPACE IN SLEEPING ROOMS. In every dwelling unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall have a minimum gross floor area of at least seventy (70) square feet. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
(4) ACCESS LIMITATION OF DWELLING UNIT TO COMMERCIAL USES. No habitable room, bathroom or water closet compartment that is accessory to a dwelling unit shall open directly into or shall be used in conjunction with a food store, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment room, or similar room used for public purposes.
(5) LOCATION OF BATH AND SECOND SLEEPING ROOM. No residence building or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one (1) sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room, nor shall the room arrangement be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment. (a) Existing one-family dwellings, where no lodgers are occupants, may be exempt from the requirements concerning access
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 16
through a first sleeping room.
(6) OCCUPANCY OF DWELLING UNITS BELOW GRADE. No dwelling unit partially below grade shall be used for living purposes unless:
(a) the floors and walls are watertight;
(b) the total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are in accordance with this code; and
(c) the required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
9.13 Light and Ventilation. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any building or structure for the purpose of occupancy therein which does not comply with the following requirements.
(1) NATURAL LIGHT IN HABITABLE ROOMS. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten (10) percent of the floor area of such room, except in kitchens when artificial light may be provided in accordance with the provisions of the building code. Whenever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three (3) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room.
(2) LIGHT IN NON-HABITABLE WORKSPACE. Every laundry, furnace room, and all similar non-habitable work spaces located in a building or structure shall have one (1) supplied electric light fixture available at all times.
(3) LIGHT IN COMMON HALLS AND STAIRWAYS. Every common hall and inside stairway in every building, other than one-family dwellings, shall be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least five (5) lumens per square foot in the darkest portion of the normally traveled stairs and passageways.
(4) ELECTRIC OUTLETS REQUIRED. Where there is electric service available to the building or structure, every habitable room of a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote outlets, one (1) of which may be a ceiling or wall-type electric convenience outlets or two (2) such convenience outlets and one (1) ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture shall be provided.
(a) Every public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one (1) electric light fixture.
(b) In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one (1) electric outlet.
(5) ADEQUATE VENTILATION. Every room shall have at least one (1) window that can be easily opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 17
widow area size required in section 9.13 (1) except that no openable window shall be required in bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an approved mechanical ventilation system.
(6) VENTILATION AND LIGHT IN BATHROOM AND WATER CLOSET. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as required by sections 9.13 (1) and (4), except that no window shall be required in bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an approved mechanical ventilation system.
(7) OVERCROWDING OF ROOMS. If any room in a dwelling is over-crowded, the building official may order the number of persons sleeping or living in said room to be so reduced that there shall be not less than four hundred (400) cubic feet of air to each adult and two hundred (200) cubic feet of air to each child under twelve (12) years of age occupying such room.
(8) EATING FACILITIES. No cooking facility or appliance shall be permitted in any sleeping room.
9.14 Minimum Requirements for Safety from Fire. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or shall let to another for occupancy, any structure that does not comply with the applicable provisions of the fire prevention sections of the building code ordinances of the municipality and the following additional requirements for safety from fire.
(1) STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS PROHIBITED. No dwelling, multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit shall be located within a building containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable liquids with a flash point of one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit or lower.
(2) COOKING AND HEATING EQUIPMENT. All cooking and heating equipment, components and accessories in every heating, cooking, and water heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions, and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health, and accident hazards.
(a) All installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the building code, or other laws or ordinances of the municipality applicable thereto.
(b) Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited.
9.15 Smoke Detectors in One- and Two-family Dwellings.
(1) STATE LAW ADOPTED. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the provisions of Chapter IHLR 28, SMOKE DETECTORS, of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, are hereby adopted and by reference made apart of this code as if fully set forth herein.
(a) Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any provision of the Wisconsin Administrative Code incorporated herein is required or prohibited by this code.
(b) Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications of the Wisconsin Administrative Code incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this code.
(c) When any of the provisions incorporated herein is inconsistent with another portion of the code dealing with smoke detectors, the provision that is the most strict in its application shall
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 18
apply.
(2) RESPONSIBILITIES. (a) The owner shall be responsible for installing smoke detectors in accordance with section 9.15 (4).
(b) The owner shall be responsible for the testing and maintenance of any smoke detector located in a common area of the building.
(c) The owner shall be responsible for checking and testing the proper function of all smoke detectors located within a dwelling unit at the beginning of each new lease.
(d) After the beginning of the lease, the tenant(s) shall be responsible for the testing and maintenance of all smoke detectors located within the dwelling unit, including replacement of the battery. The expense of any required maintenance of smoke detectors, including replacement of the battery, shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(e) The tenant(s) shall be responsible for notifying the building owner, in writing, of the malfunction of any smoke detector that cannot be remedied by replacing the battery or by simple adjustment.
(f) The owner shall have five (5) days from the receipt of written notice from a tenant to repair or replace the malfunctioning smoke detector.
(g) The owner shall furnish to the tenant(s), at the beginning of the lease, written notice of the respective responsibilities of the owner and tenant regarding smoke detector maintenance and testing.
(3) SMOKE DETECTOR DEFINITION.
(a) A smoke detector, as specified in this code, shall be a device capable of sensing visible or invisible products of combustion, other than heat, and providing a suitable audible alarm when such products are present.
(b) The detectors may be battery-powered or powered by the building electrical system.
(c) Installation and maintenance of smoke detectors shall be in accordance with NFPA 74-1980, Household Fire Warning Equipment.
(4) LOCATION OF SMOKE DETECTORS. A functional smoke detector shall be installed in the basement and at the head of any common stairway on each floor level of the building and in each sleeping area of each unit. The smoke detector shall be located no more than six (6) feet from the doorway of any sleeping room.
(5) INSPECTION AND PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
(a) An authorized DILHR or municipal representative may inspect dwellings when requested to do so by the owner or tenant.
(b) Violation of the smoke detector requirements may result in a forfeiture to the village in the amount of $25 to $500 per day for each violation found.
9.16 Owner and Occupant Responsibilities. Occupants of structures and/or premises and owners or operators of rooming houses shall be responsible for maintenance thereof as provided in this article.
(1) CLEANLINESS. Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall keep that part of the
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 19
building or premises thereof that he occupies, controls, or uses in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH. Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers required by section 9.10 (6) of this code.
(3) DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE. Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall dispose of his garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities, or if such facilities are not available, by removing all non-burnable matter and securely wrapping such garbage and placing it in tight metal garbage storage containers as required by section 9.10 (7) of this code, or by such other disposal method as may be required by applicable laws or ordinances of the municipality.
(4) USE AND OPERATION OF SUPPLIED PLUMBING FIXTURES. Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall keep the supplied plumbing fixtures therein clean and sanitary and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation.
(5) INSTALLATION AND CARE OF PLUMBING FIXTURES FURNISHED BY OCCUPANT. Every plumbing fixture furnished by the occupant of a building or structure shall be properly installed and shall be maintained in good working condition, kept clean and sanitary, and free of defects, leaks or obstructions.
9.17 Rooming Houses. Every person who operates a rooming house, or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, shall comply with the provision of every section of this code, except as provided in the following sections.
(1) WATER CLOSET, HAND LAVATORY, AND BATH FACILITIES. At least one (1) water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four (4) rooms within a rooming house wherever said facilities are shared.
(a) All such facilities shall be located within the residence building served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more than one (1) story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities.
(b) Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times.
(c) Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
(2) MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR SLEEPING PURPOSES. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than two (2) persons shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
(3) BED LINEN AND TOWELS. The operator of every rooming house shall supply bed linen and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to another occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
(4) SHADES, DRAPES, ETC. Every window of every rooming unit shall be supplied with
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 20
shades, drawn drapes, or other devices or material which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupant of the rooming unit.
(5) SANITARY CONDITIONS. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming house, and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
(6) SANITARY FACILITIES. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by section 9.17 (1) shall be located within the rooming house and within a room or rooms which: (a) afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms; and
(b) are accessible from a common hall and without going outside the rooming house or through any other room therein.
9.18 Maintenance of Property and Storage of Motor Vehicles.
(1) DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings assigned to them in this section. Words and phrases not herein otherwise defined shall have the meanings accepted by common use.
(a) Automotive Repair Business. A building or portion thereof, used for the repair of vehicles as a commercial business.
(b) Blighting Influence. A condition having an adverse effect on surrounding properties.
(c) Debris. Broken concrete, bricks, rocks or other mineral matter; bottles, porcelain and other glass or crockery; boxes; lumber (new or used); posts, sticks or other wood; paper, rags, cardboard, excelsior, rubber, plastic, wire, tin and metal items; discarded household goods or appliances; junk lawn mowers; tar paper; residues from burning; or any similar materials which constitute health, fire or safety hazards or a serous blighting influence upon their neighborhood or the village in general.
(d) Junk. Any old or scrap metal, metal alloy, synthetic or organic material or waste; any junked, ruined, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicle or machinery, or any part thereof, whether salvageable or not. Storage of certain materials may be permitted according to section 21.02(10) of this code.
(e) Motor Vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled.
(f) Disabled Motor Vehicle. A vehicle that cannot be operated without mechanical repair or assistance.
(g) Inoperable Motor Vehicle. A vehicle which does not meet the minimum equipment standards required for operation on the highway or street as set forth in Wis. Stats. Chapter 347 of the Administrative Code, Trans 305.
(h) Noncombustible Material. Material that cannot be burned.
(i) Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term shall include residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials; paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior, rubber, leather, tin cans, metals, minerals, matter, glass,
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 21
crockery and dust and other similar materials.
(j) Hazardous Obstruction. Any building, monument, tree, fence, shrub, bush, motor vehicle, trailer, camping trailer, boat, machinery, sign, or other object which creates a hazard to public safety because of its location.
(2) Prohibitions. No person, group of persons, company, firm, corporation or other entity shall store or allow to remain outside of a building for more than three days any debris, junk, rubbish, refrigerator, appliance, machinery or similar type of personal property or disassembled, disabled, inoperable, unlicensed, junked or wrecked motor vehicle or boat.
(a) Refrigerators. Any refrigerator that is stored outside of a building must be made safe by one of the following methods: 1. The door of the refrigerator must be removed from the body of the refrigerator.
2. A chain must be placed around the refrigerator and the chain must be padlocked in such a fashion to prevent the door from being opened.
3. The refrigerator must be laid down so that the door is between the refrigerator body and the ground.
(d) Firewood Storage. Firewood shall be stored in straight, orderly piles which are raised off the ground and which are not in the "front yard" of any residence. Firewood shall not be piled against any wall which adjoins the living area of any occupied dwelling.
(e) Hazardous Obstructions. No person, group of persons, company, firm, corporation or other entity shall construct, cultivate, park or maintain on private or public property, any obstruction that is hazardous to the safety of the public or which restricts from sight any traffic sign or any person traveling on a public sidewalk or any cyclist or vehicle that is traveling on any public alley, street or highway.
1. If a hazard to public safety exists and the hazard is not corrected in a timely manner after written notice is given, the chief or director of public works shall take reasonable action to protect public safety.
2. The cost of such action shall be billed to the property owner by authority of Wis. Stats. §66.0703.
(f) Barbed Wire Fences Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of land in the village to build or maintain any fence constructed wholly or in part of barbed wire along any public street adjacent to any sidewalk or to build or maintain any barbed wire as a division fence between any lots or parts of lots occupied for residential purposes.
(3) EXCEPTIONS. The above regulations shall not apply to the following types of activities when they are located in a business or industrial zoning district.
(a) To damaged or inoperable vehicles brought to the business for repair by a customer, that are stored for less than 15 days in any 60 day time period, outside an automotive repair business while awaiting repair or servicing.
(b) To vehicles that are displayed for sale on the lot of a properly licensed car dealer in an area for which a special use permit has been approved or proper zoning exists.
(c) To heavy commercial vehicles that are subject to quarterly registration by the Department
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 22
of Motor Vehicles.
(4) ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. The police department or it's designee shall have the duty, responsibility and authority to enforce this section.
(a) Persons shall allow access to the police department or it's designee to their property for the purpose of enforcing this section.
(5) VIOLATIONS. Whenever any violation of this ordinance is found, the police department may take one or more of the following actions: (a) Order the violation corrected by the property owner by the removal and proper disposal of the material within a specified period ranging from one to thirty days; or
(b) Issue a citation for violation of this section; or
(c) When the violations are pursued by the police department, such legal actions shall occur through the office of the village attorney including injunctive relief and forfeiture actions through the process of summons and complaints or other proper recourse.
(d) The municipal court may, upon petition, and at the request of the village, order the removal of the violating junk or debris. The village will then invoice the property owner for all such costs incurred in the removal. If the invoice is not paid within 30 days, the village may place the amount of the invoice on the tax rolls as a special charge against the property in question.
(e) Injunctive relief can also be requested requiring the property owner or other party in possession of the property to remove the violating junk, debris, rubbish and motor vehicles and have those items properly stored or disposed of. Any village cost incurred in the removal of such items will be assessed against the violating possessor of the property and/or owners.
(f) Failure to Comply. Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation or other legal entity failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $75 nor more than $500, plus costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense. Any person who is in default of payment of these forfeitures and costs and who is not found to be indigent by the court, shall be imprisoned in the Fond du Lac County Jail for up to 30 days for each violation or until payment is made.
9.19 Noxious Weeds Prohibited. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0407, (1) No person shall plant or allow the presence of noxious weeds upon premises in the village that they own or occupy or on the sidewalks or terraces adjacent to such premises. Noxious weeds include: Canada thistle, English charlock or wild mustard, field bindweed commonly known as creeping Jenny, goats beard, quack or quitch grass, field dodder, Indian mustard, oxey daisy, snap dragon, sow thistle and the “Barberries Bulgaris” commonly known as tall Barberry.
(2) Unsightly Growth/Height. No person shall permit upon premises in the Village that they own or occupy, or on the sidewalks or terraces adjacent to such premises, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height to exceed 6". The permitting of such growth, by blighting residential areas, permitting breeding areas for obnoxious insects, and concealing vermin and filthy deposits, is declared to be a public nuisance.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 23
(3) Weed Commissioner Duties. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. Section 66.0517 the Village President shall appoint one or more Weed Commissioners each year. In addition to having the powers and duties prescribed by Section 66.0517 the Weed Commissioner shall have all powers reasonably necessary to carry out the duties of this section including the authority to issue citations for violations of this ordinance. The Weed Commissioner may designate others to carry out nuisance abatement under the Weed commissioner’s direction.
(4) Abatement Notice. Upon discovery of a violation of this ordinance the Weed Commissioner may attempt personal service on the owner, agent of the owner, occupant or other person causing, maintaining or permitting the nuisance at such person’s last-known address. If this attempt is unsuccessful or impractical, the Weed Commissioner shall post a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place in or about the building where the nuisance exists and send notice by first class mail to the last-known address of the owner of record or agent of the owner. Such notice shall require the owner, occupant or person having control of the land where such growing matter is found, to cut, destroy and remove such growth and otherwise abate the nuisance within 5 days of the date of the issuance of the notice.
(5) Abatement by Weed Commissioner. After the time set forth in the abatement notice, the Weed Commissioner shall personally inspect the property upon which the nuisance was discovered, and if the nuisance has not been abated, the Weed Commissioner or designees under the Commissioner’s direction shall enter the property and cause the abatement of the nuisance by cutting down or otherwise destroying the nuisance bushes, unsightly growth or noxious weeds.
(6) Collecting the Cost of Abatement. In addition to all other penalties allowed by law, the Weed Commissioner shall keep an account of the expense of any nuisance abatement and make a report of the same to the clerk who shall attempt to bill and collect the costs incurred by the abatement. If the owner, his agent or other person in control of the premises upon which the nuisance was located fails to pay the bill the clerk shall, pursuant to Wis. Stats. Section 66.0627, charge the amount therein to that parcel of land in the next subsequent tax roll as a special charge and shall collect that amount as a special charge.
(7) Forfeiture Penalty for Violations. In addition or in lieu of any other remedy authorized by law if the Weed Commissioner may issue a citation for any violation of this ordinance and the penalties for such citation shall be as provided at 9.25(3) of this code.
9.20 Rat and Rodent Control.
(1) All buildings, places and premises shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent rats and rodents from being harbored underneath the same or within the walls thereof and all food products or other products, goods, wares and merchandise likely to attract or become infested with or infested by rats or rodents, whether kept for sale or for any purpose, shall be so protected as to prevent rats and rodents from gaining access thereto or coming in contact therewith.
(2) All buildings, places and premises shall continually be kept by the owner, person in charge or the occupant thereof in a clean and sanitary condition and free from rats and rodents.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 24
(3) Whenever holes, burrows or other evidence of rat and rodent infestations are found on any premises or in any building, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to exterminate the rats and rodents or to cause the rats and rodents to be exterminated.
(4) A rat and rodent-proof metal container or any other container made of material that is impervious to rats and rodents, shall be used for the storage of garbage or refuse and openings into containers, such as doors or covers, shall be tight-fitting to prevent the entrance of rats and rodents.
(5) No person shall permit buildings or grounds to accumulate food, waste, debris or any material that would serve to attract or serve as a harboring place for rats and rodents.
(6) In the event that the owner of the premises does not keep the premises rat and rodent free, the building inspector is authorized to go upon the premises and take whatever action is necessary to exterminate said rats and rodents. All charges connected therewith shall be taxed against the infested premises as a special charge.
9.21 Fair Housing. The village hereby adopts Wis. Stat.§106.50 and all subsequent amendments thereto in regards to fair housing.
(a) Officials and employees of the village will assist in the orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing within the village by implementing the authority and enforcement procedures set forth in Wis. Stats. §106.04.
(b) The clerk shall maintain the forms for complaints to be filed under §106.04, and shall assist any person alleging a violation thereof in the village to file a complaint with the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development, Equal Rights Division for enforcement of Wis. Stats. §106.04 as amended.
9.22 Non-residential Structures. The following codes are hereby adopted to apply to non-residential structures in the village:
(1) 9.03 Enforcement Authority;
(2) 9.04 Condemnation;
(3) 9.05 Right of Appeal;
(4) 9.06 Definitions;
(5) 9.07 Exterior Property Areas;
(6) 9.08 Exterior Structure;
(7) 9.09 Interior Structure;
(8) 9.11 Installation and Maintenance;
9.23 Fraud in Housing Assistance.
(1) No person shall willfully make any false representation with the intent to secure housing assistance for themselves or for some other person.
(2) No person shall willfully do any act designed to interfere with the proper administration of the housing assistance program.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 25
(3) Any person who receives assistance for dwelling accommodations under Wis. Stat. §66.1205 shall notify the housing authority granting such assistance of any increase in income, assets or change in family composition within twenty (20) days after the receipt of those assets, income, or change in family composition.
(4) Any person who makes any statement in written application for aid under Wis. Stat. Chapter 66 shall be considered to have made an admission as to the existence, correctness and validity of any facts stated which shall be considered prima facie evidence against the party making it in any complaint and in any action or proceeding brought for enforcement of any provision of this section.
(5) “Housing Assistance” as used in this section includes assistance obtained through the Housing Authority program.
9.25 Violations. Notice of violation shall be served upon the owner of record, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to him personally, or if not found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of abode with a person of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof, or by sending a copy thereof by mail to his last known address, or, if the letter with the copy is returned showing it has not been delivered to him, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by the notice.
(1) SERVICE OF NOTICE. Whenever the appropriate village official determines there has been or is a violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been or is a violation of any provision of this code, he shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor. Such notice shall:
(a) be in writing;
(b) include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(c) specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required, and
(d) allow a reasonable time of up to six (6) months for the performance of any act it requires.
(2) PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION. In case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the appropriate village official may request the legal representative to institute an appropriate action or proceeding in law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation, ordering him:
(a) to restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work;
(b) to restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such building;
(c) to require the removal of work in violation;
(d) to prevent the occupation or use of the building, structure, or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this code, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued; or
(e) to enforce the penalty provisions of this code.
(3) PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS. Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any
Village of North Fond du Lac June 25, 2007
Housing and Property Maintenance - 26
provision of Chapter 9 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Every day that a violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Chapter 10
PUBLIC WORKS
10.01 Official Map
10.02 Street and Sidewalk Grades
10.03 Sidewalk Construction and Repair
10.04 Driveways
10.05 Street and Terrace Openings
10.06 Obstructions and Encroachments
10.07 Snow and Ice Removal
10.08 Street Lighting
10.09 Street Names and Signs - Street Numbers
10.10 Solid Waste Management
10.01 Official Map. The zoning map of the village and all future amendments is hereby designated as the official map of the village.
10.02 Street and Sidewalk Grades.
(1) ESTABLISHMENT. The director of public works shall establish the grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks and the same recorded in the office of the director of public works (director). No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established.
(2) ALTERATION OF GRADE PROHIBITED. No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof in the village by any means whatsoever unless authorized or instructed to do so by the director of public works. All alterations of grade shall be recorded in the office authorizing the alteration.
(3) EXCAVATING PROPERTY BELOW GRADE. It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or agent or employee, to excavate or dig or remove earth from any lot or parcel of land in the village so that the surface of said land shall thereby be lowered more than 3 inches below the established street or sidewalk grade and allow the surface of such land to remain so lowered for more than 10 days, provided however, that this section shall not apply to any excavation of any structure where a building permit is obtained from the village as provided for in this code, nor to any drainage ditch, the width of which does not exceed 3 feet.
10.03 Sidewalk Construction and Repair.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall construct or maintain any driveway across any sidewalk or curbing without first obtaining a sidewalk permit from the building inspector. The fee for such permit shall be set from time to time by resolution of the board.
(2) OWNER TO CONSTRUCT. It shall be the duty of the abutting owner to build, repair, construct and perpetually maintain sidewalks along or upon any street, alley or highway in the
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 2
village and to pay the entire cost thereof. Whenever the board shall authorize sidewalks to be laid, rebuilt, repaired, lowered or raised along or upon any public street, alley or highway within the village, it shall proceed according to Wis. Stats. §66.0907.
(a) Exceptions. Owners of real estate abutting improved streets, defined to mean any paved street set to grade along which curb and gutter is installed, shall construct the appropriate sidewalk unless the criteria for one of the following possible exceptions applies:
1. Property is a corner lot with one side improved and the other unimproved.
2. An exit from the end of the sidewalk is provided via a concrete driveway approach.
3. Property is unimproved and is the last parcel fronting on an improved dead-end street.
(b) Whenever any of the above criteria for each exception are no longer applicable, the appropriate sidewalk shall be installed.
(c) Properties abutting unimproved streets.
1. Owners of improved properties abutting unimproved streets shall construct the appropriate concrete sidewalk, if none exists, within 12 months of completion of building construction if a formal street plan exists.
a. The building inspector may require installation of sidewalks as a condition of occupancy prior to 12 months.
b. Property owners may install their own sidewalks as long as the installation is completed prior to the beginning of street bidding.
c. If the property owner chooses not to install their own sidewalk, the village’s contractor as part of the street improvement project will install it.
2. If a street is being reconstructed, owners do not have the option of constructing their own sidewalks. a. If a sidewalk does exist, it shall be removed and a new one installed per specifications and grade, as part of the street reconstruction project.
b. The property owner shall be given credit for all good sections of concrete and not be assessed for those portions.
3. All the costs associated with the project and assessed to the abutting property owner can be paid according to section 10.10 of this code.
(d) Concrete driveway approaches. The village’s contractor shall install concrete driveway approaches at the time of the street improvements.
(e) Exemptions from the sidewalk construction order as stated are granted and limited to the following four cul-de-sacs: Audrey Court, Julie Court, Willis Court and the south end of Thurke Avenue, also known as Thurke Circle.
(2) LICENSE AND BOND REQUIRED
(a) License.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, remove, replace or repair any sidewalk upon or within any public street, avenue, alley or pedestrian lane within the corporate limits of the village without first having applied for and obtained a sidewalk contractor’s license from the director of public works of the village. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any one person from laying, removing, replacing or repairing his own sidewalk or that part of the sidewalk immediately in front of property owned by him.
2. The fee for every sidewalk contractor’s license shall be as set from time to time by
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 3
resolution of the village board.
(b) Bond.
1. Every person licensed to repair sidewalks, before receiving the license, shall provide proof of insurance and a bond to the village in the amount of $10,000, with conditions that the licensee shall lay, remove or replace or repair all sidewalks to be constructed, and shall obtain a permit, in accordance with the specifications as prescribed by this code and that the licensee will lay, replace or repair the sidewalk according to the lines and grades as marked and staked out by the director or the director’s authorized representative.
2. The license and bond shall be renewable annually, providing that in lieu of a renewal of the bond, a new surety company bond satisfactory to the village board may be filed, both license and bond to expire on the thirty first day of December, next following the date of issuance of the license.
(4) SPECIFICATIONS. All sidewalks within the village shall be repaired, rebuilt and constructed in accordance with the following specifications:
(a) Subgrade. The subgrade shall be prepared by excavating to the line, grade, and cross section as established by the director. Soft and unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with gravel and the subgrade shall be thoroughly and uniformly compacted and moistened immediately before the concrete is placed.
1. A sub-base of gravel shall be placed under the sidewalk.
2. The sub-base must be a minimum of four inches thick.
3. On embankments the subgrade shall extend at least one foot beyond each edge of the sidewalk.
(b) Material. All sidewalks shall be of air entrained concrete composed of 6 bags per cubic yard of one course construction and built to the established line and grade. Gravel shall be of good quality and washed. Concrete shall be mixed thoroughly for a minimum of one minute after all materials have been placed in the mixer.
(c) Forms. Concrete shall be placed in straight forms of wood or metal of sufficient strength to resist springing, tipping or other displacement during the process of depositing and consolidating the concrete. Wood forms shall be surface plank of at least 2 inches nominal thickness except for sharply curved sections. The forms shall be of full depth of the required walk and shall be of such design as to permit secure fastening. Forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before the concrete is placed against them. Concrete shall be placed in the forms on a moist subgrade, deposited just above the finish grade and consolidated and spaded sufficiently to bring the mortar to the surface and to prevent honeycombing. It shall then be struck off level with the top of the forms and finished.
1. To provide adequate drainage, the sidewalk shall slope toward the curb at the minimum rate of 1/4 inch per foot width.
2. All joints and edges shall be finished with a 1/4 inch radius edging tool.
(d) Width and Thickness. Residential walks shall be 4.5 feet in width and not less than 4 inches nominal thickness except within driveway approaches where the minimum thickness shall be 6 inches nominal thickness; provided that walks in residential areas may be repaired or replaced to a width not less than the existing width on the effective date of this section.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 4
1. Sidewalks in front of commercial or industrial establishments shall be not less than 8 feet in width and 5 inches in thickness except within driveway approaches where the minimum thickness shall be 7 inches.
(e) Finishing. Before the last finish has set, the sidewalk shall be steel troweled and brushed in transverse direction.
(f) Jointing. A transverse, full depth, ? inch thick expansion joint of premolded expansion material shall be located at the property lines and where the walk intersects
another walk, curb line, building or driveway approach and at all buildings, walls, poles, and stop boxes. 1. An expansion joint shall be located at an average interval of every 40 feet, with no single interval between expansion joints to exceed 60 feet.
2. The expansion joint material shall be placed in a neat and workmanlike manner with its upper edge slightly below the finished sidewalk surface.
3. Dummy groove joints for controlled cracking, at least one inch in depth and 5/16 inch in thickness shall be placed at intervals of approximately 5 feet.
4. Diagonal joints may be used only when approved by the director.
(g) Curing and Drying. As soon as any of the concrete work permitted under this section has been finished and hardened sufficiently to prevent excess marring of the surface, it shall be cured and protected against rapid drying.
1. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be deemed sufficient cause for suspension of the work.
2. Curing shall be accomplished by the "Impervious Coating", "Wet Fabric", or "Paper" methods.
3. For impervious coating or membrane curing, only those methods and materials meeting requirements of ASTM Spec. C156-44T, "Method of Test for Efficiency of Materials for Curing Concrete" shall be used, the specifications of which are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
4. Walks shall be kept free from all traffic at normal temperatures for 48 hours and in cold weather (below 50 degrees F.) for 96 hours.
5. No concrete shall be poured when the temperature may be expected to fall below 35 degrees F. in any 72 hour period or upon freezing subgrade.
10.04 Driveways.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall construct or maintain any driveway across any sidewalk or curbing without first obtaining a driveway permit from the building inspector. The fee for such permit shall be set from time to time by resolution of the board.
(2) SPECIFICATIONS FOR DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION.
(a) Width. No driveway opening shall exceed 26 feet in width at the street curb line except under the following circumstance:
1. The driveway serves a garage with openings that will accommodate three stalls across, in which case the driveway opening shall not exceed 32 feet in width at the street curb line.
2. In no event may a driveway exceed 32 feet in width unless the building inspector grants an exception. These same standards shall apply to the maximum allowable width of any driveway
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 5
approach that abuts a street constructed with mountable type curb and gutter.
(b) Interference with Intersections Prohibited. At street intersections a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the street intersection area and shall not occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the traffic safety committee for effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals.
(c) Interference with Street. No driveway apron shall extend out into the street further than the face of the curb, and under no circumstances shall such driveway apron extend into the gutter area.
1. All driveway entrances and approaches shall be so constructed that they shall not interfere with the drainage of streets, side ditches or roadside areas or with any existing structure on the right of way.
2. When required by the director to provide for adequate surface water drainage along the street, the property owner shall provide and maintain any necessary culvert pipe at his own expense.
(d) Number of Approaches Limited. No more than one driveway entrance and approach shall be constructed for any lot or premises except where deemed necessary and feasible without undue impairment of safety, convenience and utility of the street by the traffic safety committee. Any two (2) approaches shall be at least ten (10) feet apart.
(e) Workmanship and Materials. All driveway entrance and approaches that are constructed across sidewalks shall be paved in accordance with the requirements for sidewalk construction in section 10.03(3) of this chapter.
(f) Permittee Liable for Damage or Injury. The permittee shall assume all responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or property resulting directly or indirectly during the construction or repair of driveway approaches or entrances. When curb or gutter is removed the new connection shall be of equivalent material and curb returns provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner.
1. Driveway surfaces shall connect with the street pavement and sidewalk in a neat, workmanlike manner.
2. Any sidewalk areas that are damaged or are inadequate by reasons of vehicle travel across the sidewalk shall be replaced in accordance with the requirements of section 10.03 (3).
10.05 Street and Terrace Openings. (1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation or opening in any street, alley, highway, sidewalk or other public way within the village without first having obtained a permit from the building inspector.
(2) FEE. The fee for a street opening permit shall be as set from time to time by the board.
(3) REQUIREMENTS. Permits will be obtained from the building inspector 72 hours in advance of the commencement of excavation to allow for the marking of village utilities.
1. Upon completion of excavation, the permit holder shall either barricade (lighted) or temporarily patch the excavation.
2. When a permanent patch is being prepared it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to notify the Public Works Department 24 hours in advance so that the limits of the patch can be marked out before patchwork begins.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 6
3. Edges of existing pavement are to be sawed before placing patch.
4. Patching materials shall be the same as the existing pavement materials.
5. Depth of patch shall be the same as existing pavement.
6. Terrace patches shall be topped with 4" of shredded topsoil and shall be seeded with a quality mix grass seed.
7. It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to maintain and/or replace the patch for a period of 1 year after completion. 8. The cost of repairing any damage to utilities shall be the responsibility of the permit holder.
(4) REGULATIONS GOVERNING STREET AND SIDEWALK OPENINGS.
(a) Frozen Ground. No opening in the streets or sidewalks for any purpose shall be permitted when the ground is frozen, except where necessary as determined by the director.
(b) Removal of Pavement. When opening any street or other public way, all paving or ballasting materials shall be removed with the least possible loss of or damage to surfacing material and together with the excavated material from trenches shall be placed so as to cause the least practicable inconvenience to the public and permit free flow of water along gutters.
(c) Protection of Public. Every person shall enclose with sufficient barriers each opening that he may make in the streets or public ways of the village. 1. All machinery and equipment shall be locked or otherwise effectively safeguarded from unauthorized use when not being used by the permittee, his agents or employees.
2. Lights or torches shall be kept burning from sunset to sunrise, one light or torch lamp to be placed at each end of the opening in the street or way and other lights sufficient in number and properly spaced to give adequate warning.
3. Except by special permission from the director, no trench shall be excavated more than 50 feet in advance of pipe laying nor left unfilled more than 50 feet where pipe has been laid.
4. All necessary precautions shall be taken to adequately guard the public from accidents or damage to persons or property through the period of the work.
5. Each person making such opening shall be held liable for all damages, including costs incurred by the village in defending any action brought against it for damages, as well as cost of any appeal, that may result from the neglect by such person or his employees of any necessary precaution against injury or damage to persons, vehicles or property of any kind.
(d) Replacing Street Surface. In opening any street or sidewalk, the paving material, sand, gravel and earth or other material moved or penetrated and all surface monuments or hubs must be removed and replaced in their original position or condition and the same relation to the remainder as before.
1. Any excavated material, which in the opinion of the director is not suitable for refilling, shall be replaced with approved backfill material.
2. All rubbish shall be immediately removed, leaving the street or sidewalk in perfect repair, the same so to be maintained for a period of one year.
3. In refilling the opening, the earth must be laid in layers not more than 6 inches in depth and each layer rammed, tamped or flushed to prevent settling.
4. No timber, bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench.
5. The board may elect to have the village make the pavement repair for any street or
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 7
sidewalk opening, in which the cost of making the repair and of maintaining it for one year shall be charged to the person making the street opening.
(5) EXCAVATIONS IN NEW STREETS LIMITED. Whenever the board determines to provide for the permanent improvement or re-paving of any street, such determination shall be made not less than 30 days before the work of improvement or repairing shall begin.
(a) Notifications. Immediately after such determination by the village board, the director shall notify in writing each person, utility, village department or other agency owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in or under said street or any real property abutting said street, that all such excavation work in such street must be completed within 30 days. (b) After such permanent improvement or re-paving, no permit shall be issued to open, cut or excavate said street for a period of 5 years after date of improvement or re-paving unless in the opinion of the director of public works an emergency exists which makes it absolutely necessary that the permit be issued.
(6) EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS AUTHORIZED. In the event of an emergency any person owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit, or utility in or under any street and his agents or employees may take immediate proper emergency measures to remedy dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health or safety without obtaining an excavation permit; provided that such person shall apply for an excavation permit no later than the end of the next succeeding business day and shall not make any permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit hereunder.
(7) VILLAGE WORK EXCLUDED. The provisions of this section shall not apply to excavation work, authorized by the director, by village employees or contractors performing work under contract with the village necessitating openings or excavations in village streets.
(8) PERMIT FOR ERECTING UTILITY POLES. No person shall erect any telephone, electric or railway poles or posts upon any street or alley in the village, until such person submits to the director of public works or building inspector, the route of their proposed line or lines or any extension thereof showing as far as practical the location of each such pole or post and the number and location of the wire and no such construction shall be made until the said official first gives its permission therefor.
(9) SERVICE MAINS. All water and sewer mains and laterals and all gas mains and laterals and other connections between the house and the streets shall be sufficiently installed prior to paving to permit the ground to properly settle and so far as applicable, Wis. Stats. §62.18 is adopted and fully incorporated by reference. Before any gas mains are laid, the utility company shall present a proposed plan showing their location. The utility company shall agree and guarantee in the manner as the director shall determine, that all streets and sidewalks disturbed by the installation of gas mains will be repaired and put back into substantially the same condition that they were in before the commencement of the work. Upon failure to comply with the terms of the guarantee, the village may make written demand requiring such work to be done, naming the same. Upon failure and neglect of the utility to do the work within a time to be stated in the demand, the village may complete the work and charge the expense of the work to the utility company.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 8
10.06 Obstructions and Encroachments.
(1) OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED. No person shall encroach upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof. No person shall permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except as provided in appropriate sections of the zoning code.
(2) STREET PRIVILEGE PERMIT.
(a) When Required. Permits for the use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways or places of the village may be granted to applicants by the director of public works for the purpose of moving any building or structure or encumbering the street, alley, sidewalk or way with materials necessary in and about the construction or demolition of any building or structure, provided such applicant has complied with other requirements of this sub-section and has obtained permission from the director of public works and any permits required by Sec. 8.03 of this code.
(b) Conditions of Occupancy. Permission to occupy or obstruct the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds is intended only for use in connection with the actual erection, alteration, repair, removal or moving of buildings or structures and shall be given upon the following terms and conditions and subject to revocation without notice by the director of public works for violation thereof: 1. Such temporary obstruction shall not cover more than 1/3 of any street or alley.
2. Obstructions shall be sufficiently lighted at night so as to be in full view of the public from all directions.
3. Sidewalk traffic shall not be interrupted, but temporary sidewalks of not less than four (4) feet in width guarded by a closed fence at least four (4) feet high on both sides may be maintained during the period of occupancy.
4. The process of moving any building or structure shall be as continuous as practicable until completed and if ordered by the director shall continue during all hours of the day and night.
5. No building or structure shall be allowed to remain overnight on any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant.
6. Buildings shall be moved only in accordance with the route prescribed by the director and chief of police.
7. Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all parts of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds occupied under the permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish and obstructions and placed in a safe condition for public travel at the expense of the permittee.
(e) Termination. All street privilege permits shall automatically terminate at the end of three months from the date of issuance unless the director authorizes an earlier termination date.
(3) REMOVAL BY VILLAGE. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the owner or occupant of the premises adjoining any unlawfully obstructed sidewalk refuses or neglects to remove the obstruction within 24 hours after notice from the director, it shall be the duty of the director to remove the obstruction and notify the village clerk of the cost. The clerk shall enter the cost on the next annual tax roll as a special charge against the property abutting the obstructed sidewalk and the sum shall be levied and collected as other special taxes against real
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 9
estate.
(4) ILLEGAL USE OF STREETS.
(a) No person shall throw, place or deposit, any dirt, filth, straw, ashes, rubbish, litter or other refuse matter in any street, alley or public place or on any sidewalk in the village.
(b) No person shall light a fire or burn rubbish, leaves or other material on any street, sidewalk or public alley in said village without a permit from the fire chief.
(c) No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited in or on any street, alley, or sidewalk in the village any articles liable to injure the wheels or tires of vehicles or to interfere with the public use of sidewalks and streets.
(d) No person shall allow or haul any rubbish, ashes, dirt, sand, stones or other material liable to become scattered on the street, except in a vehicle provided with a box enclosed so as to retain the material, and no person shall scatter or permit to be scattered any of the material upon any street.
(e) No person shall injure or cause to be injured or destroyed any trees or shrubs lying in or upon any street or adjoining any street, lane, alley, sidewalk or other public ground within the village.
(f) No person shall construct any steps, stairs, building, fence, bay window, platform, trap door, cellar door area, balcony, cornice, sign, sign post, or other encroachment or obstruction upon, in or under any street, alley or public ground, without the previous consent of the board.
(5) PERMIT FOR CULVERT: (a ) Obstructing Ditches. No person shall fill either wholly or in part, obstruct or damage any ditch or drain in any street, lane, alley or public ground within the village.
(b) No person shall build any driveway or bridge over or lay any tile or pipe in any ditch or drain in any street or alley in said village without first obtaining permission to do so from the director.
(6) DAMAGING SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED. No person shall break, aid in breaking or cause to be broken any sidewalk or any portion thereof within the village.
10.07 Snow and Ice Removal.
(1) RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER, OCCUPANT, ETC. It shall be the responsibility of every property owner within the village who has sidewalks abutting their property, to remove or cause to be removed accumulated snow and ice within 24 hours after it ceases to fall.
(a) This includes snow: that may have drifted overnight; may have been plowed; splattered off streets; and snow from clearing out handicap ramps into the street, if any are in front of or off the corner of the property.
(b) If ice cannot be removed, it shall at least be sprinkled with a material to help prevent the sidewalk from being dangerous to pedestrians until such time as it can be removed in the opinion of the director.
(c) It shall be unlawful to discharge storm water onto a village street between November 1 and April 30.
(2) REMOVAL BY VILLAGE. If the provisions of section 1 are not met, the director or
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 10
authorized agent, shall cause said sidewalks to be cleaned or sprinkled with an abrasive or de-icer as outlined in section 1. All expenses will be assessed as a special tax against the parcel at a rate set from time to time by resolution of the board.
(3) SNOW IN STREETS. It shall be unlawful to place, shovel or blow snow into any street within the village.
(4) Properties located on a dead end street shall be required to shovel only the walk through the drive to give pedestrian traffic access to the street.
(5) Snow Emergency. When in the opinion of the Director of Public Works or his agent, extraordinary conditions exist that require the removal of an accumulation of snow or ice, a snow emergency will be called to allow for the efficient clearing of the streets. The state of emergency will be conveyed through the use of public radio and the press. When an emergency is declared all winter parking regulations will be suspended and all vehicles will be removed from the street for the duration of the snow removal operation.
(6) PENALTY. The penalty for violation of any provision of this section shall be $25.00 first offense, $35.00 penalty for the second offense, $50.00 penalty for the third offense and every offense thereafter. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
10.08 Street Lighting. No person shall disturb or damage any of the ornamental street lighting equipment in the village. No person shall, unless duly authorized, remove, change or damage any lantern or other lighting equipment or any barricade of any kind, which may be in use upon the streets or sidewalks of said village for the purpose of protecting public travel in said village.
10.09 Street Names and Signs - Street Numbers. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to maintain a complete file of plats upon which is indicated the following information:
(1) Names of all streets.
(2) A house numbering map showing the numbers for all platted parts of the village.
(3) Record map showing the location of all sewer and mains.
10.10 Solid Waste Management. The purpose of this section is to describe the refuse and recycling collection policies of the village and to promote recycling, composting, and resource recovery through an effective recycling program, as provided in Wis. Stats. §287.11, and Chapter NR 544, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(1) STATUTORY AUTHORITY. This section is adopted as authorized under Wis. Stats. §287.09(3)(b) and §66.0415, and as authorized by the Village Board of North Fond du Lac.
(2) DEFINITIONS
(a) Automated container means containers provided by the village to its residents for use in the curbside collection of refuse.
(b) Bi-metal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages, that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(c) Bulky waste materials means refuse in quantities exceeding those normally collected and shall include such items as furniture, fixtures, plumbing, plastic, metal objects, carpeting,
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 11
bedding and other large household items. Food containers, building materials and building debris are not considered bulky waste.
(d) Container board means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products.
(e) Foam polystyrene packaging means packaging made primarily from foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
1. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
2. Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container.
3. Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged article in a shipping container.
(f) Hazardous waste means any substance or combination of substances including any waste of a solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous form which may cause or significantly contribute to any increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or which may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics. This term includes, but is not limited to, substances that are toxic, corrosive, flammable, irritants, strong sensitizers or explosives as determined by the Department of Natural Resources.
(g) HYPE means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2.
(h) LDPE means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4.
(i) Magazines means periodicals and other materials printed on similar paper.
(j) Major appliance means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, furnace, boiler, dehumidifier, or stove.
(k) Multiple-family dwelling means a property containing 2 or more non-owner occupied residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
(l) Newspaper means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
(m) Non-residential facilities and properties means commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This term does not include multiple family dwellings.
(n) Office paper means high grade printing and writing papers from offices in non-residential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This term does not include industrial process waste.
(o) Other resins or multiple resins means plastic resins labeled by the SPI code #7.
(p) Person includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, and local government unit, as defined in Wis. Stats. §66.0131(1)(a), state agency or authority or federal agency.
(q) PETE means polyethylene terphtahalate, labeled by the SPI code #1.
(r) Plastic container means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale.
(s) Post-consumer waste means solid waste other than solid waste generated in the production
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 12
of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in Wis. Stats. §291.01(7), waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in Wis. Stats. §289.01(17).
(t) PP means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5.
(u) Private collection service means collection services provided by a person licensed to do the same by the DNR and by the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(v) PS means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6.
(w) PVC means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3.
(x) Recycling containers means the bins provided by the village for use in the curbside collection of recyclables.
(y) Recyclable materials includes lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and all other resins of multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers.
(z) Refuse means any solid waste not defined as a recyclable material, yard waste, brush, bulky waste, building materials, or hazardous waste, which waste can be landfilled under applicable Wisconsin law.
(aa) Residential dwelling means a property containing 2 or fewer residential units where the owner occupies at least one of the units, including those occupied seasonally.
(bb) Scavenging means the uncontrolled and unauthorized removal of materials at any point in solid waste management.
(cc) Solid waste has the meaning specified in Wis. Stats. §289.01(33).
(dd) Solid waste facility has the meaning specified in Wis. Stats. §289.01(35).
(ee) Solid waste treatment means any method, technique or process designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
(ff) Storage means the interim containment of solid waste in an approved manner after generation and prior to collection and ultimate disposal.
(gg) Storage area means areas where persons place containers during non-collection days as well as areas where containers are set out on collection day.
(hh) Waste tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or defect.
(ii) Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than 6 inches in diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls.
(3) SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences, multiple family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties shall separate the following materials from post-consumer waste:
(a) Lead acid batteries.
(b) Major appliances.
(c) Waste oil.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 13
(d) Yard waste.
(e) Aluminum containers
(f) Bi-metal containers
(g) Corrugated paper and other container board.
(h) Foam polystyrene packaging.
(i) Glass containers.
(j) Magazines.
(k) Newspaper.
(l) Office paper.
(m) Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, and PP.
(n) Steel containers.
(o) Waste tires.
(4) EXCLUSIONS TO SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS. The separation requirements of section 10.15(2) do not apply to the following:
(a) Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences, multiple family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties that send their post-consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(b) Solid waste, which is burned for supplemental fuel at a facility of less than 30% of the heat input into the facility as derived from the solid waste, burned as supplemental fuel.
(c) A recyclable material specified above for which a variance has been granted by the Department of Natural Resources under Section 544 Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(5) CARE AND PREPARATION OF SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. To the greatest extent practical, the recyclable materials shall be cleaned and kept free of contamination such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other non-recyclable materials, including but not limited to household hazardous waste, medical waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner that protects them from wind, rain, and other inclement weather conditions. Newspapers, magazines, junk mail, and office papers should be placed on top of or alongside the recycling bin.
(a) Except as otherwise directed by the village, occupants of residential dwellings (single family and 2 to 4 unit residences) shall make the following preparations for the collection of the separated materials specified below.
1. Aluminum containers should be rinsed and then flattened to save space.
2. Steel and bi-metal containers should be rinsed and the labels should be removed. Both ends should be cut out and then the can should be flattened to save space.
3. Corrugated paper or other container board should be flattened, then bundled or bagged and kept dry.
4. Glass containers, clear and colored, should be emptied and rinsed. Labels and covers may be left on. Other types of glass such as light bulbs, window glass, drinking glasses and dishes, etc. are not recyclable.
5. Magazines should be bagged or bundled and kept dry.
6. Newspaper should be bagged or bundled and kept dry.
7. Office paper should be bagged or bundled and kept dry.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 14
8. Rigid plastic containers should be prepared and collected as follows:
a. Plastic containers made of PETE, and labeled with a #1 SPI Code should be rinsed, have caps removed, and be flattened.
b. Plastic containers made of HDPE, and labeled with a #2 SPI Code, should be rinsed, have caps removed, and be flattened.
c. Plastic containers made of PVC, and labeled with #3 SPI Code, should be rinsed, have the caps removed, and be flattened.
d. Plastic containers made of PP, and labeled with #5 SPI Code, should be rinsed, have caps removed, and be flattened.
10. Plastic Bags are not recyclable, although many stores will accept used plastic bags.
(6) MANAGEMENT OF LEAD ACID BATTERIES, MAJOR APPLIANCES, AND WASTE OIL
(a) Lead acid batteries shall be taken to retail battery stores for proper disposal.
(b) Major appliances shall be scheduled for pick-up by calling any private hauler of white goods.
(c) Waste oil shall be taken to the drop-off site at the Municipal Garage or to any private business that accepts waste oil.
(d) Discarded tires shall be taken to any private business that accepts used tires.
(7) MANAGEMENT OF YARD WASTE.
(a) Yard waste may be disposed of in the following manner:
1. Grass, leaves, and garden debris may be dropped off at the Municipal Garage. The village will also conduct special curbside collection of these materials during designated periods in the spring and fall.
2. The village will also conduct special weekly curbside collections of these materials on designated days from April-November of each year.
3. The village will conduct special curbside collections of discarded Christmas
trees.
(b) Licensing of Yard Waste Disposal. (1) License Required.
(a) No person shall dispose of yard waste at any designated Village Municipal Yard Waste Disposal Site without being licensed; provided, this requirement shall not apply to Village of North Fond du Lac residents disposing of yard waste from property which they own or occupy.
(b) Licenses shall be issued on an annual basis and a license fee shall be established by resolution of the Village Board. License fees shall not be prorated.
(2). Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to persons licensed pursuant to subsection (1):
(a) “Yard waste” shall be defined as grass clippings, leaves, brush, and other vegetative garden debris originating from properties located within the Village limits.
(b) Licensees shall only dispose of yard waste at designated Village disposal sites.
(c) Yard waste must be deposited according to disposal site instructions in properly designated areas with different types of waste separated as directed. All yard waste shall be removed from the bags or containers prior to disposal.
(3) License Revocation. Disposal licenses may be subject to revocation by the Director of Public Works for the following reasons:
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 15
(a) Disposing of yard waste originating outside the Village.
(b) Failure to follow disposal site instructions, including, but not limited to properly separate types of yard waste.
(c) Disposal of materials other than yard waste
(4) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 24.05 of the Code of Ordinances.
a. In addition to a penalty imposed, the hauler shall be required to immediately purchase a permit.
(8) MANAGEMENT OF BULKY WASTE. (a) Service Provided. A curbside pick-up of bulky waste will be provided as needed and determined by the village board. During the remainder of the year, property owners must contract with a private hauler to dispose of these items or drop them off at the Transfer Station in Fond du Lac.
(b) Properties Served. Bulky waste pick-up services will be provided to all residential, multiple-family, and non-residential facilities and properties except that commercial and industrial users may not use the pick-up to dispose of unusually large quantities of bulky items, as determined by the director, or as a substitute for regular weekly refuse collections.
(c) Placement for Pick-up. Users may begin placing bulky wastes on the curb for pick-up 48 hours prior to the first day of collection as designated annually by the Director of Public Works.
(9) COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS (a) Service Provided. The curbside collection of recyclable materials will be provided once each week on the same day as the regular refuse pick-up.
(b) Properties Served. 1. The curbside collection of recyclable materials will be provided to all residential dwellings.
2. All other users must contract privately or with the village for a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the village board, for the required recycling of materials.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant or tenant of any new property to notify the Director of Public Works that recycling collection service is required.
(c) Placement for Collection 1. An 18-gallon plastic bin that is provided by the Village is the approved recycling container. Recyclable materials may be co-mingled within the bin. Larger quantities of corrugated paper, magazines, and newspapers may be placed on the ground next to the recycling container.
2. The recycling bins must be placed at the curb no later than 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day. No recycling bin shall be placed for collection more than twelve (12) hours prior to the scheduled collection day and must be removed from the curb within twelve (12) hours following collection. Recyclable containers are prohibited from being placed on the street side of the property. Street side being defined as an area between the front face of a residence and the road to which it is addressed.
(10) RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
(a) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in section 10.11(3)(e) through (o). 1. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 16
2. Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at least semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling program.
3. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
4. Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the post-consumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility
licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in section 10.15(4)(e) through (o) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(11) RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF NON-RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES.
(a) Owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and properties shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in section 10.15(4)(e) through (o).
1. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
2. Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and occupants of the properties about the established recycling program.
3. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
4. Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and properties if the post-consumer waste generated within the facility or property is treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in section 10.15(4)(e) through (o) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(c) Level of Service. Each residential user is entitled to a maximum of one 40, gallon automated refuse container per week at no charge.
1. A 60 or 90-gallon automated refuse container may be obtained in place of the 40 gallon container for a monthly/quarterly fee as established by resolution of the village board.
2. From time to time, residents may need to dispose of refuse quantities beyond the capabilities of their selected container. Additional refuse may be disposed of in the manner approved by resolution of the village board.
3. Residents who are already purchasing the additional service of a 90 gallon container and consistently have additional household disposal needs may obtain an additional 90 gallon container for a quarterly fee as set from time to time by resolution of the village board.
(12) COLLECTION OF REFUSE. (a) Service Provided. Regular curbside refuse pick-up will be
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 17
provided once each week on a designated day.
(b) Properties Served.
1. Regular refuse pick-ups will be provided to all residential dwellings.
2. All other users must contract privately or with the village for a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the village board, for the required pick-up of refuse.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant, tenant, or proprietor of any new property to notify the Director of Public Works that refuse collection service is required.
(c) Level of Service. Each residential user is entitled to a maximum of one 40, gallon automated refuse container per week at no charge.
1. A 60 or 90-gallon automated refuse container may be obtained in place of the 40 gallon container for a monthly/quarterly fee as established by resolution of the village board.
2. From time to time, residents may need to dispose of refuse quantities beyond the capabilities of their selected container. Additional refuse may be disposed of in the manner approved by resolution of the village board.
(d) Placement for Pick-Up. 1. The 40, 60, or 90-gallon automated container provided by the village are the approved refuse containers.
2. The refuse container(s) must be placed at the curb no later than 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day. No refuse containers shall be placed for pick-up more than twelve (12) hours prior to the scheduled pick-up day and must be removed from the curb within twelve (12) hours following pick-up. Refuse containers are prohibited from being placed on the street side of the property. Street side being defined as an area between the front face of a residence and the road to which it is addressed.
3. The refuse container must be placed in position at the curb where the automated truck has access to grab and dump it. The container should therefore be placed at least four (4) feet away from parked cars, trees, mailboxes, and recycling containers.
4. The lid of the refuse container must close tightly. Containers may not be overfilled nor may materials be placed outside the container.
5. All refuse placed in approved village containers for pickup must be contained within translucent enclosed plastic bags.
(e) Prohibited Materials.
1. Recyclable Materials. Recyclable materials as defined in section 10.15(3) are prohibited from being co-mingled and placed in regular refuse containers or solid waste dumpsters and must be handled separately and in compliance with section 10.15(4) of this chapter.
2. Dead Animals. It shall be unlawful to place any dead animal, or parts thereof, in a refuse container for collection provided, however, this Section shall not apply to animal parts from food preparation for human consumption.
3. Undrained Food Wastes. It shall be unlawful to place any garbage or other food waste in a refuse container for collection unless it is first drained and wrapped.
4. Ashes. It shall be unlawful to place hot ashes in a refuse container for collection.
(13) IMPROPER DISPOSAL OR HANDLING OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS (a) Non-Collectable Materials
1. Hazardous Wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any of the
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 18
following wastes:
a. Hazardous waste;
b. Toxic waste;
c. Chemicals;
d. Explosives or ammunition;
e. Flammable liquids;
f. Liquid paint.
2. Animal or Human Wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place human waste for collection except for disposable diapers, which will be accepted. Animal waste or kitty litter waste should be disposed of in clear or translucent plastic bags for collection.
3. Hospital Wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any pathogenic hospital wastes.
4. Building Waste. All waste resulting from remodeling, construction or removal of a building, roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner, builder or contractor.
(b) Improper Placement. It shall be unlawful to place, or allow to be placed, any garbage, refuse or solid waste upon the roads, streets, public or private property within the village contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(c) Compliance With Chapter. It shall be unlawful to store, collect, transport, transfer, recover, incinerate or dispose of any solid and hazardous waste within the boundaries of the village contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(d) Improper Transportation. It shall be unlawful to transport any solid waste in any vehicle that permits the contents to blow, sift, leak or fall there from. If spillage does occur, the collection crew shall immediately return spilled materials to the collection vehicle and shall properly clean, or have cleaned, the area. All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall be durable, easily cleanable and leakproof, if necessary, considering the type of waste and its moisture content. Collection vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent nuisances and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
(e) Interference With Authorized Collector. No person other than an authorized collector shall collect or handle any refuse after it shall have been put into an approved refuse container and deposited in the proper place for the collector, nor shall any person molest, hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with an authorized refuse collector in the discharge of his duties.
(f) Anti-scavenging or Unlawful Removal of Recyclables. It shall be unlawful for any person, unless under contract with or licensed by the village to collect or remove any recyclable material that has been deposited or placed at the curb or in a container adjacent to a home for the purposes of collection for recycling.
(g) Private Dumps. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a private dump within the village.
(h) Burning of Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste or recyclables in any manner, except as provided elsewhere in this Code.
(i) Refuse From Outside of Village. It shall be unlawful to bring refuse for disposal and recyclables from outside the corporate limits into the village unless authorized by agreement with the Department of Public Works.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 19
(j) Condition of Refuse Storage Areas. Refuse storage areas shall be kept in a nuisance and odor free condition. Litter shall not be allowed to accumulate. Collection crews and contractors will not be responsible for cleaning up loose materials from any containers which have become ruptured or broken due to wet conditions, animals, vandalism or other cause. The user shall be responsible for cleaning up any spilled litter. Litter not collected shall not be allowed to accumulate. Violation of this provision will result in the issuance of a warning notice to the user to clean up his area. Continued violation shall result in the owner being prosecuted under section 10.25.
(k) Refuse Accumulation; When A Nuisance. Accumulation or deposit of solid waste, rubbish or putrescible animal or vegetable matter in or upon any lot or land or any public or private place within the Village which causes the air or environment to become noxious or offensive or to be in such a condition as to promote the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects, or to provide a habit or breeding place for rodents or other animals, or which otherwise becomes injurious to the public health is prohibited and declared to constitute a nuisance. Continued violation shall result in the owner being prosecuted under section 10.25.
(14) OWNERSHIP OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES. Recyclable materials and refuse, upon placement at the curb, shall become the property of the Village. Recyclable materials, upon collection by any permitted collector, shall become the property of the contractor.
(15) PROHIBITIONS ON DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS SEPARATED FOR RECYCLING. No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in Section 24.04 (5) through (15) which have been separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
(16) HAULER SPECIFICATIONS.
(a) Hauler Restrictions
1. Haulers may not dispose in a landfill or burn in a solid waste facility any recyclable materials generated in the village that have been separated for recycling.
2. Haulers shall not compact glass with paper during collection and transport of recyclables to a processing facility or market and shall maintain materials in marketable condition.
(b) Right to Reject Materials. The hauler has the right to reject or leave at the curb any recyclable material that is not prepared according to the specifications in section 10.11(6) of this section or in education material provided by the contractor to the service recipients. Materials may also be left if not separated from solid waste, placed in the proper container, or are not designated recyclable materials for collection. The hauler also has the right to refuse to pick up any solid waste if it contains recyclable containers and material. In such cases, the hauler or attendant shall notify the generator of the materials in writing about the reasons for rejecting the items. The hauler shall also keep a list of such occurrences and provide it to the Village monthly.
(c) Hauler Licensing.
1. Haulers who collect solid waste or recyclables in the village for storage, treatment, processing, marketing, or disposal shall obtain and maintain a municipal license from Director of Public Works prior to collecting any materials in the village. The term of the municipal license shall be from July 1 to June 30 of each year and the fee shall be as established by the village
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 20
board.
2. Such haulers shall also be required to obtain and maintain all necessary state permits, licenses, and approvals prior to collecting any materials in the village.
(d) Transportation Requirements. All haulers shall comply strictly with the solid waste transportation requirements set forth in section 10.11(13)(d). Failure to comply may result in warnings, citations, or suspension of license.
(e) Reporting Requirements. The solid waste and recycling haulers and processors operating in the village are required to maintain records and upon request, report in writing to the Director of Public Works at least monthly each year. Reports shall include: a list of all users in the village to which contracted services have been provided during the reporting period; the amount of solid waste and recyclables collected and transported from the village; the amount of solid waste and recyclables processed and or marketed by item type from the village; and the final disposal location of solid waste and recyclable material. Failure to report shall be cause for the village to revoke any license or sever any contract with the hauler/processor.
(17) INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation application, the provisions of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where any terms or requirements of this section may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretations shall apply. Where a provision of this section is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard in Chapter NR 544, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and where the section provision is unclear, the provisions shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin Statutes and the Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this section or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this section.
(18) ADMINISTRATION. It shall be the responsibility of the director to administer the content of this section. The director, based on common municipal practices shall handle items not specifically covered in this section. If his decision is not acceptable to the property owner, the village board shall review and decide complaints as requested.
(19) VIOLATIONS. In the event that a user violates the requirements of this chapter, the non-conforming materials shall be tagged at curb side with a notice informing the user of the violation and the corrective action required. If tagged, the materials shall be removed from the curb within 24 hours by the user. The violation shall be corrected and the materials shall be placed curb side for the next regular pickup. No special pickups will be made for materials that were in violation.
(20) ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
(a) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this section, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the village may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative of the village who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct,
Village of North Fond du Lac June 6, 2006
Public Works - 21
hamper, or interfere with such an inspection.
(b) Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance may be issued a warning or citation by the North Fond du Lac Police Department, Superintendent of Public Works or the superintendent’s designee to collect forfeitures. The issuance of a citation under this paragraph shall not preclude the subsequent issuance of additional citations under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter.
(c) Penalties for violating this ordinance may be assessed as follows:
(1) Any person who violates Section 24.16 may be required to forfeit $50 for a first violation, $200 for a second violation, and not more than $2000 for a third or subsequent violation in any twelve (12) month period.
(2) Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance, except Section 24.16 may be required to forfeit not less than $25 for a first violation, not more than $100 for a second violation, and not more than $1000 for a third or subsequent violation in any twelve (12) month period.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Chapter 11
SANITARY SEWERS
11.01 Sewers
11.02 Definitions
11.03 Building Sewer Connection
11.031 New Construction
11.032 System Reconstruction
11.033 System Requirements
11.04 Use of Public Sewers
11.05 Control of Industrial Wastes Directed to Public Sewers
11.06 Basis for Sewer Service Charges
11.07 Amount of Sewer Service Charges
11.08 Billing Practices
11.09 Right of Entry, Safety, and Identification
11.10 Sewer Construction
11.11 Damage or Tampering with Wastewater Collection Facilities
11.12 Violations and Penalties
11.13 Appeals
11.14 Amendment
11.15 Audit
11.16 Public Utility Exemption
11.25 Penalty
11.01 Sewers.
(1) USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED. The owner of all houses, buildings or other properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the village abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now or may be located in the future a public sanitary sewer of the village, is hereby required at his/her expense to install suitable sanitary facilities therein and to connect the facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with applicable state and local codes.
(2) Pursuant to Wis. Stat. §61.36 and §61.39, the village may lay out, construct, extend and otherwise provide for sanitary and storm sewers for the said village.
(3) Special assessments made pursuant to this code and the pertinent statutes shall be administered according to section 10.10 of this code.
11.02 Definitions.
(1) 2000 WASTEWATER AGREEMENT means the 2000 Wastewater Agreement between the City of Fond du Lac and Outlying Sewer Group.
(2) ACT means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, (Public Law
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 2
92-500) and Clean Water Act of 1977 (Public Law 95-217).
(3) APPROVING AUTHORITY means the village clerk, director of public works or their authorized deputy, agent or representative.
(4) BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five (5) days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed as per liter (mg/1). Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
(5) BUILDING DRAIN means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
(6) BUILDING SEWER shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called building connection.
(7) CATEGORY A shall be those sanitary sewer users who discharge normal domestic strength wastewater with concentrations of BOD no greater than 250 mg/1, suspended solids no greater than 300 mg/1, and phosphorus no greater than 10 mg/1.
(8) CATEGORY B shall be those sanitary sewer users who discharge industrial wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business distinct from sanitary sewage with concentrations of BOD greater than 250 mg/1, suspended solids greater than 300 mg/1, and/or phosphorus greater than 10 mg/1.
(9) CHLORINE REQUIREMENT means the amount of chlorine, in mg/1, which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content determined in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
(10) CITY means the City of Fond du Lac, Wisconsin.
(11) CITY APPROVING AUTHORITY means the city manager, the director of public works or superintendent of wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Fond du Lac; or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. Wherein all sewage disposal charges are concerned, the city council of the City of Fond du Lac shall be the city Approving Authority.
(12) COMBINED SEWER means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water.
(13) COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, phosphorus, pH, or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES permit for the publicly owned wastewater treatment facility receiving the pollutants, if such works were designed to treat such additional pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
(14) DIRECTOR means the director of public works or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
(15) EASEMENT means an acquired legal right for the specified use of land owned by others.
(16) EXCESSIVE is in such magnitude that in the judgement of the director, it exceeds the allowable flow normally expected from the source. Continuation of such flow will adversely impact the capability of the system to provide uninterrupted service to other customers.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 3
(17) FLOATABLE OIL is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
(18) GARBAGE means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
(19) GRANTEE means the village or the city whichever is appropriate.
(20) GROUND GARBAGE means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half (1/2”) inch in any dimension.
(21) INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS shall mean wastewater with pollutants that will adversely affect or disrupt the quality of wastewater treatment if discharged to a wastewater treatment facility.
(22) INTERCEPTOR SEWER shall mean sewers that carry wastewater flows from the collector sewers in the drainage basin to the regional wastewater treatment plant.
(23) MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY shall mean an industry that:
(a) Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday;
(b) Has a flow greater than five (5) percent of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste.
(c) Has a material in its discharge included on a list of toxic pollutants issued under Wis. Stats. §283.21.
(d) Has a significant impact, either singularly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment works or the quality of its effluent.
(24) NATURAL OUTLET shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
(25) OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS includes all costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, as well as the costs assoc-iated with periodic equipment replacement necessary for maintaining capacity and performance of wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
(26) PARTS PER MILLION shall be a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
(27) PERSON means any and all persons, including any individual, partnership, firm, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
(28) PH means the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7.
(29) PUBLIC SEWER means any sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 4
may not have been constructed with village funds.
(30) REPLACEMENT COSTS mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances that are necessary during the useful life of the treatment plant or equipment to maintain the capacity and performance for which they were designed and constructed. Operation and maintenance costs include replacement costs.
(31) SANITARY SEWAGE means a combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities having the following characteristics:
(a) A B.O.D. of not more than 250 mg/l.
(b) A suspended solids content of not more than 250 mg./l.
(c) A phosphorous content of not more than 10 mg./l.
(32) SANITARY SEWER means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quan-tities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
(33) SEWAGE is the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater".
(34) SEWERAGE SYSTEMS shall mean all properties, structures, manholes, pipes, equipment and conduits for the purpose of collecting and transporting wastewater as now exists or hereafter added to, expanded or improved.
(35) SEWER CONNECTION shall mean that part of the sewerage system connecting the sewer main and the building lateral of the abutting property.
(36) SEWER SERVICE CHARGE is a service charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of capital-related expenses as well as operation and maintenance costs of said facilities. (User charge, which covers operation and maintenance and replacement costs, is a part of the Sewer Service Charge).
(37) SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissible.
(38) SLUG means any discharge of wastewater with a concentration or flow that exceeds 5 times the average 24 hour concentration or flow for a period greater than 15 minutes.
(39) STANDARD METHODS means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Association.
(40) STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "Storm Sewer") means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
(41) STORM WATER RUNOFF means that portion of the rainfall that is drained into the sewers.
(42) SUSPENDED SOLIDS means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids and that are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater" and are referred to as non-filterable residue.
(43) UNPOLLUTED WATER is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
(44) USER means any person that discharges wastes into the sewerage system.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 5
(45) USER CHARGE is a charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of operation and maintenance costs of said facilities.
(46) VILLAGE means the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(47) WASTEWATER shall mean the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present.
(48) WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT FACILITIES shall mean the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
(49) WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY shall mean the City's arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment.
(50) WATERCOURSE shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently.
(51) WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (WPDES) PERMIT is a document issued by the State of Wisconsin, Department of Natural Resources which establishes effluent limitations and monitoring requirements for the District's wastewater treatment facility. The WPDES Permit and modifications thereof pertain to the District's wastewater treatment facility.
11.03 Building Sewer Connection.
(1) BUILDING SEWER CONNECTION. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection or opening into, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a permit from the appropriate village official. The owner or agent shall make application on a special permit provided by the village. The permit shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or special information considered pertinent by the village. Permit fees shall be determined by separate village ordinances.
(2) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building.
(3) Existing building sewers may be used in conjunction with new structures only when they are found to conform to the requirements of this section.
(4) The size, slope alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the method to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining, testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of the plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village.
(5) Roof leaders, subsurface drains, groundwater drains, foundation footing drains and other clear water drains shall be constructed and maintained, insofar as is practical, in such a fashion as to prevent clear water intrusion into the sanitary sewer system.
(a) All sources of clear water entry into the sanitary system existing at the time of the adoption of this section shall be illegal.
b) If stormwater or clear water is being discharged into the sanitary system, either
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 6
intentionally or as a cause of system degeneration, the village shall give the offending person 15 days notice to disconnect or to make sufficient repairs so as to eliminate the source of the clear water intrusion. Failure to disconnect or to make such repairs shall authorize the village to cause disconnection or to make needed repairs and to assess the costs of such work against the property involved.
11.031 New Construction Inspection. No connection with any sewer main or any part thereof shall be covered until the same has been inspected by the plumbing inspector or some other person authorized to make such inspection by the village board. Before any such connection shall be covered, the person making the inspection on behalf of the village shall endorse the approval of the same upon the permit. No connection shall be made to any sewer main except through a "Y" branch unless especially authorized by the plumbing inspector. All connections shall be made in a workmanlike manner and to the satisfaction of the said inspector. Connections to the main sewers shall be 6 inches in diameter, unless otherwise specially permitted or required by the plumbing inspector.
11.032 System Reconstruction. The village has undertaken the systematic reconstruction of the public sanitary sewer system lying within the corporate limits. Metering records taken at the downstream end of the village system indicate the presence of an abnormal amount of clear water entry into the sanitary sewer system. The presence of this clear water reduces available capacity to all system users, causes system overloads that may manifest themselves as basement flooding, causes a financial burden on the citizens of the village, and is a potential source of severe health hazards. The village recognizes that its public sewer system has a finite life and in many cases has exceeded the useful life of the system. The village also recognizes that private building sewers possess many of the same characteristics as the public system. (1) The village shall inspect all private connections to the public mains at the time of reconstruction of the public system.
(a) Any existing private facility not meeting the requirements of this section shall be considered illegal.
(b) Prior to the actual reconstruction, each property owner shall be given written notice of the project. Such notice shall be made no less than 30 days prior to commencement of the actual work.
(2) As the reconstruction progresses, the village shall inspect each private sewer connection for conformance with this section.
(a) In the event that the private system meets the requirements of this section, the village shall reconnect the private system to the public system at an appropriate point near the right of way line.
(b) In the event that the private sewer is found not to meet the requirements of this section, the village shall immediately notify the owner of the determined deficiency(ies)
(3) The owner shall, at the owner’s expense, make the necessary repairs to correct the deficiency(ies). In all cases, the village shall supply an appropriate connection point as part of its
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 7
work. The owner may elect to:
(a) make the repair(s). In doing so, the owner recognizes that all work must be done in strict conformance with all applicable local and state codes and in such a manner to correct the noted deficiency(ies). All work needed to accomplish the repair shall be done at the expense of the owner.
(b) contract with licensed contractor to complete the repair. All work needed to accomplish the repair shall be done at the expense of the owner.
(c) have village contractors, if available, complete the repair. The village agrees, as part of any project, to request unit prices that will allow for the calculation of the cost of making the appropriate repair to the private building sewer.
1. Should the owner select this option, the owner will be charged the entire cost of making the repair.
2. The owner may elect to pay the entire amount upon completion of the work, or the owner may request that he be billed in the form of a special assessment on the owner’s tax bill according to section 10.10 of this code.
11.033 System Requirements.
(1) All sanitary sewer mains and laterals, both public and private, shall be constructed and maintained in such a fashion that the effects of clear water on the system are held to an absolute minimum.
(2) All work, construction technique, and materials incorporated into the project shall be in strict conformance with state and local codes and the Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin, latest edition.
(a) Permitted Materials. Permitted materials are those specified in the Technical Guidance Manual of the 2000 Wastewater Agreement.
(b) Defects Requiring Repair.
1. Any visible leak.
2. Open, improperly formed, or root intruded joints.
3. Improper materials such as clay, soil or orangeburg pipe.
4. Improper connections such as a palmer valve.
11.04 Use of the Public Sewers.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sanitary sewer except with permission of the Approving Authority.
(2) STORM SEWERS. Storm water other than that exempted under Section (1) above, and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to sewers specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Approving Authority and other regulatory agencies.
(a) Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged on approval of the Approving Authority, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(3) DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge any waste or other substance directly into a
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 8
manhole, catch basin or inlet. All discharges to the sewer shall be through an approved sewer connection.
(4) PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(b) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, which injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a public nuisance in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/1 as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewers.
(c) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works.
(d) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
(e) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sanitary sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, un-ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders, and disposable diapers.
(f) The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal sanitary sewer systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
1. The Approving Authority may set limitations lower than the limitations established in this chapter if, in the director’s opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives.
2. In forming his/her opinion as to the acceptability, the Approving Authority will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sanitary sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the waste in the wastewater treatment facility and other pertinent factors. 3. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer shall not be varied without approval of the Approving Authority as follows:
a. Wastewater having a temperature higher than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius).
b. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils of petroleum origin, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32o and 140o F. (0o and 60o centigrade).
c. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 9
solutions whether neutralized or not.
d. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. The installation and operation of any garbage grinders equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the plumbing inspector.
e. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Approving Authority for such materials.
f. Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits that may be established by the Approving Authority.
g. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Approving Authority in compliance with applicable state or federal reg-ulations.
h. Quantities of flow, concentrations or both, which constitute a "slug" as defined herein.
i. Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the city wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
j. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
k. Materials that exert or cause:
1. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, phosphorus, nitrogen or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment facility.
2. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate).
3. Incompatible pollutants in excess of the allowed limits as determined by City, State and Federal laws and regulations as determined and when amended, referred to as pretreatment standards developed by the Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR 403.
4. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
5. An adverse effect on either the wastewater treatment plant operation or on plant processes.
l. Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the person at his expense.
m. The accidental discharge of any prohibited waste into any sewer shall be reported to the village and city Approving Authority by the person responsible for the discharge or by the owner or occupant of the premises where the discharge occurs, immediately upon obtaining knowledge
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 10
of the fact of such discharge so that steps may be taken to minimize its effect on the sewerage system. Notification of such discharge will not relieve the person of liabilities for any expense, loss or damage to the system or for any fines imposed by the city and/or village on account thereof.
1. Village shall comply with all of the requirements of the city's WPDES permit and all modifications thereof.
2. No discharge shall be allowed into the sanitary sewerage system that is in violation of the requirements of the WPDES permit and the modifications thereof.
(5) SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the village and any person whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the sewage disposal works, either before or after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities by reason of the admission of such wastes and no extra costs are incurred by the village without recompense by the person, provided that all rates and provisions set forth in this ordinance, are recognized and adhered to.
(6) NEW CONNECTIONS. New connections to the village's sanitary sewer system will be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
(7) COMPLIANCE. The city Approving Authority must be notified within five (5) days of any permission granted and approvals given to persons of special arrangements made to the sewer users, of changes in effluent limitations or of other action taken by the Approving Authority.
11.05 Control of Industrial Wastes Directed to Public Sewers.
(1) SUBMISSION OF BASIC DATA. Each person who discharges Category B industrial wastes to a public sewer, shall prepare and file with the Approving Authority a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged to the wastewater collection and treatment facilities. This data should be subsequently provided annually at a time specified by the Approving Authority.
(a) The following forms or the information needed to complete them will be accepted:
1. Annual NR 101 "Effluent Reporting Form"
2. Form 3400-28 "Industrial Waste Contribution to Municipal System"
(b) Similarly, each person desiring to make a new connection to a public sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall prepare and file with the Approving Authority a report that shall include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be discharged.
(c) The above is required to comply with the city's Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit.
(2) EXTENSION OF TIME. When it can be demonstrated that circumstances exist which would create an unreasonable burden on the person to comply with the time schedule imposed by Section 11.05 (1), a request for extension of time may be presented for consideration of the Approving Authority.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 11
(3) INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES. If any waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 11.04 (4), and which have adverse effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life, health or constitute a public nuisance, the Approving Authority may: (a) Reject the wastes
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and/or
(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of 11.04 (5).
(4) CONTROL MANHOLES. Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of his/her wastes, including domestic sewage.
(a) Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a manner acceptable to the Approving Authority. If measuring devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the Approving Authority.
(b) Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be installed by the person discharging the waste, at his/her expense, and shall be maintained by him/her so as to be in safe condition, accessible and in proper operating condition at all times.
(c) The Approving Authority prior to the beginning of construction shall approve plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities and related equipment.
(d) An approved sketch shall be provided to the Approving Authority for his records showing the locations of all control manholes. 1. The manholes shall be located from both street lines and building lines.
2. The sketch shall show the roadways and access points to the control manholes and note entry limitations, if any, and the telephone number and person to contact for entrance when necessary and any other data considered pertinent by the Approving Authority and/or the director.
3. Ample space shall be provided around the control manholes and shall be maintained free and clear by the owner at all times.
(5) MEASUREMENT OF FLOW. The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste collection and treatment charges shall be the metered water consumption of the person as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the water utility except as noted in item (6) below.
(6) PROVISION OF DEDUCTIONS. In the event that a person discharging industrial waste into the public sewers produces evidence satisfactory to the Approving Authority that more than 20 percent of the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the public sewer, then the determination of the water consumption to be used in computing the waste volume discharged into the public sewer may be made a matter of agreement between the Approving Authority and the person.
(7) METERING OF WASTE. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the Approving Authority if this volume cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 12
be installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the Approving Authority.
(8) WASTE SAMPLING. Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration of said wastes. The deter-mination shall be made by the industry as often as may be deemed necessary by the Approving Authority.
(a) Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the composition of the wastes.
(b) The sampling may be accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical equip-ment acceptable to the Approving Authority.
(c) Installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities shall be the responsibility of the person discharging the waste and shall be subject to the approval of the Approving Authority or their duly authorized representative at all times.
(d) Every care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to ensure their preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample was taken.
(9) PRETREATMENT. Where required, in the opinion of the Approving Authority, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures, processes or operation of the wastewater treatment works, the person shall provide at his/her expense such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be determined required to render his/her wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
(10) GREASE AND/OR SAND INTERCEPTORS. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided as required by the state plumbing code (H62.11 and amendments) when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
(a) All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the plumbing inspector and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(b) In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which shall be subject to review by the Approving Authority.
(c) Disposal of the collected materials performed by owner(s) personnel or currently licensed waste disposal firm or agent must be in accordance with currently acceptable DNR practice.
(11) ANALYSES. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and with the Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants". Sampling methods, location, time, duration and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Approving Authority.
(a) Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial wastes shall be made by the person discharging them or his/her agent, as designated and required by the Approving
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 13
Authority.
(b) The village may also make its own analyses on the wastes and these determinations shall be binding as a basis for treatment service charges.
(12) SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed flow equalization, pretreatment or processing facilities shall be submitted for review to the Approving Authority prior to the start of their construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers.
(13) COMPLIANCE. The City Approving Authority must receive copies of all information submitted by sewer users to the Approving Authority within 5 days after the information is received by the Approving Authority. The City Approving Authority must also be notified within 5 days of any permission granted and approvals given to sewer users or of other action taken by the Approving Authority regarding the control of industrial wastes directed to public sewers.
11.06 Basis for Sewer Service Charges.
(1) SEWER USERS SERVED BY WATER UTILITY WATER METERS. There is hereby levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having a connection with the wastewater system and being served with water solely by the water utility, a sewer usage charge based on the volume of water used, as measured by the water utility water meter used upon the premises. In addition, a minimum monthly (commercial) or quarterly (residential) service charge will be assessed each sewer user to cover administrative costs.
(2) Sewer Users Served By Private Wells. If any person discharging sewage into the public sanitary sewer system procures any part or all of his/her water from sources other than the water utility, all or part of which is discharged into the public sanitary sewer system, the person shall have water meters installed by the water utility at his/her expense for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these sources.
(a) The water meters shall be furnished by the water utility, installed under its supervision, and maintained by the water utility.
(b) If it is not practical to meter a customer with a meter device, a monthly or quarterly charge will be calculated to recover the cost of sanitary sewer usage.
(3) DEDUCT METERS. If a user feels that a significant amount of water metered does not reach the sanitary sewer due to lawn or garden watering, etc., he/she can at his/her own expense, through the Approving Authority, install a second water meter, or an additional metered service that would monitor this flow.
(a) Charges for sewer use would be made based on the difference between the two meter readings.
(b) Refer to rate schedule for second water meter rental fee, PSC Rate File Schedule AM-1 Amendment 19 or amendment in force at time of rental.
(c) Requests for a second meter or metered service must be made in writing to the Approving Authority.
(d) The water utility will charge for each meter a service charge set by the water utility to
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 14
compensate for the cost of furnishing and servicing the meter.
(4) Inflow and Infiltration (I/I). The village reserves the right to meter the wastewater of any customer reasonably believed to be generating I/I.
(a) The ratio of water usage to wastewater flow will be determined using the three previous year’s of pumped water to metered wastewater flow. The village shall bill the customer the higher of the pumped volume or water usage to wastewater flow ratio.
(b) If it is determined through calculation of water usage to wastewater flow ratio that a customer’s actual wastewater flow is higher than the system ratio, the customer shall have a sewer meter installed at the customer’s expenses for the purpose of determining sewage volume for billing purposes.
11.07 Amount of Sewer Service Charges.
(1) BASIS FOR SERVICE CHARGE. Service charges are based on an annual revenue requirement consisting of operation and maintenance expenses, replacement costs, taxes and debt service.
(a) These costs are to be recovered as follows:
1. Village of North Fond du Lac treatment costs: Volume & Fixed charge
2. Operation and maintenance expense:
Volume charge
3. Replacement costs: Volume charge
4. Taxes: Volume charge
5. Debt Service: Fixed charge
(b) Fixed Charge
1. The fixed charge shall be a minimum monthly or quarterly charge for all users based on the user's meter size, meter equivalency ratio, monthly equivalency factor and benefited/non-benefited status. The fixed charge shall recover annual debt service costs. Annual debt service costs shall be allocated to benefited/non-benefited users based upon their proportionate share of total wastewater discharged to the sewer system. a. The fixed charge calculation is described below. The fixed charge shall be revised to reflect the actual number and size of users and actual cost as part of overall rate adjustments.
1. Benefited Monthly Fixed Charge = (Meter Equivalency Ratio) x
(Benefited Monthly Equivalency Factor)
2. Monthly Non-Benefited Fixed Charge = (Meter Equivalency Ratio) x
(Non-Benefited Monthly Equivalency Factor)
3. The meter equivalency ratios are as follows:
Meter Size Meter Equivalency Ratio
5/8" & 3/4" 1.0
1" 2.5
1-1/2" 5.0
2" 8.0
3" 15.0
4" 25.0
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 15
6" 50.0
8" 80.0
(c) Volume Charge. The volume charge shall be a monthly or quarterly charge based upon the volume and strength of wastewater discharged by a user to the sewer system. The volume charge shall recover operation and maintenance expenses, replacement cost and taxes.
1. The normal domestic strength volume charge shall be revised to reflect actual volume cost no less often than biennially. The normal domestic strength volume charge shall be as calculated:
Annual Operation, Maintenance, Replacement and Tax Expense ?
Total Annual Wastewater Volume =
Normal Domestic Strength Volume Charge
2. The monthly volume charge shall be as calculated:
a. Normal Domestic Strength User Monthly Volume Charge =
Normal Domestic Strength User Charge x Monthly Volume of Wastewater Discharged to the Sewer System
b. Greater Than Domestic Strength Users. Charges to users discharging wastewater greater than normal domestic strength shall be assessed a surcharge based on the amount by which the wastewater exceeds normal domestic strength in accordance with the following formula:
Monthly Volume Charge = (NDS x V) + {(.00834 x V) x [(B$ x B#) + (S$ x S#) + (P$ x P#)]} Where
NDS = Normal domestic strength volume charge
V = Wastewater volume in CCF
B$ = Cost per pound of BOD above normal domestic strength
B# = Concentration of BOD from a user above normal domestic strength
S$ = Cost per pound of SS above normal domestic strength
S# = Concentration of SS from a user above normal domestic strength
P$ = Cost per pound of phosphorus above normal domestic strength
P# = Concentration of phosphorus from a user above normal domestic strength
.00834 = Conversion factor (mg/l to pounds)
c. In no event will a user pay less than the charge for normal domestic strength wastewater.
d. Flood Mobile Home Park. Charges to Flood Mobile Home Park discharging wastewater not greater than normal domestic strength shall be equal to monthly volume charges designed for normal domestic users less the portion of the utility's cost of service related to clear water elimination funding.
(2) Category A. As previously defined as normal domestic strength wastewater having concentrations of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) no greater than 250 mg/l, suspended solids no greater than 300 mg/l, and phosphorus no greater than 10 mg/l. The sewer service charge for Category A wastewater is as follows:
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 16
Old Rate
New Rate
Fixed Customer Charges
Commercial 1/5/2010
Meter Charges
Pre-January 2010
Residential 1/5/2010
Quarterly
5/8 - 3/4 residential
$48.55
$53.41
1" - 1 1/4" residential
$81.26
$89.39
Monthly
5/8 commercial
$16.18
$17.80
3/4" commercial
$16.18
$17.80
1" commercial
$27.09
$29.80
1 1/2" commercial
$44.43
$48.87
2" commercial
$66.67
$73.34
3" commercial
$104.18
$114.60
4" commercial
$185.43
$203.97
6" commercial
$361.82
$398.00
VOLUME CHARGES PER 1,000 GALLONS
General
$9.01
$9.91
Flood*
$5.59
$6.15
*Note: Flood MHP receives Clearwater credit as part of rate per agreement
Mobile Home Parks
FLOOD
$400.65
$440.72
SABEL'S
$295.16
$324.68
GR MEADOW
$208.34
$229.17
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 17
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 18
(3) CATEGORY B is defined as wastewater having concentrations of BOD greater than 300 mg/l, suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l and/or phosphorus greater than 10 mg/l. The sewer charge for Category B wastewater is as follows:
(a) Volume Charge Same as Category A
(b) Customer Charges Same as Category A
(c) A surcharge will be charged for the following as determined by the previous year’s annual true up as required by the 2000 Wastewater Agreement. 1.BOD (greater than 250 mg/l)
2. SS (greater than 300 mg/l)
3. Phosphorus (greater than 10 mg/l)
(4) REASSIGNMENT OF SEWER USERS. The Approving Authority will reassign sewer users into appropriate sewer service categories if wastewater sampling programs and other related information indicates a change of categories is necessary.
11.08 Billing Practices.
(1) BILLING PERIOD. Sewer service charges and industrial cost recovery charges shall be shown separately from the water on a monthly or quarterly basis.
(2) PAYMENT. Sewer service charges and industrial cost recovery charges shall be payable twenty (20) days after the billing date at the Municipal Building.
(3) PENALTIES. Such charges levied in accordance with the ordinance shall be a debt due to the village and shall be a lien upon the property in accordance with Wis. Stats. §66.0809.
(a) If this debt is not paid within twenty (20) days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be deemed delinquent and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the village against the property owner, the person or both.
(b) A penalty charge of one (1%) percent per month of original bill will be assessed to delinquent bills.
(c) Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
11.09 Right of Entry, Safety and Identification
(1) RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Approving Authority or city Approving Authority or other duly authorized employee of the village or city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation or testing, all in accordance with the provisions of this section and Wis. Stat. §196.171. The Approving Authority or city Approving Authority, or other duly authorized employee of the village or city shall have no authority to inquire into any process beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for wastewater treatment.
(2) SAFETY. While performing the necessary work on private premises referred to in (1) above, the duly authorized village or city employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the person; and the village or city shall indemnify the person against loss or damage for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person growing out of
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 19
gauging and sampling operation and indemnify the person against loss or damage to its property by village or city employees, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions as required in section 11.05(4).
(3) IDENTIFICATION, RIGHT TO ENTER EASEMENTS. The Approving Authority, City Approving Authority or other duly-authorized employees of the village or city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement, all subject to the terms, if any, of the easement agreement.
11.10 Sewer Construction.
(1) WORK AUTHORIZED. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb the public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Plumbing Inspector.
(2) COST OF SEWER CONNECTION. All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the installation of the building sewer.
(3) USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Approving Authority, to meet all requirements of this ordinance.
(4) MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in the Technical Guidance Manual of the 2000 Wastewater Agreement with the city.
(5) BUILDING SEWER GRADE. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
(6) STORM AND GROUNDWATER DRAINS. No persons shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, sump pumps or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(a) No person shall make connection of a lateral subject to the inflow or infiltration of storm water to a public sanitary sewer.
1. All such connections, including laterals subject to the inflow or infiltration of storm water, existing at the time of passage of this code shall thereafter be illegal.
2. If storm water or clear water is being discharged into a sanitary sewer, the Approving Authority shall give the offending person thirty (30) days notice to disconnect.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 20
3. Failure to disconnect after such notice shall authorize the Approving Authority to cause disconnection and assessment to the costs of such disconnection against the property involved.
(b) The Approving Authority may, in the alternative, institute legal action for violation of this subsection.
(c) One 90-day extension may be granted to the person by the Approving Authority if the disconnection cannot be made due to inclement weather or due to conditions beyond the person's control.
(7) CONFORMANCE TO PLUMBING CODES. The connection of the building sewer into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the Technical Guidance Manual of the 2000 Wastewater Agreement with the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. The Approving Authority must approve any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials before installation.
(8) INSPECTION OF CONNECTION. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Approving Authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the plumbing inspector.
(9) BARRICADES AND RESTORATION. All excavations for the building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Approving Authority.
11.11 Damage or Tampering with Wastewater Collection Facilities.
(1) WILLFUL, NEGLIGENT OR MALICIOUS DAMAGE. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater collection facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to prosecution under Wisconsin State Statutes.
11.12 Violations and Penalties.
(1) WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Any person found to be violating any provision of this section shall be served by the Approving Authority with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
(2) ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. Any person found to be responsible for accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system that causes damage to the treatment facility and/or receiving body of water shall pay the amount to cover damages, established by the Approving Authority.
(3) LIABILITY TO VILLAGE FOR LOSSES. Any person violating any provisions of this section shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation, which the village may suffer as a result thereof.
(4) COMPLIANCE. If any violations or accidental discharges affect the city wastewater collection and treatment facilities as well as the village's sanitary sewer system, the city may
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 21
penalize the violator independently and concurrently with the village according to the city's sewer use code. The city Approving Authority must be notified immediately of any violation or accidental discharges that occur.
11.13 Appeals.
(1) PROCEDURES. Any user, permit applicant or permit holder affected by any decision, action or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the Approving Authority interpreting or implementing the provisions of this ordinance or in any permit issued herein, may file with the Approving Authority a written request for reconsideration within ten (10) calendar days of the date of such decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration.
(a) The Approving Authority shall render a decision on the request for reconsideration to the user, permit applicant or permit holder in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of request.
(b) If the ruling on the request for reconsideration made by the Approving Authority is unsatisfactory, the person requesting reconsideration may, within ten (10) calendar days after notification of the action, file a written appeal according to the procedures outlined in chapter 23 of this code. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the village board shall accompany any appeal for their ruling. This fee may be refunded if the appeal is sustained in favor of the appellant.
11.14 Amendment.
(1) AMENDMENT. The village through its duly-authorized officers, reserves the right to amend this ordinance in part or in whole wherever it may deem necessary, but such right will be exercised only after due notice to all persons concerned and proper hearing on the proposed amendment.
11.15 Audit. The village shall conduct an annual audit, the purpose of which shall be to maintain the proportionality between users and user classes of the sewer service charge system and to ensure that adequate revenues are available relative to increasing operation, maintenance and replacement costs and debt retirement. Copies of the annual audit report must be submitted to the City Approving Authority after the annual audit has been completed.
11.16 Public Utility Exemption. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent any public service corporation or any contractor engaged by the village for the purpose of laying mains, conduits, water pipes or sewers from operating under a contract or other permit.
11.25 Penalty. In addition to penalties which may be expressed in various sections of this chapter, the penalty for violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be as provided in section 24.05 of this code.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Sanitary Sewers - 22
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Chapter 12
WATER UTILITY
12.01 Compliance with Rules
12.02 Application for Service
12.03 Application for Service Installation
12.04 Extension of Mains
12.05 Service Maintenance
12.06 Meters
12.07 Billing and Payment
12.08 Units of Service
12.09 Failure of Meter to Register
12.10 Complaint Meter Tests
12.11 Turning on Water
12.12 Water for Air Conditioning and Special Refrigeration
12.13 Water for Construction
12.14 Use of Fire Hydrants
12.15 Use of Hydrants
12.16 Flat Rate Service
12.17 Vacation of Premises
12.18 Repairs to Mains
12.19 Duty of Superintendent with Respect to Public Safety
12.20 Protective Devices
12.21 Inspection
12.22 Emergency Water Restrictions
12.25 Penalty
12.01 Compliance with Rules. All persons who receive a water supply from the North Fond du Lac Water Department (utility) or who may make application therefor, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by the rules and regulations as filed with the Public Service Commission (PSC) of Wisconsin.
(1) DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this chapter, Superintendent shall mean the director of public works or his agent.
12.02 Application for Service.
(1) APPLICATION. Each applicant for water service will be required to apply to the North Fond du Lac Water Utility office with the following information:
(a) the location of the premises to be served;
(b) the date on which the applicant will be ready for service;
(c) whether the applicant is the owner or tenant or agent for the premises;
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Water Utility - 2
(d) An agreement to abide by the regulations of the utility;
(e) Such other information as the utility may reasonably request.
(2) The application does not bind the applicant to take service for any period of time longer than the one upon which the rates for water service are based. Neither does it bind the utility to give service except under reasonable conditions.
12.03 Application for Service Installation.
(1) APPLICATIONS TO BE FILED PRIOR TO COMMENCING WORK. Application for the original installation of a water service from the utility's mains to the curb line shall be filed at the office of the utility by the owner of the property to be served or by an authorized agent, for the approval of the superintendent of the utility, prior to the performance of any such work.
(2) The owner or his agent shall pay a tap-in fee for 1" service to the utility at the time of his application for a permit to make the service connection. In case a service larger than 1" is desired, the actual cost to the utility of the installation, between the distribution main and the curb line shall be charged to the owner or applicant upon completion of the work.
(3) In the case of a blind lateral or service from the main exists at the time of application for service, the applicant will be required to connect his premises to this service.
(4) When it is deemed necessary to install a larger service to replace an existing small diameter service pipe, the applicant or owner shall be charged for the actual cost of the new service.
(5) Service pipes of polyethylene and copper will be permitted and no other material shall be used. The size of the pipe from the curb stop into the premises shall not be less than the size of the pipe connected to.
(6) All service pipes from the curb stop to the premises shall be installed according to the current code of the village.
(7) In case of multiple metering in premises served by a single service, the point where branch service connection is made in the premises and also the full length of the piping between all branch connections and their meters, shall not be covered or buried and shall be readily accessible for inspection at all times.
(8) A separate service pipe must be laid for each building.
12.04 Extension of Mains. All extensions of water mains shall be subject to special assessments to be levied under the provision of the Wisconsin Statutes and section 10.10 of this code, against those properties adjoining any such water main extensions on an equitable basis.
12.05 Service Maintenance.
(1) MAINTENANCE OF THE LINES. The service pipe from the main to the shut off box will be maintained and kept in repair at the expense of the utility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the service pipe from the shut off box to the point of use and can be billed for any water that has not passed through the meter and has been wasted by defective pipes and fixtures.
(2) LEAKING OR BROKEN PIPES. If an owner or consumer fails to repair a leaking or broken pipe from the shut off box to the point of metering or use within such time as may appear
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Water Utility - 3
reasonable to the superintendent, the water will be shut off and will not be turned on again until the repairs have been completed.
(3) SHUT OFF BOXES. The consumer or owner shall protect the shut off box in his terrace and shall keep it free from dirt and other obstructions. The utility shall not be liable for failure to locate the shut off box and shut off water in case of a leak on the consumer's premises.
12.06 Meters.
(1) INSTALLATION. Meters will be furnished and placed by the utility and are not to be disconnected or interfered with by the customer or his agents.
(a) The utility shall furnish a pair of connections to the customer for each new meter setting at the time the service is installed or existing pipe is changed.
(b) All piping, valves and fittings within the premises must be supplied by the customer or owner, except the meter and its connections.
(c) Each meter installed shall receive water for measurement independent of any other meter, except in the case where it is decided by the superintendent to provide a "battery" of two or more meters if circumstances warrant such installation.
(d) The plumbing inspector shall determine the size of the meter to be installed.
(2) LOCATION OF METERS. It shall be the duty of the owner or customer of any premises to provide a location for a water meter and to maintain such location and access thereto, clean and sanitary and free from any condition of a hazardous nature. (a) Water meters shall not be placed below any plumbing fixtures, or installed in any toilet room in proximity to any plumbing fixtures, nor shall they be located below any stairway, landing or platform unless there is provided a space not less than four feet above the center line of the water meter supply line.
(b) No connection for water meters will be installed in any location not easily accessible; or which is, or may be, unclean, unsanitary or in any manner hazardous to the employees of the utility in the discharge of their duty.
(3) METER INSTALLATION. Meters must be installed not more than three feet above the basement floor or the ground floor of the building and whenever possible and practicable, just inside of the wall through which the service pipe enters.
(a) In order that the meter can operate properly, it shall be so connected to the service pipe so that the inlet and the outlet of the meter itself are on approximately the same level and that the meter register dial faces upwards.
(b) When the new service pipe is installed or the existing piping is changed, the plumber shall obtain from the utility exact over-all dimensions of the meter when the meter connections or couplings are obtained from the utility and must set the couplings or connections they obtained from the utility the proper distance apart to accommodate the meter.
(c) All service piping to which the meter is connected must be secured to the walls and ceiling or other supports in order that such piping will not sag or collapse when the meter is removed for any purpose.
(4) STOP AND WASTE VALVE.
(a) On 1" and larger meter installations, the owner must install at his own expense a valve on the inlet and another on the outlet side of the meter, both valves to be within 18" of the meter.
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Water Utility - 4
(b) A floor drain shall be provided in all cases where services 1" and larger are installed. The customer or owner shall keep these valves in working order at his own expense.
(5) METER REPAIRS. The utility will repair all water meters owned by it and used in its water service installations. The utility will bear the cost of such repairs when the need for them is caused by ordinary wear. (a) The cost of meter repair in cases where meters are damaged by frost, heat, hot water, abrasive materials or external violence due to carelessness or neglect of the owner, his tenant or his agents, shall be charged to the owner or customer.
(6) METER SEALS. All meters will be sealed by the utility at the time of installation or resetting and no seal shall be altered or broken except by its authorized employees or agents. Any person tampering, altering, or removing the seal, or the meter, shall be subject to a penalty according to 12.25 of this chapter.
12.07 Billing and Payment (1) Meter rates hereinafter specified are payable on the dates above named, the amount to be paid being determined by the quantity of water used during the preceding month or in case of private residences by the quantity of water used during the preceding quarter.
(2) Bills for water service are rendered monthly for commercial accounts and quarterly for residential and become due and payable 20 days after issuance.
(a) A late payment charge of 1% per month will be added to bills not paid within 20 days of issuance.
(b) The gross bill is the net bill plus the late payment charge.
(c) The late payment charge is applicable to all customers. The utility customer may be given a written notice that the bill is overdue no sooner than 20 days after the bill is issued and unless payment or satisfactory arrangements have been made within the next eight days, service may be discontinued pursuant to Chapter 185 PSC Wisconsin Administrative Code. A charge of $15.00 will be made for turning water on again after shut off for non-payment, increasing to $25.00 for after hours restoration of service.
12.08 Units of Service.
(1) A customer or unit of service shall consist of any aggregation of space or area occupied for a distinct purpose, such as a residence, apartment, flat, store, office, factory, which is equipped with one or more water fixtures for rendering service separate and distinct from other users.
(2) Suites in houses or apartments where complete housekeeping functions, such as cooking, are not exercised shall be classed as rooming houses. Thus houses and apartments, having suites of one, two or more rooms with toilet facilities, but without kitchen for cooking, are classed as rooming houses.
(3) Where a consumer's premises have several buildings, each supplied with service and metered separately, each building will be billed separately, i.e., the readings will not be cumulated. If these buildings are all used in the same business and are connected by the consumer, they can be metered in one place.
(4) If the utility, for its own convenience, installs more than one meter, the readings will be
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Water Utility - 5
cumulated for billings.
12.09 Failure of Meter to Register. If a meter is damaged or fails to register or operate for any reason, the utility will render a bill for the current period based on normal usage as determined by previous registrations, provided there is no particular reason why the use during that period has not been normal.
12.10 Complaint Meter Tests.
(1) Upon the request of a utility customer to have their meter tested for accuracy the utility clerk shall check the records for the last time the meter was tested or when the meter was installed. If the meter has been in service for less than 24 months or it has been less than 24 months since the first test, this procedure shall be followed.
(a) The customer will be required to pay a $25.00 deposit before the test is performed.
(b) The utility shall test the meter promptly after receiving the deposit.
(c) If the meter is found to be in error the utility will refund the deposit and correct the billing error.
(d) If the meter is found to be within the PSC standards for accuracy the deposit will be retained by the utility.
(2) If a customer requests a meter test for a meter that has not been tested within the last 24 months the utility will promptly test the meter for accuracy, at no cost to the customer. If the meter is found to be in error the utility will correct the customer’s bill immediately.
(3) A report giving the results of such test shall be made to the customer and a complete original test record shall be kept on file in the office of the utility. Upon request, the test shall be made in the presence of the customer during normal business hours.
12.11 Turning on Water. Only the duly authorized employee of the utility may turn on the water supply for a customer. When a plumber has completed a job, he must leave the water turned off. This does not prevent the plumber from testing his work.
12.12 Water for Air Conditioning and Special Refrigeration. No consumer shall install or operate in his premises any apparatus or system for air conditioning or special refrigeration without obtaining the approval of the superintendent. No such appliances or equipment will be permitted which do not utilize all practical water conservation devices. Any system that permits the continual discharge of water into sewers without re-use is prohibited. Connections to a water conservation device must be so arranged that the supply has a physical break between the utility's mains and said device so it will be impossible for water to siphon back in case of low pressure in the utility's mains. This rule applies to all installations made subsequent to June 1, 1955.
12.13 Water for Construction and other Purposes.
(1) CONSTRUCTION. When water is needed for building purposes, application for service must be made in advance to the superintendent.
(a) Permission will not be given to connect with service pipe at the curb line.
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Water Utility - 6
(b) The service pipe must be carried inside of the cellar wall from where the water used will be drawn.
(c) No contractor will be allowed to use water from any fire hydrant, whether work is performed for the village or private individuals, without permission from the superintendent.
(2) OTHER USES. Persons desiring water for cisterns, tanks or other intermittent service shall be charged at regularly scheduled rates.
12.14 Use of Fire Hydrants. Only such persons as shall be authorized by the superintendent or the chief of the fire department shall be permitted to open any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever and no one except such persons shall be permitted to take the hydrant wrenches or cause the same to be taken, from any fire engine house, except for fire purposes.
12.15 Use of Hydrants.
(1) CONSTRUCTION. In cases where no other supply is available, permission to use the hydrant may be granted by the superintendent. Charges shall be as specified by the PSC.
(2) UNAUTHORIZED USE OF HYDRANTS. Any person who shall, without authority of the superintendent, operate any hydrant connected with the distribution system except for extinguishing fire, or who shall wantonly injure or impair the same, shall be subject to a fine according to section 12.25 of this code.
(3) DAMAGE BY MOTOR VEHICLES. Owners or operators of motor vehicles shall be held responsible for the cost of repair of any hydrant damaged by being hit by a motor vehicle and the utility will not be responsible for the damage to the motor vehicle by reason of such accident.
12.16 Flat Rate Service. In those few cases where, because of conditions beyond the utility's control, meters cannot be installed and the indicated consumption is low, the superintendent may authorize an unmetered connection service to be paid for in advance. Service connections under flat rates must be provided with a check and waste cock placed in a frost proof and easily accessible location.
12.17 Vacation of Premises. When premises are to be vacated, the utility shall be notified at once. The owner of the premises shall be liable for any damage to the property of the utility by reason of failure to notify the utility of the vacancy.
12.18 Repairs to Mains. In a case where repairs to mains or services or laying of new mains are necessary the utility reserves the right to shut off the water from any locality and to keep it shut off as long as may be necessary. Notice in advance will be given in all cases where practicable but the utility does not bind itself to give such notice. No claim shall be allowed for damage to pipe, fixtures or appurtenance by reason of interrupted water supply, or variation of pressure.
12.19 Duty of Superintendent with Respect to Public Safety. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to see that all open ditches for water mains, hydrants and service pipes are properly guarded to prevent accident to any person or vehicle and at night there shall be
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Water Utility - 7
displayed amber signal lights in such a manner as will so far as possible, insure the safety of the public.
12.20 Protective Devices. The owner or occupant of every premise receiving water supply shall apply and maintain suitable means of protection for premise supply and appliances, against damage arising in any manner from the use of the water supply.
12.21 Inspection. The utility, by its superintendent, or other duly authorized agents, shall have the right of access during reasonable hours, to the premises supplied with water service, for the purpose of inspection, or for the enforcement of the utility's rules and regulations.
12.22 Emergency Water.
(1) RESTRICTIONS. The Director of Public Works is empowered to impose reasonable emergency restrictions upon the use of water in the village.
(2) Any person desiring to use water while such restrictions are in force and effect must obtain a permit for such use from the director.
(3) Any person who violates this section shall be fined or forfeiture imposed not more than $100.00 or, in default of payment thereof 6 months imprisonment for each separate offense.
(4) Wis. Stats. §166.23(2) is hereby adopted as it pertains to emergency government situations.
12.25 Penalty. In addition to penalties provided in Wisconsin Statutes or other provisions of this code, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or regulations made hereunder, shall be subject to the maximum penalty prescribed by statute and/or by section 24.05 of this code.
Village of North Fond du Lac August, 18 2006
Chapter 13
TERRACES, PARKS & URBAN FORESTS
13.01 Tree Planting Regulations: Village Tree Board
13.02 Tree Trimming and Sanitation
13.03 Terrace Tree Planting
13.04 Park Property Protected
13.05 Park Regulations
13.25 Penalties
13.01 Tree Planting Regulations: Village Tree Board.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Street trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the Village.
(b) Park Trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the village, or to which the public has free access as a park.
(2) Creation and Establishment of a Village Tree Board. There is hereby created and established a Village Tree Board for the Village of North Fond du Lac which shall consist of five members, citizens, residents and employees of this village who shall be appointed by the village president with the approval of the village board.
(a)Term of Office. The term of the five persons to be appointed by the village president shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
(b) Compensation. Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(c) Duties and Responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, council and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the village board and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive village tree plan for the Village of North Fond du Lac, State of Wisconsin. The board, when requested by the village board, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work.
(d) Operation. The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
Village of North Fond du Lac August 18, 2006
Terraces, Parks, & Urban Forests - 2
(3) Street Tree Species to be Planted. The village arborist creates the official street tree species for the Village of North Fond du Lac, Wisconsin. No species other than those recommended by the village arborist may be planted as street trees without written permission of the Village Tree Board. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall cause the removal of any tree planted in violation of this section.
(a) Spacing. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 7 of this ordinance, and not trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect.
(b) Distance from Curb and Sidewalk. The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 7 of this ordinance, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, 2 feet; medium trees, 3 feet; and large trees, 4 feet.
(c) Distance from Street Corners and Fireplugs. No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs or curb lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet of any fireplug.
(d) Utilities. No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in Section (3) of this ordinance may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any6 overhead utility wire, or over or within 5 lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
(4) Public Tree Care. The village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may e necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
(a) The Village Tree Board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which be reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water line, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section selection and location of said trees is in accordance with Section 7 through 11 of this ordinance.
(b) Tree Topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or village department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the sever cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this ordinance at the determination of the Village Tree Board.
(c) Pruning Corner Clearance. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8’) above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a
Village of North Fond du Lac August 18, 2006
Terraces, Parks, & Urban Forests - 3
menace to the safety of the public. The village shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign.
(d) Dead or Diseased Tree Removal and Prohibited Trees on Private Property. The village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the village, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the village. The Village Tree Board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within sixty days after the date of service notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the village shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owners property tax notice.
(e) Cottonwood and Box Elder Trees Prohibited. No person shall plant within the village any female tree of the species Populus Deltoides, commonly called “Cottonwood”, or any tree commonly called the seed-bearing “Box Elder: or Acernegundo.
(f) Removal of Stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(g) No person shall break, injure or harm in any manner any tree planted in any highway or street or public right of way in the village.
(5) Interference with the Village Tree Board. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Village Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this ordinance.
(6) Arborists License and Bond. It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the village without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the village board; provided however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or village employee dong such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 property damage indemnifying the village or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described.
(7) Review by Village Board. The village board shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Village Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Village Tree Board to the Village Board who may hear the matter and make final decision.
13.02 Tree Trimming and Sanitation.
(1) TREES TO BE KEPT TRIMMED. Trees standing in and upon any public street or parkway or upon any lot or land adjacent thereto shall be pruned and trimmed by the owner or owners or occupants of the abutting property on or in front of which the trees are growing so that the lowest
Village of North Fond du Lac August 18, 2006
Terraces, Parks, & Urban Forests - 4
branches projecting over the public street or alley will provide a clearance of not less than 14 feet and a clearance of not less than 10 feet over any other public place shall be likely to fall and do injury to the public. Any tree not trimmed as herein provided shall be deemed hazardous.
(2) HAZARDOUS AND INFECTED TREES. Any tree or part thereof, whether dead or alive, which the director finds to be infected, hazardous or a nuisance so as to endanger the public or other trees, plants or shrubs, growing within the village or to be injurious to sewers, sidewalks or other public improvements, whether growing upon public or private premises, shall be removed, trimmed or treated by the owner of the property upon which such tree or part thereof is located.
(a) Any diseased or hazardous trees located within the right-of-way of any public street, highway, alley, park or other public property, shall be removed, trimmed or treated by the village.
(b) Any diseased or hazardous trees located on private property, shall be removed, trimmed or treated by the owner.
1. The director shall give written notice to said owner to remedy the situation, which shall be served personally or posted upon the affected tree.
2. The notice shall specifically state the period of time within which the action must be taken, which shall be within not less than twenty-four (24) hours, nor more than fourteen (14) days, as determined by the director on the basis of the seriousness of the condition of the tree or the danger to the public.
3. If the owner shall fail to remove, treat or trim said tree within the time limited, the director shall cause the tree to be removed, treated or trimmed and shall report the full cost thereof to the clerk, who shall enter such cost as a special charge against the property.
(3) COTTONWOOD AND BOX ELDER TREES PROHIBITED.
(a) No person shall plant within the village any female tree of the species Populus Deltoides, commonly called "Cottonwood", or any tree commonly called the seed-bearing “Box Elder” or Acernegundo which may now or hereafter become infested with box elder bugs.
(b) Any person planting the aforementioned trees after the date of the adoption of this ordinance shall cause the same to be removed. If any owner shall fail to remove any such tree within 30 days after receiving written notice from the director of public works or the director’s agent, the director shall cause the removal of such tree and report the full cost thereof to the village clerk who shall place the charge upon the next tax roll as a special charge against the premises.
(4) PLANTING OF CERTAIN TREES RESTRICTED. No person shall plant within the village any Catalpa, Chinese Elm, White Poplar, Lombardy Poplar, Willow or any fruit or nut tree in or upon any public street, parkway, boulevard or other public place within the village unless he shall first secure written permission from the director or the director’s designee, who shall not approve such planting if in the director’s opinion, the tree will constitute a nuisance to the public or adjoining property owners or interfere with the safety of the public or the operation of any sewer or water system.
1. The village owns the terrace and reserves the right to make final tree selections prior to a
Village of North Fond du Lac August 18, 2006
Terraces, Parks, & Urban Forests - 5
homeowner planting a terrace tree.
2. The director shall cause the removal of any tree planted in violation of this subsection.
(5) TREES PROTECTED.
(a) No person shall break or injure any tree planted in any highway or street or public right of way in the village. No person shall pour salt water or any harmful substance on any public street in such places as to injure any tree, shrub or flowers planted or growing therein.
(b) No person shall place or maintain upon the ground any stone, cement, lumber or other substance or material which may impede the free passage of water and air to any tree or shrub in any public street or way, in said village.
(c) No person shall attach any electric insulator or any device for the holding of any electric wire or any wire to any tree growing or planted upon or in any public street or way in said village.
(d) No person shall fasten any horse or other animal to any tree in any public street or way, in the village nor shall any such person cause or permit a horse or any animal to stand so that the horse or animal can injure any such tree, shrub or flower.
13.03 Terrace Tree Planting.
(1) Terrace Trees shall be planted in accordance with sections 13.02(3) and (4).
(2) The location of the trees planted on any terrace shall be determined by the director or his agent, and no tree shall be planted nearer than 25' from the intersection of a street right-of-way line.
13.04 Park Property Protected. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, mar or deface in any way, trees, posts, benches, or any other property situated within the park grounds in the village and it shall be unlawful for any person to trample, cut, take away or in any manner destroy or damage plants, flower beds, shrubs or flowers, located or situated in such park or for any person to ride any horse or vehicle upon any part of said park grounds, except in the gravel roadway or other maintained roadway, unless permission be first given by a duly authorized agent or officer of the village.
(1) This section shall not apply to any circus animal, amusement ride properly permitted under section 5.13, or to any pony or horse used for the sole purpose of cultivating gardens or other agricultural land located within the village limits.
13.05 Park Regulations.
(1) APPLICATIONS, RESERVATIONS AND DEPOSITS. Reservations for group gatherings using park facilities shall be made in the clerk’s office. A specified deposit shall be made prior to the date of the event, and a specified portion of that deposit may be returned to the group, after the event, if the park facilities are found to be clean and orderly.
(2) SPECIAL CLASS "B" LICENSES. All special class "B" license applications for events to be held in the village park and recreation system must be completed and returned to the clerk's
Village of North Fond du Lac August 18, 2006
Terraces, Parks, & Urban Forests - 6
office at least three (3) days prior to the date of the event. There will be no special class “B” liquor licenses issued for Le Mieux Park
(3) CURFEWS.
(a) Le Mieux Park and Optimist Park will be closed to all activities daily between the hours of 10:00 p.m. - 6:00 a.m.
(b) Village Park will be closed to all activities daily between the hours of 11:00 p.m. - 6:00 a.m. Children under 18 years of age, who attend events at the Village Park after 10:00 P.M. must be accompanied by a responsible adult.
(4) PETS. No pets are allowed in village parks or recreational facilities.
(5) AUTHORITY TO CLOSE PARKS. The director or his agent shall have the authority to close any park to the public if it is wet or unsuitable for public use.
13.25 Penalty. In addition to penalties provided by Wisconsin State Statute or other provisions of this code, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to the maximum penalty prescribed by statute or by section 24.05 of this code.
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Chapter 14
PUBLIC NUISANCES
14.01 Open Burning
14.02 Radio and Television Interference Prohibited
14.03 Public Health
14.04 Public Nuisances
14.05 Animal Control
14.06 Disorderly Conduct Prohibited
14.07 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited
14.08 False Fire Alarms Prohibited
14.09 Refusing to aid an Officer
14.10 Resisting or Obstructing an Officer
14.11 Obstructing Emergency or Rescue Personnel
14.12 Assisting Escape of Prisoner
14.13 Impersonating a Law Enforcement Officer
14.14 Harassment
14.15 Begging
14.16 Trespassing or Loitering
14.17 Discharging and Carrying Firearms and Guns Prohibited
14.18 Sale and Discharge of Fireworks Prohibited
14.19 Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks Prohibited
14.20 Storage of Gun Powder
14.21 Destruction of Property Prohibited
14.22 Littering Prohibited
14.23 Laser Safety
14.24 Unlawful Use of Telephone or Computerized Communication System.
14.25 Penalty
14.01 Open Burning.
(1) OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED. No person, firm or corporation shall build any outdoor fire within the corporate limits of the village except as set forth in subsection
(2) The purpose of this section is to prohibit or strictly control the burning of materials in the village in order to prevent public nuisances, threats to public safety, and possible air and water pollution that may result from such burning.
(a) It is felt that only by completely prohibiting the outside burning of rubbish, leaves, and other combustibles can such unnecessary public nuisances, dangers, and pollution be abated.
(b) The use of outdoor portable incinerators, drums, barrels or other containers, and outdoor or inside fireplaces for the burning of leaves, trash, garbage, building materials, or refuse is hereby prohibited.
(c) No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor wood burning heating system in the Village of North Fond du Lac.
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 2
(2) EXCEPTIONS.
(a) Outdoor cooking fire. Open or closed cooking grills (charcoal and propane fuel only) are exempt from the prohibitions of section (1) above except as follows:
1. For all multiple family dwellings more than one story in height, the use of any propane or charcoal gas cooking device is prohibited above the first floor occupancy.
2. For all multiple family dwellings more than one story in height, the use of any open or closed outdoor cooking fire, charcoal or propane cooking device, or any open flame device is prohibited within 15 (fifteen) feet of the structure on the ground floor.
3. Smoke from outdoor cooking grills shall not disturb or annoy neighboring property owners.
(b) Recreational Fires. Recreational fires defined as any campfire or cooking fire located at a single or two family private residence for the purpose of recreation or personal enjoyment, are exempt from section (1) so long as the fire is started and tended in compliance with the following requirements:
(1) No fire pit, whether in-ground or portable, shall be closer than 15 feet from any fence, building, shed, accessory structure, garage or any other combustible material.
(2) No in-ground fire pit shall be less than 10 inches deep, less than 2 feet in diameter nor greater than 4 feet in diameter. The fire pit shall be surrounded on the outside at ground level by non-combustible material such as concrete block or rock.
(3) Portable fire pits, defined as commercially designed devices intended to contain and control outdoor wood fires, shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations and shall be used upon a noncombustible surface such as stone, gravel, concrete or brick, with a surface area twice the diameter of the portable fire pit.
(4) Smoke from any recreational fire shall not cause a nuisance for neighboring property owners. The fire shall not cause a nuisance for neighboring property owners. The fire shall be extinguished immediately upon the complaint of a neighboring property owner in regard to nuisance smoke.
(5) Material for recreational fires shall not include rubbish, garbage, recyclable items, trash or any material made of or coated with rubber, plastic, leather or petroleum-based materials, and shall not contain any flammable or combustible liquids.
(6) All recreational fires shall be attended at all times by at least one responsible adult from the ignition of the fire until the fire is completely extinguished.
(7) The owner is required to have available and accessible, in the vicinity of the open burning, adequate fire suppression equipment such as a fire extinguisher, water hose connected to a pressurized water source, shovels and other equipment that would be sufficient to extinguish a fire.
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 3
(8) Any person who has started or maintained a recreational fire as defined herein shall pay any and all costs incurred by the fire department for any service call generated by a recreational fire not in conformance with the provisions of this section.
(c) Controlled burning. Controlled burning of grass or similar vegetation for environmental management purposes, or for training purposes by the fire department can only be performed with prior written permit issued by the fire chief.
(d) Ceremonial Fires. Ceremonial campfire or bonfire, can be performed with prior written permit issued by the fire chief. All guidelines for the burn will be specified in the permit.
(e) Other occasions of desirable outdoor burning not specified by this subsection may be allowed with prior written permit issued by the fire chief, but not as an alternative when other refuse removal or disposal of methods are available.
(3) PERMIT CONDITIONS.
(a) Any burning permitted under subsection (2) shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free manner.
(b) Whenever a special permit is issued by the fire chief, the permit may specify and be conditioned upon observance of certain safety restrictions and nuisance mitigation measures.
(c) If the permit requires that a fire truck and crew be present at the fire scene as a safety precaution, the permit holder, at the discretion of the fire chief will be required to reimburse the village for such costs incurred.
(d) The permit holder shall be responsible for any liability resulting from damage caused by the open burning.
(4) FIRE CHIEF MAY PROHIBIT. The fire chief or his designee may prohibit any or all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous or a nuisance to surrounding residents or passers by.
(5) BURNING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, waterway, alley, or parking lot accessible to the general public.
14.02 Radio and Television Interference Prohibited.
(1) No person in the village shall maintain, use or operate any apparatus device, machine or equipment either electrical or mechanical, which causes interference with radio, television, telephone or electronic reception of others when it is possible by ordinary means, electrical devices or wiring or by ordinary repair, adjustment or installation or other practical means to correct the operation of such mechanism so to prevent such interference.
(2) INSPECTION. Upon complaint being made to the police department that any device in the village is causing interference as provided by subsection (1) hereof, the police department shall investigate the complaint and make recommendations to the person causing the interference so as to eliminate it. The Police Department may request technical assistance from the electrical inspector when needed. In the event that the owner or operator of the offending device causing interference fails to apply remedial measures to eliminate the interference within 10 days after the recommendation is made, the owner or operator shall be deemed to be operating the device in violation of this section and shall be subject to forfeiture as hereinafter provided. Any person
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 4
refusing to allow a Law Enforcement Officer and/or the electrical inspector to enter upon the premises in the village for the purpose of making recommendations to eliminate interference shall within 10 days after such refusal, be deemed to be operating and maintaining the offending device in violation of this section and shall be subject to forfeiture as hereinafter provided, unless said interference be remedied within the said 10 day period.
(3) EXCEPTIONS. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the operation of violet-ray machines, diathermal machines, x-ray machines or other electro-medical devices causing radio interference, provided that the same are being used in medical treatment and the interference that results from the operation is reduced as much as possible by filters, condensers, shields, grounds or other appliances, tending to reduce the interference.
(4) COMPENSATION FOR INSPECTOR. The compensation for the services rendered by the electrical inspector shall be determined by resolution of the village board.
14.03 Public Health. The village elects to come under the jurisdiction of the Fond du Lac County Board of Health as provided in Wis. Stat. §251.08.
14.04 Public Nuisances.
Section 14.04(1) Chronic Nuisance Premises.
(a) Definitions. The following terms shall be defined as follows in this subchapter.
(1) Chief. The Chief of Police or his/her designee.
(2) Enforcement Action. Arrest, the issuance of a citation, the issuance of a written or verbal warning, or an order to abate a code violation.
(3) Nuisance Activity. Any of the following activities, behaviors, conditions of property or conduct whenever engaged in or allowed to occur by property owners, operators, tenants, occupants, or persons associated with premises:
a. An act of harassment, as defined in 947.013, Wis. Stats.
b. Disorderly conduct, as defined in 947.01, Wis. Stats.
c. Crimes of violence, as defined in Chapter 940, Wis. Stats.
d. Obstructing or resisting an officer, as defined in 946.41, Wis. Stats.
e. Crimes against sexual morality, as defined in Chapter 944, Wis. Stats.
f. Any gambling crimes, as defined in Chapter 945, Wis. Stats.
g. Animal violations, as defined in Chapters 5 and 14, Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Ordinance.
h. Theft, as defined in 943.20, Wis. Stats.
i. Receiving stolen property, as defined in 943.34, Wis. Stats.
j. Damage to property, as defined in 943. 01, Wis. Stats.
k. Arson, as defined in 943.02, Wis. Stats.
l. Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses, as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
m. Trespassing, as defined in 943.13 and 943.14, Wis. Stats.
n. Weapons violations, as defined in Chapter 14, Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Ordinance.
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 5
o. Noise violations, as defined in Chapter
p. Alcohol violations, as defined in Chapter 5, Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Ordinance or Chapter 125, Wis. Stats.
q. Loitering and curfew violations, as defined in Chapter 14, Chapter 15 Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Ordinance.
r. Reckless driving, as defined in 346.62, Wis. Stats.
s. Any conspiracy to commit, as defined in 939.31, Wis. Stats., or attempt to commit, as defined in 939.32, Wis. Stats., any of the activities, behaviors, or conduct enumerated in subsections (a) (3) a. through r. above.
t. Any activities requiring the execution of arrest or search warrants at the particular location.
u. Any activities reasonably requiring Police support for Village of North Fond du Lac inspection-related calls.
v. Violations of Fire and Safety Ordinances, as contained in Chapter 14, Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Ordinance.
w. Violations of Public Nuisance Ordinances, as contained in Chapter 14, Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Ordinance.
x. Violations of Housing Standards Ordinances, as contained in Chapter 9, Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Ordinance.
y. Violations of Building Code Ordinances, as contained in Chapter 8, Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Ordinance.
z. Violations of Zoning Code provisions or orders made by the Village of Fond du Lac pursuant to the authority of Section 62.23 Wis. Stats.
aa. Allowing any structure to become subject to an order pursuant to Section 66.0413 Wis. Stats.
bb. Violation of any provision of Chapter 15 of the North Fond du Lac Code.
(4) Owner. The owner of the premises and his/her agents.
(5) Persons associated with. Any person who, whenever engaged in a nuisance activity, enters, occupies, patronizes, visits or attempts to enter, occupy, patronize or visit a property. Includes any officer, director, customer, agent, employee or independent contractor of a property owner, tenant, or occupant.
(6) Premises. Any individual dwelling unit, any apartment building (all units included as one premises), or any individual business premises/commercial structure and associated common areas located in the Village.
(b) Notice. Whenever the Chief determines that three or more nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action have occurred at the premises during any 12-month period, the Chief may notify the premises owner in writing. In calculating the requisite nuisance activities, the Chief may count separate qualifying nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action occurring on the same day (as long as they are distinct in time) or different days, but shall never count nuisance activities that were reported by the owner of the premises. The notice shall contain the street address or legal description sufficient to identify the premises, a description of the nuisance activities that have occurred at the premises, a statement indicating that the cost of future enforcement may be assessed as a special charge against the premises, and a notice as to the
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 6
appeals rights of the owner. . In making the Chief’s determination under this section the Chief may, without limitation by enumeration, rely on the representations of Village employees who are charged with the duty of enforcing or overseeing compliance with any chapter or portion of the Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Code and any documents created by those employees in the performance of their duties.
(c) Delivery of Notice. The notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if sent either by certified mail to the property owner’s last known address, or if delivered in person to the property owner. If the property owner cannot be located, the notice shall be deemed properly delivered if left at the property owner’s usual place of residence in the presence of a competent family member at least 14 years of age, or a competent adult currently residing there and who shall be informed of the contents of the notice. If a current address cannot be located, it shall be deemed sufficient if a copy of the notice is sent by certified mail to the last known address of the owner as identified by the records of the tax roll.
(d) Abatement Plan. Any owner receiving notice pursuant to section (b) and (c), shall meet with the Chief, or his/her designee, within five business days of receipt of such notice. The parties shall review the problems occurring at the property and agree upon an abatement plan to end the nuisance activity on the property. The plan shall also specify a name, address, and telephone number of a person living within 60 miles of the property who can be contacted in the event of further police, fire, or inspection contact. If the owner fails to respond or refuses to meet with the Chief after notice, the Chief shall, to the best of his ability fashion an abatement plan and serve it upon the owner in the manner provided in (c) above.
(e) Additional Nuisance Activity. Whenever the Chief determines that additional nuisance activity has occurred at a premises not less than 15 business days after notice has been issued, and if the Chief determines in his discretion that reasonable efforts have not been made to abate the nuisance activity, the Chief may calculate the cost of response and enforcement, by Village personnel, for this and any subsequent nuisance activities. It shall also cause such charges and administrative costs to be assessed against the premises as a fee for current service authorized by 62.11 and 66.0628, Wis. Stats and collected as a special charge which the Village may impose as a lien against the real estate upon which the premises is located. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this section shall authorize charges for calls for assistance described in Wis. Stat. §66.0627(7).
(f) Appeal. Appeal of the determination of the Chief of Police pursuant to either the notice, abatement plan, or the levying of special charges may be made solely to the Village Board requesting a hearing. Notice of Appeal must be in writing and submitted to the Village Board in care of the Village Clerk with a copy submitted to the Chief of Police . Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes does not apply to this ordinance. The hearing under this subsection shall be conducted by the Village Board
(g) Use of Other Abatement Procedures. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the Village from using Chapter 823, Section 66.0413 or other provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes that provide other procedures to address nuisances: to collect damages not provided for in this ordinance; gain injunctive relief; or to obtain other order(s) of the court to regarding the nuisance activity and the abatement thereof.
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 7
14.05 Animal Control. (1) RESTRAINT OF DOGS. Any person owning (owner) or having charge, custody, care or control of any dog, (responsible party) shall:
(a) keep the dog inside an enclosed structure;
(b) upon an appropriate chain or tie no less than six (6) feet in length;
(c) In an enclosed yard, either walled, electronic fenced or structural fence;
(d) or in any other appropriate restraining enclosure. Public access to one entrance of the owner’s residence or business must be provided without interference from such dog. No tie, chain or enclosure shall allow the dog to be within six (6) feet of any street, sidewalk, public way, or neighbor’s driveway or walkway. In addition, any dog not so tied or enclosed, whether on the owner’s premises or upon the public streets and highways, shall be restrained by an appropriate leash or chain, not exceeding six (6) feet in the hands of a person directly controlling the movement of such dog, provided that such lease or chain is in the hands of a person of sufficient strength to physically control such dog. Electronic fences must adhere to the same rules and regulations as a structural fence. Signage must be displayed on all lot lines adjacent to public right of ways indicating electronic dog restraint. Signage must be properly displayed for full visibility and be no less than 2” by 4” or no more than 6” by 12” in size and be made of weather resistant material with clear lettering.
(e) Exceptions. The following shall be exempt from the above restrictions:
1. A duly authorized police dog, properly trained and directly subject to the voice control of the dog’s assigned officer.
2. A seeing-eye or other handicap-aid dog owned by and within the control and voice control of its owner.
3. A dog that remains within the owner’s rear yard under the personal, immediate, and direct supervision of the owner or other person either of whom is physically present and able to control the dog by voice command. Rear yard is defined as the yard area behind a house or other structure, which is separated from all public streets and sidewalks by a residence or similar building.
(2) RESTRAINT OF CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
(a) Any person owning (owner) or having charge, custody, care or control of any cat or other animal (responsible party) shall keep such animal exclusively upon his/her own premises, which shall include his/her automobile. Any cat or other animal which is allowed or taken outside the respective custodians house or other dwelling, including an automobile, shall be kept upon an appropriate chain or tie no less than six (6) feet in length, or in any other appropriate restraining enclosure. Public access to one entrance of the owner’s house or dwelling must be provided without interference from such animal. Any such animal that is taken off of the custodian’s property must be restrained in an appropriate restraining enclosure, or restrained by an appropriate leash or chain not exceeding six (6) feet in length, in the hands of a person directly controlling the movement of such animal.
(3) SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION. Any dog, cat or other animal found or discovered running loose and untied, or not leashed as provided in this section may be seized, restrained by physical or chemical means, and impounded by any police officer or humane
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 8
officer. The fact that a dog, cat or other animal is licensed does not exempt the animal from the provisions of this subsection. If any such dog, cat or other animal is so seized, restrained and impounded, the police officer shall attempt to notify the owner or responsible party personally or by mail as soon as possible if the owner is known or can be ascertained with reasonable effort. The owner or responsible party shall be liable for all costs associated with the utilization of Humane Society services plus a Village-determined fee for animal control services. Said owner or responsible shall further be subject to the forfeitures and costs provided under Section 14.25, which forfeiture shall not exceed $500 per occurrence. If no responsible party or owner claims the animal after seven (7) days, the animal may be disposed of by a Humane officer, police officer, or Humane Society, in a proper and humane manner.
(4) ANNOYANCES. No owner, caretaker or custodian shall:
(a) harbor or keep any dog or any other animal which barks, whines, howls or makes sounds common to its species in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion.
(b) fail to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition and free from objectionable odor, all structures, pens, yards, and areas adjacent thereto wherein any dog or animal is kept.
(c) keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed so as to apply to a zoo, theatrical exhibit or circus.
(5) Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such manner that the animal cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding.
(6) ANIMAL BITES. The village subscribes to the provisions of Wis. Stats. §95.21 as it pertains to rabies control.
(a) Vicious Dogs or Cats. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or have in his or her possession in the village any dog or cat of a vicious disposition or any dog or cat which shall have bitten any person unless such dog or cat be muzzled at all times or securely tied or securely penned on the premises of such person.
The village elects the provisions of Wis. Stat. §174.02(3)(a) relating to dog bites.
(7) CRUELTY TO ANIMALS. The village subscribes to the following Wisconsin State Statutes as they pertain to Crimes Against Animals: (a) §951.02 Mistreating Animals;
(b) §951.08 Instigating Fights Between Animals;
(c) §951.13 Providing Proper Food and Drink to Confined Animals;
(d) §951.14 Providing Proper Shelter;
(e) §951.15 Animals; Neglected or Abandoned; Police Powers.
(8) PET LITTERING. No person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring an animal as a pet shall allow such animal to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any private or public property. The person responsible for such animal must immediately remove and dispose of all feces so deposited in a sanitary manner.
(9) DISTURBING BIRDS AND SQUIRRELS. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, to destroy or attempt to injure or destroy, any kind of wild birds or squirrels within the village limits, with the exception of controlled programs under the direction of the County Humane Officer or Police Department
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 9
(10) SPECIES PROHIBITED WITHIN THE VILLAGE. The species named in this section by their nature or actions are hereby declared to be a nuisance and may not be kept by any person within the village limits. Species prohibited by this section are:
1. livestock, including all cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, sheep, goats, poisonous snakes, and swine;
2. all mink, foxes, skunks, raccoons, chickens, ducks, geese and bees or other wild animals.
(11) ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE. It shall be unlawful for any person living outside the village limits, who is the owner of, or in possession of, or charged with having the care of any cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, sheep, goats, swine, or fowl, to allow or permit the same to enter the village or to run at large within the village limits.
(12) TRANSPORTATION OF ANIMALS. No person may keep or transport any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel manner. No person shall lead any animal upon any street or alley from a motor vehicle or from a trailer or semi trailer drawn by a motor vehicle.
(13) MOTORIST HITTING DOMESTIC ANIMAL TO STOP AND REPORT. Any person who, while operating a motor vehicle, strikes or causes injury to cats, dogs, horses, cattle or any other domestic animals, shall stop at once, ascertain the extent of the injury and as soon as possible notify the animal's owner or an appropriate law enforcement officer of such striking or injury and the location of the animal.
14.06 Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. No person, within the village shall:
(1) In any public place or private place engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to cause or provoke an immediate disturbance of public order or tends to disturb or annoy any other person or persons.
(2) Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy altercation other than a bona fide athletic contest.
14.07 Loud and Unnecessary Noises Prohibited. No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing, and unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb another in or about any public street, alley park or any private property.
14.08 False Fire Alarms Prohibited.
State Statutes adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §941.13 except the provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
14.09 Refusing to Aid an Officer. State Statutes adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §946.40(1) and (2), except the provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
14.10 Resisting or Obstructing an Officer. State Statutes adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §946.41, relating to resisting or obstructing an officer, with exception to the provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 10
this section as if fully set forth herein.
14.11 Obstructing Emergency or Rescue Personnel. State Statutes adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §941.37 (1) and (2), except the provisions relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
14.12 Assisting Escape of a Prisoner.
No person shall intentionally aid any prisoner or person to escape from the lawful custody of a law enforcement officer of the village.
14.13 Impersonating a Law Enforcement Officer. No person shall impersonate a law enforcement officer with intent to mislead others into believing that the person is actually an officer within the Village of North Fond du Lac.
14.14 Harassment. State Statutes adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §947.013 (1) and (1m), except the provisions relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
14.15 Begging. No person shall, within the limits of the village, place themselves upon any sidewalk or public street or other public place for the purpose of begging or receiving alms or go about said village from place to place or house to house begging alms.
14.16 Trespass or Loitering. (1) TO SCHOOL PROPERTY. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to trespass or loiter on, or use school ground in the village under the following circumstances:
(a) Between the hours of 9:00 PM and 7:00 AM, provided that this section shall not prohibit the use of such school grounds when such use shall be in connection with school functions, or when expressed permission for such use has been given by school authorities.
(b) When access to school property has been officially denied or revoked by an employee of the school district.
(2) TRESPASS TO PROPERTY.
State Statute adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stat. §943.14 Criminal Trespass to a Dwelling; §943.11 Entry Into a Locked Vehicle; §943.13 Trespass to Land; and §192.32 Trespassing on Railroad, except the provision therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
14.17 Discharging and Carrying Firearms and Guns Prohibited.
(1) The village elects to adopt the provisions of Wis. Stat. §66.0409 as it relates to local regulation of firearms.
(2) No person shall fire or discharge any cannon, rifle, revolver, air rifle, pellet gun or other firearm within the village, except as provided in this section.
(a) This subsection shall not apply to:
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 11
1. Any law enforcement officer acting in the course of their duties.
2. Any licensed rifle range.
(3) AIR RIFLES, SLINGSHOTS, BOWS AND ARROWS.
(a) No person shall use any slingshot of any kind or any air gun, spring gun or other device for the purpose of throwing stones, lead, wood or any other substance within the limits of the village.
(b) No person shall use any bow and arrow within the limits of the village except in an area and under circumstances approved and permitted by the Chief of Police or the chief’s designee.
1. Permits for use shall be issued by the chief or the chief’s designee.
2. The fee for the permits shall be set by resolution of the village board.
(4) Firearms restricted in certain buildings.
(a) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this chapter:
1. “Firearm” means any weapon from which a shot may be fired by the force of an explosive or propellant, including, but not limited to, rifles, pistols, shotguns, air guns and BB guns.
2. “Law enforcement” means any person employed by the State of Wisconsin or any political subdivision of this state, for the purpose of detecting and preventing crime and enforcing laws or ordinances and who is authorized to make arrests for violations of the laws or ordinances he or she is employed to enforce.
3. “Weapon” means a handgun, an electronic weapon as defined at Wis. Stats. § 941.295, a knife other than a switchblade under Wis. Stats. § 941.29, or a billy club.
(b)In addition to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 175.60 enumerating places where the carrying of a weapon or a firearm is prohibited, including exceptions thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer or other Village officer or official designated by the North Fond du Lac Chief of Police to enter the following Village of North Fond du Lac municipal buildings, facilities or locations while carrying a weapon or a firearm:
1. Municipal Building;
2. Spillman Library;
3. Fire/EMS Department;
4. EMS Residence;
5. Police Department;
6. Community Center;
7. Village Pool;
8. Village Garage;
9. Village wells, pump houses, and all related buildings;
10. Any and all other municipal buildings owned or operated by the Village of North Fond du Lac, whether now in existence or later constructed or leased.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer to enter any building, facility, or location open to the public that is posted as a no firearms or concealed weapons location while possessing, carrying, or concealing a firearm or weapon, whether with or
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 12
without a state permit.
(d) Signs meeting the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 943.13(2)(bm)1 shall be posted in prominent places near public entrances of all buildings, structures or locations that restrict or prohibit firearms or concealed weapons.
(e) 1. Signs of at least 5 inches by 7 inches in size shall be posted in prominent places near public entrances to all licensed premises selling alcohol for on-premise consumption to advise patrons that:
a. Firearms are prohibited on such premises except with a valid concealed weapons permit pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 941.237(2);
b. Those with such a permit cannot be served alcohol if carrying a concealed weapon pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 941.237(3)(cx).
2. Licensees that prohibit all firearms and concealed weapons on the premise and post signs complying with sub D. above shall be exempt from this requirement.
3. The Village Clerk shall have signs meeting these requirements produced and available for licensees by November 1, 2011, and for new licensees thereafter. Licensees shall post such signs or signs substantially similar of comparable size, font, and content.
(f) Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100 nor more than $500, plus court and other costs, for each separate violation, and shall further be subject to penalty for trespass under § 943.13 Wis. Stats.
14.18 Sale and Discharge of Fireworks Prohibited.
(1) The definition of fireworks as listed in the provisions of Wis. Stats. §167.10(1) are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth here in.
(2) Use and Sale. No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale, use and possess, discharge or explode any firework within the limits of the Village.
(3) Firework displays are not allowed without first obtaining a permit from the fire chief or the chief’s designee and paying fees for such permit as may be set from time to time by resolution of the village board.
14.19 Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks Prohibited.
(1) No person shall stand, sit, loaf or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street or sidewalk, bridge or public ground within the village in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or from any place of business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place.
(2) It should also be unlawful to use vulgar or threatening language toward any person, menace, annoy, insult, or put fear in any person passing or attempting to pass upon any sidewalk, street, or public place in the village.
(3) In no way shall this prevent any law enforcement officer from initiating contact with any person in performing their official duties.
14.20 Storage of Gun Powder. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or have in any building or place occupied by him/her in the village any gunpowder in quantities greater than
Village of North Fond du Lac January 10, 2005
Public Nuisances - 13
twenty-five (25) pounds. All gun powder of quantities less than twenty-five (25) pounds stored on any property in the village shall be kept in a canister designed for such use.
14.21 Destruction of Property Prohibited. No person shall willfully injure or intentionally deface, destroy or unlawfully remove, take or meddle with any property of any kind or nature belonging to the village or its departments, or to any private person without the consent of the owner or proper authority.
14.22 Littering Prohibited.
(1) No person shall throw any glass, rubbish, waste or filth upon the street, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the village or upon any private property not owned by him/her or upon the surface of any body of water within the village.
(2) The parent or parents of an un-emancipated minor child who violates Section 14.22 of this chapter may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damages or destroyed property.
14.23 Laser Safety.
(1) DEFINITIONS.
(a) Laser means any device that projects a beam or point of light by means of amplification by stimulated emission of radiation, or a device that emits light that simulates the appearance of a laser.
(2) No person shall direct or cause to be directed, any beam of any laser device at any person under circumstances that tend to disturb, frighten, or annoy any other person or persons.
(3) EXCEPTIONS.
(a) This provision of municipal ordinance shall not prohibit any law enforcement officer using such a device in the lawful performance of their duties.
(b) The provisions of this section are not intended to prohibit the reasonable use of laser devices in legitimate business or educational settings so long as such use does not unreasonably provoke an immediate disturbance of public order.
14.24 Unlawful Use of Telephone or Computerized Communication System. State Statutes adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stats. 947.012 and 947.0125, except the provisions relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
14.25 Penalty. Unless otherwise specified, the penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be as provided in Sec. 24.05 of this code. Each day that any such provision is so violated by any such person shall be and constitute a separate violation hereunder.
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Chapter 15
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
15.01 Use of Intoxicants
15.02 Theft
15.03 Prohibiting Possession of Marijuana
15.04 Drug Paraphernalia
15.05 Distribution or Possession of Isobutyl Nitrate
15.06 Non-sufficient Fund Checks/Worthless Orders/Account Closed Checks
15.07 Use of Tobacco Products by Minors and the Distribution of Tobacco
15.08 Truancy
15.09 Contributing to Truancy
15.10 Parental Responsibility for Juvenile Misconduct
15.11 Unlawful Sheltering of Minors
15.12 Curfew
15.13 Gambling, Lotteries, Fraudulent Devices and Practices Prohibited
15.14 Indecent Conduct and Language Prohibited
15.15 Displaying Material Harmful to Minors
15.16 Regulation of Sexually Oriented Business
15.17 Banning Nude Dancing in Bars
15.18 Regulation of Smoking on School Property
15.19 Regulation of Smoking in Places of Employment and Public Places
15.20 Social Host
15.25 Penalty
15.01 Use of Intoxicants.
(1) DEFINITIONS.
(a) Alcohol Beverages has the meaning found in Wis. Stats. §125.02(1).
(b) Fermented malt beverage has the meaning found in Wis. Stats. §125.02(6).
(c) Intoxicating liquor has the meaning found in Wis. Stats. §125.02(8).
(d) Underage person has the meaning found in Wis. Stats. §125.02(20m).
(2) POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BEVERAGES BY UNDERAGE PERSON. It shall be unlawful for any underage person to consume or possess any alcoholic beverage or be under the influence of any alcoholic beverage within the corporate limits of the village.
(3) PROCURING AND FURNISHING OF ALCOHOL TO UNDERAGE PERSON. The village elects to adopt Wis. Stats. §125.07(1)(a)4 as it relates to procuring and/or furnishing liquor to minors.
(4) POSSESSION OR DRINKING OF FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES OR INTOXICATING LIQUOR ON PUBLIC WAYS. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or give away, or offer to
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 2
sell, serve or give away, any alcoholic beverage upon any public way, public street, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, safety zone, alley, public parking lot, highway, cemetery drive or other public area within the village or on private property without the owner's consent, except at licensed premises.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any open can, bottle, or other container containing malt beverages or intoxicating liquor, or to drink from the same while on, or in any motor vehicle parked on any public way, public street, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, safety zone, alley, public parking lot, private lot open to the public, highway, cemetery drive, or other public area within the village.
(c) Sections 3(a) and 3(b) shall not apply to municipal parks or to any street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or public way which is officially designated by the village as a parade route, festival grounds, block party or street dance area.
(d) During hours when a licensed premise is required by statute or ordinance to be closed, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume any fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor or possess any open can, bottle or other container which contains fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor outside the premises of any tavern on any property contiguous or adjacent thereto if such licensed property is under the control of management of the tavern's license holder, agent or owner.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or give away, or to offer to sell, or have in their possession any alcoholic beverage in any village park during hours in which the park is officially closed.
(5) The most current publication of Chapter 125 Wisconsin Statutes is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section so far as applicable.
15.02 Theft.
(1) Definitions. In this section:
(a) Merchant has the meaning found in Wis. Stats §943.50(1)(a).
(b) Value of merchandise has the meaning found in Wis. Stats. §943.50(1)(b).
(2) THEFT. The village elects the provisions of Wis. Stats. §943.20(1)(a) as it relates to theft.
(3) RETAIL THEFT. The village elects the provisions of Wis. Stats. §943.50(1m), §943.50(3), and §943.50(3m) as it relates to retail theft.
(a) A merchant or merchant's adult employee is privileged to defend property as prescribed in Wis. Stats. §939.49.
(4) FRAUD ON HOTEL OR RESTAURANT KEEPER OR TAXICAB OPERATOR. The village elects the provisions of Wis. Stats. §943.21 as it relates to fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper or taxicab operator.
(5) THEFT OF LIBRARY MATERIAL. The village elects the provisions of Wis. Stats. §943.61 as it relates to theft of library materials.
15.03 Prohibiting Possession of Marijuana.
(1) DEFINITIONS.
(a) Marijuana has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. §961.01(14).
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 3
(b) Practitioner has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. §961.01(19).
(2) No person within the corporate limits of the village shall possess marijuana unless the substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of his professional practice.
15.04 Drug Paraphernalia. The village elects the provisions of Wis. Stats. §961.571, §961.572, §961.573, §961.574 as they relate to drug paraphernalia with exception to the provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed.
15.05 Distribution or Possession of Isobutyl Nitrite. No person shall manufacture, possess, use, dispense, sell, or hold for sale any isobutyl nitrite, or any compound or mixture or preparation containing significant amounts of isobutyl nitrite.
15.06 Issuance of Non-sufficient Fund Checks, Worthless Orders and Account- Closed Checks. The village elects to adopt Wis. Stat. §943.24 as it relates to the issuance of worthless checks and other orders for payment.
(1) No person may issue any check or other order for the payment of money which, at the time of issuance, he or she intends shall not be paid.
(2) Any of the following is prima facie evidence that the person at the time he or she issued the check or other order for the payment of money, intended it should not be paid:
(a) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have an account with the drawee; or
(b) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and that the person failed within five (5) days after receiving notice of nonpayment or dishonor to pay the check or other order; or
(c) Proof that, when presentment was made, within a reasonable time, the person did not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and the person failed with five (5) days after receiving notice of nonpayment or dishonor to pay the check or other order.
(3) This section does not apply to a post-dated check or to a check given for a past consideration, except a payroll check.
(4) In addition to the other penalties provided for violation of this section, the Court may order a violator to pay restitution under Section 800.093, Wis. Stats., as amended.
15.07 Use and Distribution of Cigarettes and Tobacco Products.
(1) JUVENILE USE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS. The village elects to adopt the provisions of Wis. Stats. §254.92 regarding the purchase or possession of tobacco products by juveniles.
(2) RESTRICTIONS ON THE SALE OR GIFT OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS. The village elects to adopt the provisions of Wis. Stat. §134.66 regarding the sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco products.
15.08 Truancy.
(1) AUTHORITY. Wis. Stats. §118.163(1m)(2) and (2m) authorizes the village to adopt a
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 4
municipal truancy code. (2) DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this section:
(a) Truant has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. §118.163(1)(d).
(b) Habitual Truant has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. §118.16(1)(a).
(c) Acceptable Excuse has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. §118.15(3).
(d) Dropout has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. §118.153(1)(b).
(3) SCHOOL ATTENDANCE.
(a) Requirements. The school attendance requirements for the village shall be as set forth in Wis. Stat. §118.15 and except as provided in Wis. Stat. §118.15, any person having under their control a child who is between the ages of 6 and 18 years shall cause the child to attend school regularly during the full period and hours, religious holidays excepted, that the public or private school in which the child should be enrolled is in session until the end of the school term, quarter or semester of the school year in which a child becomes 18 years of age.
(b) Exceptions.
1. A person will not be found in violation of this section if such person has under their control a child who has been sanctioned under Wis. Stat. §49.26(1)(h).
2. A person will not be found in violation of this section if that person can prove that he or she is unable to comply with the provisions of this section because of the disobedience of the child. The child shall be referred to the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction under Wis. Stats. Chapter 938.
(c) Penalties. Except as set forth in the above 2 exceptions and further excepting a person who has been found guilty of a misdemeanor under Wis. Stats §948.45 for the circumstances at issue, whoever violates this section may be penalized as follows if evidence has been provided by the school attendance officer that the activities under Wis. Stat §118.16(5)(n):
1. For the first offense, by a forfeiture imposed of not more than $500.00;
2. For the second or subsequent offense, by a forfeiture imposed of not more than $1,000.00.
3. The court may require a person who is found guilty of violating this section to perform community service work.
4. The court may order any person who violates this section to participate in counseling at the person’s own expense or to attend school with his or her child or both.
(4) PROHIBITION AGAINST TRUANT. Any person between the ages of 6 and 18 years who is attending school in the village, subject to the exceptions found under Wis. Stat. §118.15, is prohibited from being a truant as the term is defined in the section. Any law enforcement officer in the village is authorized to issue a citation to any person who is determined to be truant under the terms of this section.
(5) PROHIBITION AGAINST HABITUAL TRUANT. Any person between the ages of 6 and 18 years who is attending school in the village, subject to the exceptions found under Wis. Stat. §118.15 is prohibited from being a habitual truant as the term is defined in this section. Any law enforcement officer in the village is authorized to issue a citation to any such person who is determined to be a habitual truant under the terms of this section.
(6) PRECONDITIONS TO ISSUANCE OF HABITUAL TRUANCY CITATION
Prior to the issuance of any citation against a juvenile who is truant or a habitual truant or against a parent or guardian, the North Fond du Lac School District Attendance Officer shall provide
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 5
evidence to the police department that appropriate school personnel in the school or school district in which the child is enrolled have, within the school year during which the truancy occurred, taken the following actions:
1. Met with, or attempted to meet with, the child's parent or guardian and received no response or were refused.
2. Provided an opportunity for educational counseling to the child to determine whether a change in the child’s curriculum would resolve the child’s truancy and have considered curriculum modification under Wis. Stat. §118.15(1)(d).
3. Evaluated the child to determine whether learning problems are the cause of the truancy and, if so, taken steps to overcome the learning problems, except that the child need not be evaluated if tests administered to the child within the previous year indicate that the child is performing at their grade level.
4. Conducted an evaluation to determine whether social problems are the cause of the child's truancy and, if so, taken appropriate action or made appropriate referrals.
(a) Subsection 1 does not apply if a meeting as required under Wis. Stat. §118.16 is not held within ten (10) school days after the date that the notice under Wis. Stat. §118.16(2)(cg) is sent. Wis. Stat. §118.15 (2), (3), and (4) do not apply if the school attendance officer provides evidence that appropriate school personnel were unable to carry out the activity due to the child’s absence from school.
(b) Form of Citation. Any citation issued shall be returnable to the Lakeside Municipal Court in the same manner as all other ordinance citations are returnable. The citation is to state on its face that it is a "must appear" citation.
(7) FINDING AND DISPOSITION.
(a) Truancy. Upon finding the child truant, the court shall impose one or more of the following dispositions:
1. An order for the person to attend school;
2. A forfeiture of not more than $50 plus costs for the first violation, or a forfeiture of not more than $100 plus costs for any second or subsequent violation committed within twelve (12) months of a previous violation, subject to Wis. Stat. §938.37, and subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture of not more than $500 for all violations committed during a school semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardians or both.
(b) Habitual Truancy. Upon finding the child habitually truant, the court shall impose one or more of the following dispositions:
1. Suspension of the person’s operating privileges for not less than 30 days nor more than one year. The court shall immediately take possession of the suspended license and forward it to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension.
2. Counseling, Service or Work Program. An order for the person to participate in counseling, a supervised work program or community service work as described under Wis. Stat. §938.34(5g). The costs of any such counseling, supervised work program or community service work may be assessed against the person, parents or guardian of the person or both.
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 6
3. In-house Restraint. An order for the person to remain at home except for the hours in which the person is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel time required to get to and from the school program or place of worship. The order may permit the person to leave the home if the child is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
4. Educational Program. An order for the person to attend an educational program as described in Wis. Stats. §938.34 (7d).
5. Revocation of Work Permit. An order for the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development to revoke, under Wis. Stats. §103.72 a permit issued under Wis. Stats. §103.70 authorizing the employment of the person.
6. Teen Court Program. An order for the person to be placed in a teen court program as described in Wis. Stats. §938.342(1g)(f).
7. An order for the person to attend school.
8. A forfeiture of not more than $500, subject to Wis. Stat. §938.37. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardians or both.
9. An order placing the person under formal or informal supervision as described in Wis. Stats. §938.34(2).
10. An order for the person’s parent, guardian or legal custodian to participate in counseling at the parent’s, guardian’s or legal custodian’s own expense or to attend school with the person or both.
11. Any other reasonable conditions consistent with the section including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on specific premises and restrictions on associating with other children or adults.
(c) Disposition. Upon finding the child to be a dropout, the court shall impose one or more of the following dispositions: 1. The court may suspend the person’s operating privileges until the person reaches the age of 18. The court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license and forward it to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension.
15.09 Contributing to Truancy.
(1) CONTRIBUTING TO TRUANCY. Any person 18 years of age or older who, by act or omission, knowingly encourages or contributes to the truancy of a child is guilty of a violation of the section.
(2) EXCEPTIONS. This section does not apply to a person who has under his or her control a child who has been sanctioned under the provisions of Wis. Stat. §49.26(1)(h).
(3) An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a child if the natural and probable consequences of that act or omission would be to cause the child to be truant.
15.10 Parental Responsibility for Juvenile Misconduct.
(1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to reduce the incidents of misconduct by juveniles by requiring proper supervision on the part of custodial parents.
(2) DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this section, unless otherwise defined:
(a) Child means a person under the age of seventeen years.
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 7
(b) Custodial parent means a parent or legal guardian of a minor child who has custody of said child.
(c) Custody means either physical custody of a child under a court order under Wis. Stat. §767.23 or §767.24 or the custody of a child under a stipulation under Wis. Stat. §767.10 or actual physical custody of the child. Custody does not include legal custody, as defined under Wis. Stats. §48.02(12) by an agency or a person other than a child’s birth or adoptive parent. In determining which parent has custody of a child for purposes of this section, the court shall consider which parent had responsibility for caring for and supervising the child at the time that the child’s ordinance violations occurred.
(3) PROHIBITED CONDUCT. Every custodial parent has a duty to properly supervise his or her child. Any custodial parent whose child is convicted of a village municipal code violation twice in a six-month period or three or more times within a twelve-month period is guilty of failing to properly supervise said child. The six and twelve-month periods shall be measured from the date of the first violation.
(4) DEFENSES.
(a) The following shall be defenses to a violation of section 3:
1. Where the parent has made all reasonable and available efforts under the circumstances to prevent the juvenile misconduct;
2. Where the parent is not legally responsible for the supervision of the juvenile at the time the misconduct occurred; or
3. Where the parent has a physical or mental disability or incompetency rendering them incapable of supervising the juvenile at the time the misconduct occurred.
(b) It is not a defense where the parent assigns their parental responsibility to another, except pursuant to legal proceedings, which result in a court order effectuating the same.
(c) The parent has the burden of proving their defense by clear and satisfactory evidence.
15.11 Unlawful Sheltering of Minors. (1) No person shall, unless duly licensed under the Wisconsin Statutes, without having first obtained the permission of the parent or legal guardian of any minor or without first notifying the police department of the village of the existence of a minor described in subsection
(a) below, on premises owned or operated by or under the control of the person:
(a) By any means, conceal, shelter, or assist in the concealing or sheltering of any minor under the age of eighteen (18) while the minor is under the legal custody of the parents or legal guardian and while the minor is on report with any law enforcement agency as a “missing person”, a “runaway”, or a “wanted” person:
(b) Supply false information to or obstruct any police officer who, in the performance of his/her duty is attempting to locate or to take into custody any minor described in this section.
15.12 Curfew. No child under 18 years of age shall loaf, idle or remain and no parent or guardian shall knowingly permit his child or ward of such to loaf, idle or remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places in the village between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such child is accompanied by a parent, guardian or some person of lawful age having legal
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 8
custody of such child. This section shall not be construed to prohibit such child from performing an errand or duty if directed by his parent or guardian of urgent necessity or from pursuing the duties of his employment in an expeditious and orderly manner or from going to or from business or amusement places or private homes.
15.13 Gambling, Lotteries, Fraudulent Devices, and Practices Prohibited
(1) GAMBLING PROHIBITED. The provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 945, relating to gambling, commercial gambling, possession of gambling devices, except provisions therein relating to penalties imposed are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
(2) PROMOTING GAMBLING, PROFITING FROM GAMBLING. No person shall promote gambling or profit from gambling anywhere in the village.
(3) POSSESSION OF GAMBLING RECORDS. No person shall knowingly possess any gambling record anywhere in the village. Knowingly means knowing that the record is a gambling record, whether or not the person knows the possession is a violation of the law. The following is an affirmative defense to a charge of violating this section.
(a) The person possessing the record did not use it or intend to use it in connection with any gambling.
(4) POSSESSION OF A GAMBLING DEVICE. No person shall possess any gambling device, knowing the character of the device. No person shall, knowing the character of such device, manufacture, sell, transport, place, or conduct or negotiate a transaction concerning such device, knowing that the device is to be used in unlawful gambling.
(5) EXCEPTIONS. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit any activity or any possession of any record or device relating to any gambling activity licensed or permitted by the State of Wisconsin.
15.14 Indecent Conduct and Language Prohibited. The village elects the provisions of Wis. Stats. §944.20(1) and (2) as they pertain to lewd and lascivious behavior.
15.15 Displaying Material Harmful To Minors.
(1) DEFINITIONS.
(a) Minor means any unmarried person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
(b) Harmful to Minors means that quality of any description, or representation, in whatever form of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse when material or performance, taken as a whole, has the following characteristics:
1. The average adult person applying contemporary community standards would find that the material has a predominant tendency to appeal to a prurient interest in sex in minors; and
2. The average adult person applying contemporary community standards would find that the material depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse in a manner that is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community with respect to what is suitable for minors; and
3. The material lacks serious, or educational, literary, scientific, artistic, or political value for
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 9
minors.
(c) Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple; or the depiction of covering male genitals in a discernable turgid state.
(d) Sexual conduct means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or if such person be female, breast.
(e) Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(f) Sado-masochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
(g) Material means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, figure, or description.
(h) Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
1. The character and content of any material which is reasonably susceptible to examination by the defendant, and
2. The age of the minor; however, an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
(i) Person means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or legal entity of any kind.
(j) A reasonable bona fide attempt means an attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor by requiring production of a driver's license, identification card or paper and not relying solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the minor.
(2) OFFENSES. No person having custody, control or supervision of any commercial establishment shall knowingly: (a) Display material which is harmful to minors in such a way that minors, as a part of the invited general public, will be exposed to view such material provided, however, a person shall be deemed not to have "displayed" material harmful to minors if the material is kept behind devices commonly known as "blinder racks" so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view.
(b) Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view, or otherwise disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material which is harmful to minors.
(3) OFFENSES-MINORS. Any person under 18 years of age who falsely states, either orally or in writing, that he is not under the age of 18 years, or who presents or offers to any person any evidence of age and identity which is false or not actually his own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material, is guilty of a violation of this ordinance.
(4) DEFENSES. It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this ordinance that:
(a) The material involved was displayed, presented or disseminated to a minor at a recognized
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 10
and established school, church, museum, medical clinic, hospital, public library, governmental agency, quasi-governmental agency and persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of such persons or organizations, and which institution displays, presents or disseminates such material or performance for a bona fide governmental, educational or scientific purpose.
15.16 Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses. It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the Village, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Village. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
(1) DEFINITIONS.
(a) Adult Arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed have as their dominant theme, or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
(b) Adult Bookstore Or Adult Video Store means a commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade for sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which have as their dominant theme, or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
(c) Adult Cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that regularly or routinely features:
1. Persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity; or
2. Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”; or
3. films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproduction which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
4. persons who engage in lewd, lascivious or erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers.
(d) Adult Motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 11
circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which have as their dominant theme, or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, and has a sign visible from the public right of way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions.
(e) Adult Motion Picture Theater means a commercial establishment for adults where regularly or routinely, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown which have as their dominant theme, or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
(f) Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment for adults that regularly or routinely features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which have as their dominant theme, or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas”.
(g) Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(h) Escort Agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
(i) Establishment means and includes any of the following:
1. the opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
2. the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
3. the additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
4. the relocation of any sexually oriented business.
(j) Permittee and/or Licensee means a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
(k) Nude Model Studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
(l) Nudity Or A State Of Nudity means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast without a fully opaque complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
(m) Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
(n) Semi-Nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the human bare
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 12
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast without a fully opaque complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
1. physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
2. activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
(o) Sexual Encounter Center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
(p) Sexually Oriented Businesses means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
(q) Specified Anatomical Areas means the male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
(r) Specified Sexual Activities means and includes any of the following: 1. the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
2. sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
3. masturbation, actual or simulated; or
4. excretory functions,
as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in 1 through 4 above.
(s) Substantial Enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25%) percent, as the floor areas exists on October 1, 1997.
(t) Transfer Of Ownership Or Control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
1. the sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
2. the transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
3. the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
(2) CLASSIFICATION. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: (a) adult arcades;
(b) adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(c) adult cabarets;
(d) adult motels;
(e) adult motion picture theaters;
(f) adult theaters;
(g) escort agencies;
(h) nude model studios; and
(i) sexual encounter centers.
(3) PERMITS AND/OR LICENSE REQUIRED.
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 13
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid permit and/or license, issued by the village clerk.
(b) An application for a permit and/or license must be made on a form provided by the village clerk. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(c) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this ordinance and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with all village codes including fire, health, building and zoning codes.
(d) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a permit and/or license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty (20%) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit and/or license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a twenty (20%) percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a permit and/or license as applicant.
(e) The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit and/or license.
(f) Application for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be made to the clerk by the intended operator of the enterprise. The intended operator shall be required to give the following information on the application form:
1. The name, street address (and mailing address if different) and Wisconsin driver’s license number of the intended operator; and the name and street address (and mailing address if different) of the owner(s);
2. The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided;
3. The telephone number of the establishment;
4. The address, and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be located;
5. If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the establishment for which the permit is sought, and the date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the permit is sought; and
6. If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the permit). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten (10) days following the date of issuance of the permit, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner’s time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same.
7. A description which shall include the date and nature of the charge and the county and state of venue for each criminal and ordinance conviction (except minor traffic convictions) and each pending criminal and ordinance charge against the intended operator and each person
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 14
identified in subsection (3)(d).
(g) The application shall be accompanied by the following:
1. Payment of the application fee in full;
2. If the establishment is a Wisconsin corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto;
3. If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto;
4. If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of Wisconsin, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto;
5. If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualified documents, together with all amendments thereto;
6. Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed;
7. If the person identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land in item (6) are not also the owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the establishment for the purpose of the operation of the establishment;
8. A photocopy of the current motor vehicle driver’s license, if any, of the intended operator(s);
9. Any of items (2) through (8), above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the clerk with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current.
(h) The application shall contain a statement under oath that: 1. The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and
2. The applicant has read the provisions of this section.
(i) A separate application and permit shall be required for each sexually oriented business.
(4) ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE
(a) The clerk shall approve the issuance of a permit and/or license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless he/she finds one or more of the following to be true: 1. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit and/or license or has inaccurately answered a question or request for information on the application form.
3. Subject to Wis. Stat. §111.321, §111.322 and §111.335, the applicant, intended operator, or any of the persons identified in subsection (3)(d) hereof shall have been convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five (5) years, the nature of which is directly related to the person’s fitness to engage in a sexually oriented business.
4. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the building inspector and zoning administrator as being in compliance with applicable laws and
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 15
ordinances.
5. The permit and/or license fee required by this ordinance has not been paid.
6. An application of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) The permit and/or license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit and/or license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(c) The building inspector and zoning administrator shall complete his certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within ten (10) days of receipt of the application by the clerk. Each certification shall be promptly delivered to the clerk.
(d) If the clerk determines that an applicant is not eligible for a permit and/or license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application by the clerk, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this section.
(e) An applicant denied a permit and/or license by the clerk may appeal such decision by requesting administrative review of the decision as provided in Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin State Statutes as modified by Village Code, Chapter 23.
(5) FEES. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit and/or license shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the village board. This fee is to be used to pay for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. The fee for partial license years shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis beginning with the first day of the month of issuance.
(6) INSPECTION. An applicant, or permittee and/or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Building and Zoning Department, or other Village or State departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(7) EXPIRATION OF PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE. (a) Each permit and/or license shall expire June 30 of each year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Subsection (4) hereof. Application for renewal should be made at least sixty (60) days before the expiration date, and when made less than sixty (60) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit and/or license will not be affected. The license renewal fee shall be submitted with the application renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of $100.00 shall be assessed against any applicant who files for renewal later than sixty (60) days before the license expires. If the applicant is denied, one-half (½) of the total fees collected shall be returned.
(b) When the clerk denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a permit and/or license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the clerk finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit and/or license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit and/or license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
(8) REVOCATION OR SUSPENSIONS. (a) The village may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 16
license and/or permit to operate a sexually oriented business as provided in this subsection. 1. Any resident of the village may file a sworn written complaint with the Village Clerk alleging that a person holding a license and/or permit to operate a sexually oriented business has violated this Code. Upon the filing of the complaint, the Village Board, or a duly authorized committee of the Village Board, shall issue a Summons, signed by the Village Clerk and directed to an approved person for service. The Summons shall command the licensee or permittee complained of to appear before the village board or the designated committee on a date and place named in the summons, not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days from the date of issuance, and show cause why his/her/its license or permit should not be revoked or suspended. The summons and a copy of the complaint shall be served on the licensee or permittee at least three (3) days before the date at which the licensee/permittee is commanded to appear. Service shall be in the manner provided under Wis. Stats. Chapter 801, for the service and civil actions in Circuit Court.
2. If the licensee or permittee does not appear as required by the summons, the allegations of the complaint shall be taken as true and if the village board or designated committee finds the allegations sufficient, the license or permit shall be revoked. The clerk shall give notice of the revocation to the person(s) whose license is revoked within three (3) days of such determination.
3. If the licensee or permittee appears as required by the summons and denies the complaint, both the complainant and the licensee may produce witnesses, cross-examine witnesses, and be represented by Counsel. The licensee or permittee shall be provided a written transcript of the hearing at his or her expense. If the hearing is held before the Village Board and the complaint is found to be true, the license shall be either suspended for not less than ten (10) days nor more than ninety (90) days, or revoked.
4. If the hearing is held before a committee of the board, the committee shall submit a report to the village board, including Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and a recommendation as to what action, if any, the village board should take with respect to the license or permit. The committee shall provide the complainant and the licensee or permittee with a copy of the report. Either the complainant or licensee may file an objection to the report and shall have the opportunity to present arguments supporting the objection to the village board. The village board shall determine whether the argument shall be presented orally or in writing or both. If the village board, after considering the committee’s report and any arguments presented by the complainant or the licensee, finds the complaint to be true, or if there is not objection to a report recommending suspension or revocation, the license or permit shall be suspended or revoked as provided herein.
5. The village board shall give notice of each suspension or revocation within three (3) days of such determination to the person(s) whose license or permit is suspended or revoked.
6. If the village board finds the complaint untrue, the proceedings shall be dismissed without cost to the accused. If the village board finds the complaint to be malicious and without probable cause, the cost shall be paid by the complainant. The village board or the committee may require the complainant to provide security for such cost before issuing a summons.
7. When a license or permit is revoked, the revocation shall be recorded by the clerk and no other license issued under this section may be granted within thirty-six (36) months of the date of revocation to the person(s) whose license or permit was revoked. No part of the fee paid for any license so revoked may be refunded.
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 17
8. The clerk may refuse to renew a license for the causes provided in subsection 9 hereof. Prior to the time for the renewal of the license, the clerk shall notify the licensee or permittee in writing of his/her intention not to renew the license and provide the licensee or permittee with an opportunity for a hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the intended action. The hearing shall be conducted as provided in subsection 8 hereof. If the hearing is held before a committee of the village board, the committee shall make a report and recommendation as provided under subsection 8 and the village board shall follow the procedure specified under that subsection in making its determination.
9. Grounds for revocation or suspension of a permit and/or license issued under this section shall include but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. a permittee and/or licensee gave false, inaccurate or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
b. a permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
c. a permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
d. a permittee and/or licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee’s and/or licensee’s permit and/or license was suspended;
e. a permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the permitted and/or licensed premises;
f. the owner or operator of the permitted establishment knowingly allowed a person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter an establishment; or
g. there was a change of owner or operator for which a transfer application was not timely filed.
h. a permitee and/or licensee violated any of the provisions of Sections 5.11(15) Conditions of License, 5.11(16), Closing Hours, 5.11(17) Restrictions on Special Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage Special Event License, and 5.11(18) Beer Garden License Required For Outdoor Consumption at Class “B” Premises, 15.15(2) Displaying Harmful Material to Minors, 15.14 Indecent Conduct, or 15.17 Banning Nude Dancing in Bars of this code.
i. Subject to Wis. Stat. §111.321, §111.322 and §111.335, the applicant, intended operator, or any of the persons identified in subsection (3)(d) hereof shall have been convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five (5) years, the nature of which is directly related to the person’s fitness to engage in a sexually oriented business.
(b) When a permit and/or license is revoked, the revocation shall continue for three (3) years, and the permittee and/or licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business permit and/or license for three (3) years from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the clerk finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit and/or license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
(c) After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 18
revocation of a permit and/or licensee, the applicant or licensee or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(9) TRANSFER OF PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE. A permittee and/or licensee shall not transfer his/her permit and/or license to another, nor shall a permittee and/or licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit and/or license at any place other than the address designated in the application.
(10) LOCATIONAL RESTRICTIONS. Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in the Industrial-1 district provided that:
(a) The sexually oriented business may not be operated within 500 feet of:
1. a church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship;
2. a public or private elementary or secondary school;
3. a boundary of any residential district;
4. a parcel used for residential purposes;
5. a public park;
6. a licensed day-care center;
(b) All buildings used for the operation of a sexually oriented business shall be set back 30 feet from the street right-of-way.
(c) The sexually oriented business may not be operated within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business.
(d) For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to interviewing structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, parcel used for residential purposes, or licensed day care center.
(e) For purposes of subsection (c) above, the distance between any two sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
(11) NON-CONFORMING USES.
(a) Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of the locational or structural configuration requirements of this ordinance shall be deemed a non-conforming use. The non-conforming use will be permitted to continue unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such non-conforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is non-conforming.
(b) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a church, synagogue, regular place of religious worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, licensed day care center, public park, or residential
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 19
district within 500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license, and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked.
(12) ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less then ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
(b) It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented permit and/or license, rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he/she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms “rent” or “subrent” mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(13) REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS.
(a) A person who operated or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 1. Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit and/or license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6") inches. The clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of the Building Inspector or his designee.
4. It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least an employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager stations designated, then the
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 20
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
6. It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.
7. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1) foot-candle as measured at the floor level.
9. It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(14) EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
(a) It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this section.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 1. The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
2. The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center.
(d) Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
(15) SIGNAGE.
(a) Notwithstanding any other village ordinance, code or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for sexually oriented business other than (1) primary sign and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein.
(b) Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such display surface shall: a. not contain any flashing lights;
b. be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 21
c. not exceed the dimensions for signs allowed in the zoning district where the sexually oriented business is located.
(c) Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise.
(d) Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
(e) Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display surface shall: 1. be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
2. not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
3. not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and
4. be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprises.
(f) The provisions of subsections (b)1, (c), and (d) above shall also apply to secondary signs.
(16) PERSONS YOUNGER THAN EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED FROM ENTRY; ATTENDANT REQUIRED.
(a) It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that the sexually oriented business is open for business.
(b) It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at or near each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented businesses’ regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 1. A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s, or chauffeur’s driver’s license; or
2. valid personal identification certificate issued by the State of Wisconsin reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
(17) EXEMPTIONS. It is a defense to prosecution under this ordinance that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated;
(a) by a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Wisconsin; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(b) by a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
15.17 Banning Nude Dancing in Bars.
(1) This section prohibits live, totally nude, non-obscene, erotic dancing in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and creating an exception from such prohibition for theaters, civic centers, performing arts centers, and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis.
(a) The village board has explicit authority under Wis. Stats. §125.10(1) to adopt regulations governing the sale of alcoholic beverages which are in addition to those set forth in Wis. Stats. ch. 125.
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 22
(b) the village board has authority under its general police powers set forth in Wis. Stats. §61.34(1) to act in good order of the municipality and for the health, safety and welfare of the public; and may carry out its powers by regulation and suppression.
(c) The village board recognizes it lacks authority to regulate obscenity in light of Wis. Stats. §66.051(3), and does not intend by adopting this section to regulate obscenity, since nudity in and of itself is not obscene, it declares its intent to enact an ordinance addressing the secondary effects of live, totally nude, non-obscene, erotic dancing in bars and taverns.
(d) Bars and taverns featuring live totally nude, non-obscene, erotic dancing have in other communities tended to further the increase of criminal and other offensive activity, to disrupt the peace and order of the communities, to depreciate the value of real property, to harm the economic welfare of the communities and to negatively affect the quality of life of the communities, and such secondary effects are detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of citizens.
(e) The village board recognizes the U.S. Supreme Court has held that nude dancing is expressive conduct within the outer perimeters of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and therefore entitled to some limited protection under the First Amendment, and the governing body further recognizes that freedom of speech is among our most precious and highly protected rights, and wishes to act consistently with full protection of those rights.
(f) The governing body is aware, based on the experiences of other communities, that bars and taverns in which live, totally nude, non-obscene, erotic dancing occurs may and do generate secondary effects which the governing body believes are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(g) Among these secondary effects are: 1. The potential increase in prostitution and other sex-related offenses, as well as other crimes and offenses.
2. The potential depreciation of property values in neighborhoods where bars and taverns featuring nude dancing exist.
3. Health risks associated with the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
4. The potential for infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of unlawful conduct.
(h) The village board desires to minimize, prevent and control these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the village; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of urban blight.
(i) The governing body has determined that enactment of an ordinance prohibiting live, totally nude, non-obscene dancing in bars and taverns licensed to serve alcohol beverages promotes the goal of minimizing, preventing and controlling the negative secondary effects associated with such activity.
(2) Nude Dancing in Licensed Establishments Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to perform or engage in, or for any licensee or manager or agent of the licensee to permit any person, employee, entertainer or patron to perform or engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the premises of a licensed establishment which:
(a) Shows his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal clef or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering.
(b) Shows any portion of the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 23
areola.
(c) Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(3) Exemptions. The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to the following licensed establishments: theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude erotic dancing.
(4) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(a) the term “licensed establishment” means any establishment licensed by the board to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 125, Stats.
(b) The term “licensee” means the holder of a retail “Class A”, “Class B”, Class “B”, Class “A”, or “Class C” license granted by the board pursuant to Wis. Stats. ch. 125.
(5) Penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture under section 15.25. A separate offense and violation shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, violation of this section constitutes sufficient grounds for suspending, revoking or non-renewing an alcohol beverage license under Wis. Stats. §125.12.
15.18 Regulation of Smoking on School Property
(1) DEFINITIONS. (a) Educational Facility is defined in State Statute 101.123 (1) (a) and means any building used principally for educational purposes in which a school is located or a course of instruction or training program is offered that has been approved or licensed by a State agency or Board.
(b) School Property means any property owned by a public school district and contiguous with a school building, school parking lot or school athletic facility.
(2) REGULATION OF SMOKING. No person may smoke in an educational facility or upon school property in the immediate vicinity of a school building, parking lot or athletic facility except those areas designated as smoking areas by the School District.
(3) PENALTIES. Any person who willfully violates this ordinance after being advised by an employee of the School District or any volunteer associated with the School District or any police officer that smoking is prohibited shall forfeit not more than $50.
15.19 Regulation of Smoking in Places of Employment and Public Places
15.19 (1) STATE STATUTES ADOPTED.
The provisions of Chapter 101.123 of the Wisconsin Statutes as amended by 2009 Wisconsin Act 12 relating to the prohibition of smoking in various enclosed places are hereby adopted and made part of this Code by reference, in order to protect the health and comfort of the public. Penalties for violation shall be as provided in Section 15.19(2).
15.19 (2) PENALTIES.
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 24
A violation of the provisions of Section 15.19 of the Municipal Code relating to the prohibition of smoking in various enclosed places shall be $100 to $250, except that the forfeiture for a “person in charge” cannot exceed $100 per day. As prescribed by state statutes, a warning notice shall be issued to the “person in charge” for the first violation.
15.20 Social Host
(1) DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
(a) Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
(b) Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
(c) Event or gathering means any group of three or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
(d) Host or allow means to aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control or permit a gathering or event.
(e) In control means the power to direct, manage, oversee and/or restrict the affairs, business or assets of a person or entity.
(f) Parent means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
1. As natural, adoptive parent or step-parent;
2. As a legal guardian; or
3. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
(g) Present means being at hand or in attendance.
(h) Residence, premises, or public or private property means any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park or any other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without permission or compensation.
(i) Underage person is any individual under 21 years of age.
(2) PROHIBITED ACTS. It is unlawful for any person(s) to: host or allow an event or gathering at any residence, premises or on any other private or public property where alcohol or alcoholic
beverages are present when the person knows that an underage person will or does (i) consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or (ii) possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it; and the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption by the underage person(s).
(a) A person is responsible for violating subsection (3) of this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
(b) A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be responsible.
(3) EXCEPTIONS. This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while the parent is present and in control of the underage person.
(a) This chapter does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
(b) This chapter does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment.
15.25 Penalty. The penalty for a violation of
Village of North Fond du Lac November 7, 2005
Standards of Conduct - 25
this ordinance is a forfeiture not to exceed $1000.
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
Chapter 16
TRAFFIC CONTROLS
16.01 Maintenance of Property and Storage of Motor Vehicles.
16.02 Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle.
16.03 Official Traffic Signs and Control Devices
16.04 Through Streets Designated
16.05 Stop Sign Locations Designated
16.06 Traffic Control Signal Locations Designated
16.07 Yield Intersections Established
16.08 One-Way Streets Established
16.09 Parking Regulations
16.10 Heavy Truck Routes and Class "B" Highways Designated
16.11 Bus Loading Zones
16.12 Bicycles, In-Line Skates and Play Vehicles
16.13 Snowmobiles and All-Terrain Vehicles
16.14 Automobile and Other Vehicle Regulations
16.25 Penalty
16.01 Maintenance of Property and Storage of Motor Vehicles.
(1) DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings assigned to them in this section. Words and phrases not herein otherwise defined shall have the meanings accepted by common use.
(a) Motor Vehicle. A vehicle which is self-propelled.
(b) Disabled Motor Vehicle. A vehicle that cannot be operated without mechanical repair or assistance.
(c) Inoperable Motor Vehicle. A vehicle which does not meet the minimum equipment standards required for operation on the highway or street as set forth in Wis. Stats. Chapter 347 or Trans. 305.
(2) PROHIBITIONS. No person, group of persons, company, firm, corporation or any other entity shall store or allow to remain outside of a building for more than three days any disassembled, disabled, inoperable, unlicensed, unregistered, junked or wrecked motor vehicle, boat, refrigerators, appliances, machinery or similar types of personal property.
(a) Storage of Commercial and Recreational Vehicles. No person shall store a trailer, semi-trailer, recreational vehicle, mobile home, camping trailer, or boat on any street or highway for more than 24 hours. Personal property stored on the street for 72 or more consecutive hours shall be declared abandoned and shall be impounded as an abandoned vehicle. Upon proper application, the police department may grant special permission to allow on the street parking of commercial and recreational vehicles for a maximum of seven (7) days. This special permission provision shall apply only during the period from April 1st to October 31st.
(b) Abandoned Vehicles. No person, group of persons, company, firm, corporation or other entity shall leave unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home or any other motor vehicle on any public highway or private or public property for more than 72 hours under such circumstances so as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned.
1. If such vehicle is left on private property without permission of the property owner for more than 72 hours, it shall constitute a public nuisance and may be declared abandoned by any police officer.
2. Any vehicle so abandoned shall be declared so by the police department. The Village elects the provisions of Wis. Stat. §66.28 Disposal of Abandoned Property and §342.40 as it pertains to Vehicle
Traffic Controls - 2
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
Abandonment Prohibited; Removal; Disposal. The fees for the storage of abandoned vehicles shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Village Board.
3. If a vehicle is not claimed, that is, all fines, forfeitures imposed and fees are paid and the vehicle is removed from Village impoundment, in the time allotted under Wis. Stat. §342.40(3)(c) or a maximum of 30 days, the Village may dispose of such vehicle in the manner described or may at its discretion take the title to the vehicle for municipal use.
(3) EXCEPTIONS. The above regulations shall not apply to the following types of activities when they are located in a business or industrial zoning district.
(a) To damaged or inoperable vehicles that are stored outside an automotive repair business while awaiting repair or servicing.
(b) To vehicles that are displayed for sale on the lot of a properly licensed car dealer.
(c) To heavy commercial vehicles that are subject to quarterly registration by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(4) ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. The police department or its designee shall have the duty, responsibility and authority to enforce this section.
(a) Persons shall allow access to the police department or it's designee to their property for the purpose of enforcing this section.
(5) VIOLATIONS. Whenever any violation of this section is found, the police department may take one or more of the following actions:
(a) Order the violation corrected by the property owner by the removal and proper disposal of the material within a specified period ranging from one to thirty days; or
(b) Issue a citation for violation of this section; or
(c) When the violations are pursued by the police department, such legal actions shall occur through the office of the Village Attorney including injunctive relief and forfeiture actions through the process of summons and complaints or other proper recourse.
(d) The municipal court may, upon petition, and at the request of the Village, order the removal of the violating junk or debris. The Village will then invoice the property owner for all such costs incurred in the removal. If the invoice is not paid within 30 days, the Village may place the amount of the invoice on the tax rolls as a special charge against the property in question.
(e) Injunctive relief can also be requested requiring the property owner or other party in possession of the property to remove the violating motor vehicles and have them properly stored or disposed of. Any Village cost incurred in the removal of such items will be assessed against the violating possessor of the property and/or owners.
(f) Failure to Comply. Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation or other legal entity failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $75 nor more than $500, plus costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense. Any person who is in default of payment of these forfeitures and costs and who is not found to be indigent by the court, shall be imprisoned in the Fond du Lac County Jail for up to 30 days for each violation or until payment is made.
16.02 Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle. No person shall operate a vehicle in such a manner as to cause a disturbance or annoy a person or persons including, but not limited to, acts deemed illegal by local ordinance and/or state law.
16.03 Official Traffic Signs and Control Devices.
(1) MANDATORY PLACEMENT OF TRAFFIC SIGNS AND CONTROL DEVICES. Whenever traffic
Traffic Controls - 3
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
regulations created by this section, including a State of Wisconsin traffic regulation adopted by reference in section 16.05 (stop signs); 16.06 (yield signs); 16.07 (parking regulations); 16.10 (heavy truck routes); 16.13 (snowmobile) where signs are applicable under 346.02(7) or require the erection of traffic control devices for enforcement, the Director of Public Works, with the cooperation of the Police Department, shall procure, erect, and maintain uniform traffic control devices. These traffic control devices shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices promulgated by the Federal Highway Administration. Adequate notice of such traffic regulation shall be given to the users of the streets and highways on which such regulations apply.
(2) DISCRETIONARY PLACEMENT OF TRAFFIC SIGNS AND CONTROL DEVICES.
(a) Whenever state law grants discretion to local authorities in placing or removing a uniform traffic control device, devices shall be erected in such locations and in such manner as in the judgment of the Traffic Safety Committee which will carry out the purposes of this section. The Traffic Safety Committee shall be comprised of the Director of Public Works, the Police Chief, and the Administrator. Adequate notice of changes in such traffic regulation shall be given to the users of the affected streets and highways.
(3) PROHIBITED SIGNS AND MARKERS. No person other than an officer authorized by this section to erect and maintain official traffic control devices or his or her designee shall place within the limits of any street or highway maintained by the Village, any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument unless permission is first obtained from the Director of Public Works or, where applicable, the State Highway Commission. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument placed or maintained in violation of this Subsection shall be subject to removal as provided in subsection (4).
(4) REMOVAL OF UNOFFICIAL SIGNS, MARKERS, SIGNALS, AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. The Director of Public Works or his designee may remove any sign, signal, marking or other device that is placed, maintained, or displayed in violation of this Section or stated law. A charge may be imposed against premises for removal of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal, marking or device. Any such charge that is not paid on or before the next succeeding November 1st shall be placed upon the tax roll for collection as a special municipal tax.
16.04 Through Streets Designated. The Village designates the following streets, as through streets in the Village.
(1) All of that portion of State Highway 175, Prospect Ave., located within the corporate limits of the Village.
(2) Minnesota Avenue from the north curb line of Garfield Street to the south
curb line of Harrison Street; and from the north curb line of Harrison Street to the south curb line of McKinley Street; and from the north curb line of McKinley Street to the north Village limits.
(3) Wisconsin Avenue from the south curb line of Center Street to the north curb line of Harrison Street; and from the south curb line of Harrison Street to the north curb line of Lincoln Street.
(4) Michigan Avenue from the north curb line of Harrison Street to the south curb line of Broadway Street.
(5) Michigan Avenue from the south curb line of Harrison Street to the north curb line of Winnebago Street.
(6) Michigan Avenue from the south curb line of Garfield Street to the north curb line of Prospect Avenue.
(7) McKinley Street from the west curb line of Minnesota Avenue to the east curb line of Chapman Avenue; and from the west curb line of Chapman Avenue to Prospect Ave.
(8) Winnebago Street from the west Right-of-Way line of Prospect Avenue to the west Village limits.
Traffic Controls - 4
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(9) Thurke Avenue from the north curb line of Polk Street to the south curb line of Broadway Street; and from the north curb line of Broadway Street to the north Village limits.
(10)Harrison Street from the intersection of Ohio Street to the east curb line of Wisconsin Avenue; and from the west curb line of Wisconsin Avenue to the east curb line of Minnesota Avenue; and from the west curb line of Minnesota Avenue to the east curb line of Prospect Avenue; and from the west curb line of Prospect Avenue to Park Ridge Lane.
16.05 Stop Signs Locations Designated. Operators of all vehicles shall stop at:
(1) Indiana Avenue, Illinois Avenue, Wisconsin Ave and Prospect Avenue when westbound on Lincoln Street
(2) Illinois Avenue, Indiana Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue when eastbound on Lincoln Street.
(3) Illinois Avenue, Wisconsin Avenue and Prospect Avenue when westbound on Jefferson Street
(4) Prospect Avenue, Wisconsin Avenue, Illinois Avenue and Indiana Avenue when eastbound on Jefferson Street
(5)Indiana Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue when westbound on Winnebago Street
(6) Wisconsin Avenue and Indiana Avenue when eastbound on Winnebago Street
(7) Illinois Avenue, Wisconsin Avenue, Michigan Avenue, Minnesota Avenue, Prospect Avenue, Florida Avenue and Washington Avenue when westbound on Garfield Street
(8) Michigan Avenue, Wisconsin Avenue, Illinois Avenue and Indiana Avenue when eastbound on Garfield Street
(9) Wisconsin Avenue, Prospect Avenue and Park Ridge Lane when westbound on Harrison Street
(10) Prospect Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue when eastbound on Harrison Street
(11) Minnesota Avenue when eastbound on Friendship Street
(12) Michigan Avenue and Minnesota Avenue when westbound on Cleveland Street
(13) Minnesota Avenue, Michigan Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue when eastbound on Cleveland Street
(14) Wisconsin Avenue, Michigan Avenue, Minnesota Avenue, Adams Avenue and Prospect Avenue when westbound on McKinley Street
(15) Adams Avenue, Minnesota Avenue, Michigan Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue when eastbound on McKinley Street
(16) Wisconsin Avenue, Michigan Avenue, Minnesota Avenue, Bechaud Avenue, Chapman Avenue, Thurke Avenue and Prospect Avenue when westbound on Polk Street
(17) Thurke Avenue, Adams Avenue, Bechaud Avenue, Michigan Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue when eastbound on Polk Street
(18) Wisconsin Avenue, Chapman Avenue and Thurke Avenue when westbound on Broadway Street
(19) Chapman Avenue, Bechaud Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue when eastbound on Broadway Street
(20) Wisconsin Avenue, Minnesota Avenue, Chapman Avenue and Thurke Avenue when westbound on Marcoe Street
(21) Chapman Avenue, Minnesota Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue when eastbound on Marcoe Street
(22) Minnesota Avenue, Chapman Avenue and Thurke Avenue when westbound on Clinton Street
(23) Chapman Avenue, Minnesota Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue when eastbound on Clinton Street
(24) Westwood Avenue when westbound on Southview Drive
(25) Thurke Avenue when eastbound on Southview Drive
(26) Minnesota Avenue and Thurke Avenue when westbound on Center Street
(27) Chapman Avenue when eastbound on Center Street
Traffic Controls - 5
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(28) Minnesota Avenue, Chapman Avenue and Thurke Avenue when westbound on North Street
(29) Chapman Avenue and Minnesota Avenue when eastbound on North Street
(30) Chapman Avenue, Thurke Avenue and Westwood Avenue when westbound on Chapleau Street
(31) Thurke Avenue, Chapman Avenue and Minnesota Avenue when eastbound on Chapleau Street
(32) Chapman Avenue when westbound on Rose Street
(33) Minnesota Avenue when eastbound on Rose Street
(34) Thurke Avenue when westbound on Prairie Fox Court
(35) Chapman Avenue and Thurke Avenue when westbound on Blackbird Street
(36) Chapman Avenue and Minnesota Avenue when eastbound on Blackbird Street
(37) Chapman Avenue when westbound on Willis Court
(38) Chapman Avenue when westbound on Anne Street
(39) Minnesota Avenue when eastbound on Anne Street
(40) Blackbird Street when southbound on Woodside Court
(41) Center Street when southbound on Rose Avenue
(42) Prospect Avenue when southbound on Westwood Avenue
(43) Southview Drive when southbound on Petula Street
(44) Chapleau Street when northbound on Petula Street
(45) Southview Drive when southbound on Fairlawn Avenue
(46) Chapleau Street when northbound on Fairlawn Avenue
(47) Southview Drive when southbound on Jeffrey Court
(48) Southview Drive when southbound on Shelly Court
(49) Southview Drive when southbound on Julie Court
(50) Broadway Street and Polk Street when southbound on Thurke Avenue
(51) Polk Street and Broadway Street when northbound on Thurke Avenue
(52) McKinley Street when southbound on Adams Avenue
(53) Broadway Street when northbound on Adams Avenue
(54) North Street and McKinley Street when southbound on Chapman Avenue
(55) North Street when northbound on Chapman Avenue
(56) Marcoe Street and McKinley Street when southbound on Bechaud Avenue
(57) Marcoe Street when northbound on Bechaud Avenue
(58) McKinley Street, Harrison Street and Garfield Street when southbound on Minnesota Avenue
(59) Garfield Street, Harrison Street and McKinley Street when northbound on Minnesota Avenue
(60) Harrison Street, Winnebago Street and Prospect Avenue when southbound on Michigan Avenue
(61) Winnebago Street and Harrison Street when northbound on Michigan Avenue
(62) Harrison Street, Lincoln Street and Winnebago Street when south bound on Wisconsin Avenue.
(63) Lincoln Street, Harrison Street, Center Street and Winnebago Street when northbound on Wisconsin Avenue
(64) Winnebago Street and Lakeshore Drive when southbound on Illinois Avenue
(65) Winnebago Street and Ohio Avenue when northbound on Illinois Avenue
(66) Lakeshore Drive when southbound on Indiana Avenue
(67) Lakeshore Drive when northbound on Indiana Avenue
(68) Van Dyne Road when southbound on Lakeshore Drive
(69) Lakeshore Drive when northbound on Van Dyne Road
(70) Prospect Avenue when westbound on Van Dyne Road
(71) Lakeshore Drive when eastbound on Van Dyne Road
Traffic Controls - 6
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(72) Harrison Street when northbound on Washington Avenue
(73) Garfield Street when southbound on Maine Avenue
(74) Harrison Street and Winnebago Street when northbound on Maine Avenue
(75) Winnebago Street when southbound on Florida Avenue
(76) Winnebago Street when northbound on Florida Avenue
(77) Winnebago Street when southbound on Prospect Avenue and turning right
(78) Prospect Avenue when northbound on Michigan Street
(79) Prospect Avenue when southbound on Iowa Court
(80) Jefferson Street when northbound on Saratoga Avenue
(81) Jefferson Street when southbound on Saratoga Avenue
(82) Prospect Avenue when either southbound or northbound on Sunset Circle
(83) North Pioneer Road when southbound on Park Ridge Lane
(84) Winnebago Street when northbound on North Pioneer Road
(85) Winnebago Street when southbound on North Pioneer Road
(86) Winnebago Street when northbound on North Rolling Meadows Drive
(87) USH 45 when northbound on Lakeshore Drive
(88) USH 45 when eastbound on Lakeshore Drive
16.06 Traffic Control Signal Locations Designated
(1) Operators of all vehicles approaching the following intersections controlled by traffic control signals shall follow the guidelines established in Wis. Stat. §346.37. Operators shall comply with these regulations at:
(a) Prospect Avenue and Winnebago Street.
16.07 Yield Intersections Established. (1) OPERATORS OF ALL VEHICLES SHALL
YIELD THE RIGHT OF WAY AT:
(a) St. Paul Avenue and North Street
1. Traffic traveling southbound on St. Paul Avenue shall yield the right of way to traffic on North Street
(b) St. Paul Avenue and Wells Street
1. Traffic traveling westbound on Wells Street shall yield the right of way to traffic on St. Paul Avenue
(c) Saratoga Avenue at Michigan Street
1. Traffic traveling northbound on Saratoga Ave. shall yield the right of way to traffic on Michigan Avenue
(d) Bechaud Avenue at Friendship Street.
1. Traffic traveling southbound on Bechaud Avenue shall yield the right of way to traffic on Friendship Street
(e) Bechaud Avenue at Cleveland Street.
1. Traffic traveling northbound on Bechaud Avenue shall yield the right of way to traffic on Cleveland Street
(f) Bechaud Avenue at Clinton Street
1. Traffic traveling northbound on Bechaud Avenue shall yield the right of way to traffic on Clinton Street
(g) Audrey Court at Polk Street
1. Traffic traveling southbound on Audrey Court shall yield the right of way to traffic on Polk Street
Traffic Controls - 7
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(h) Prospect Avenue when making a right turn on Harrison Street.
16.08 One-Way Streets Established (1)
No operator of any vehicle shall operate against the flow of traffic on a street here-in designated as “one-way” by official sign or marking. The following streets are designated “one-way” within the Village:
(a) All traffic on Garfield Street, from the west curb line of Prospect Avenue to the east curb line of Florida Avenue, shall flow westbound.
16.09 Parking Regulations.
(1) PARKING LIMITS. When signs are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the period hereinafter specified, upon the following streets or portion of streets or parking lots.
(a) No Parking from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. school days at the following locations:
1. On the west side of Thurke Avenue from Polk Street north to Broadway Street.
2. On the north side of McKinley Street from Adams Avenue east to Bechaud Avenue.
3. The 85’ east of the radius point of the corner on Harrison Street and Prospect Avenue.
4. On the west side of Chapman Avenue from McKinley Street to Polk Street.
(b) Two (2) hour parking from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days at the following locations:
1. On the east side of Chapman Avenue from its intersection with McKinley Street north 305 feet.
2. On the east side of Minnesota Avenue from Cleveland Street north to McKinley Street.
3. On the north side of McKinley Street from Bechaud Avenue east to Minnesota Avenue.
4. On the north side of McKinley Street from Prospect Avenue east to Adams Avenue.
5. On the south side of McKinley Street, in all unrestricted space, beginning at the east curb line of Chapman Avenue and continuing to Minnesota Avenue.
(c) Parking is restricted to police vehicles on the west side of Illinois Avenue from a point four feet south of the southern edge of the police department driveway for a distance of 42 feet.
(d) Parking in the twelve spaces located on the north end of the municipal building next to the fire station located at 16 Garfield Street shall be restricted to the Village emergency response employees when responding to an emergency, when on call, or when stand-by status in the municipal building.
(e) Parking is limited to 20 minutes from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.:
1. On the west side of Minnesota Avenue from a point 15 feet south of the southern most crosswalk on Minnesota Avenue at McKinley Street and continuing south for a distance of 130 feet.
2. On the east side of Adams Avenue commencing at the intersection of Adams Avenue and McKinley Street thence north 337 feet.
(2)WINTER PARKING.
(a) No person shall park on any street from November 15th through March 15th, between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m., except in the following manner: From 8 p.m. of an even calendar date to 8 a.m. the following day, parking shall only be permitted on the side of the street with even-numbered addresses. From 8 p.m. of an odd calendar date to 8 a.m. the following day, parking shall only be permitted on the side of the street with odd-numbered addresses.
(b) Where ordinance already prohibits parking on one side of the street, the provisions of this ordinance shall be superseded by those restrictions and parking shall always be in accordance with those regulations.
(c) During the time of snow emergency, which is determined by the Director of Public
Services, all vehicles will be required to be moved off the streets for the period of the snow emergency. Failure to adhere to this section, will result in citation and towing of vehicles which are in violation, at
Traffic Controls - 8
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
owners expense.
(d) Violations of 16.09(2)(a) and (c) will be subject to the penalties stated in section
16.25.
(3) PARKING PROHIBITED. No person shall park any vehicle at any time on:
( a) 1. The north side of Garfield Street from Washington Avenue to Minnesota Avenue.
2. The east side of Delaware Avenue and the cul-de-sac on Delaware Avenue.
3. The south and north side of Marcoe Street from Wisconsin Avenue east to the bridge.
4. Either side of Prospect Ave from the south Village limits to the north Village limits
5. The north side of Winnebago Street from Prospect Ave to the Florida Ave intersection.
6. The south side of Winnebago Street from Prospect Ave to the Florida Ave intersection.
7. The south side of Broadway Street, between Michigan Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue.
8. The southeast side of Lakeshore Drive between Van Dyne Road and Illinois Avenue.
9. The south side of Harrison Street from a point 99 feet east of its intersection with Wisconsin Avenue thence east to its intersection with Ohio Street.
10. The north side of Lincoln Street from Prospect Ave to Wisconsin Avenue.
11. The east side of Illinois Avenue from Ohio Street south 168 feet.
12. The south side of Lincoln Street from Wisconsin Avenue west for a distance of 187 feet.
13. The south side of McKinley Street from Prospect Ave to the west curb line of Minnesota Avenue.
14. The north side of Polk St. from Prospect Ave east 86 feet.
15. The south side of Polk St. from Prospect Ave east 102 feet.
16. The northeast side of Ohio Avenue from Garfield Street to Harrison Street.
17. The 19 foot section centered with the Spillman library entrance.
18. The south side of Harrison Street from Prospect Avenue to Minnesota Avenue.
19. The north side of Harrison Street from Prospect Avenue East 156 feet.
20. The north side of Mckinley Street from driveway to driveway around curve.
21. The east side of Illinois Avenue from Winnebago Street south 114 feet around corner.
22. The east side of Wisconsin Avenue from Clinton Street north to Center Street.
23. The south side of Winnebago Street starting at a point 140 feet east of the Pioneer Road centerline to a point 505 feet east of the Pioneer Road centerline.
24. The south side of Garfield Street from Prospect Ave to Minnesota Ave.
25. The north side of Winnebago Street from Prospect Avenue to a point 50 feet east.
26. The northwest side of Lakeshore Drive between Van Dyne Road and Illinois Avenue.
27. The south side of Harrison Street from Prospect Ave to Maine Ave.
28. The north side of Harrison Street west 82 feet from Minnesota Ave.
29. The east side of Florida Ave Cul-de-sac.
30. The north side of Winnebago Street from centerline of Pioneer Road 565 feet east.
31. Either side of Rolling Meadows Drive.
32. Either side of Pioneer Road.
(4) LOADING ZONES.
Traffic Controls - 9
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(a) No parking is allowed at any time on the north side of Winnebago Street from Prospect Avenue easterly a distance of 125 feet to the alley except for loading or unloading purposes.
(b) No parking is allowed on the east side of Wisconsin Avenue from 2:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. from a point 35 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Harrison Street south a distance of 30 feet.
(c) No parking is allowed from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Saturday on the west side of Wisconsin Avenue from a point 44 feet south of the south curb line of Harrison Street at the southwest corner of the intersection of Harrison Street and Wisconsin Avenue south a distance of 42 feet.
16.10 Heavy Truck Routes and Class "B" Highways Designated.
(1) DEFINITION. For purposes of this
Section, heavy traffic shall be defined as: (a) All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic tires; and
(b) All vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than motor buses, designed or used for transporting property of any nature and having a gross weight of more than fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds.
(2) PROHIBITED ROUTES. Heavy traffic is prohibited from using any Village street or highway not designated as a heavy traffic route.
(a) This section shall not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using a Village street or highway for the purpose of obtaining orders for supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from any place of business or residence that has an entrance on such street or highway.
(b) This section will not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using any Village streets over which are routed state trunk highways.
(c) However, in no event shall the weight of vehicle and load on such other streets exceed the limitations of Wis. Stats. §348.15 or §348.16(3) pertaining to Class "A" highways or deliveries on Class "B" highways.
(d) When being driven to the site of any construction, repair or maintenance of electric, gas or water service, vehicles owned and operated by a public utility will be exempt from the provisions of this Section.
(3) ADMINISTRATION. The Director of Public Works, in cooperation with the police department, shall administer this section. Administration shall include:
(a) Posting of Signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted giving notice of this section and of the heavy traffic routes established herein.
(b) Maps. Heavy traffic routes shall be shown on the Official Street Map.
(c) Construction Equipment.
1. The Director of Public Works may grant temporary permits to allow heavy construction equipment to use Village streets or highways not designated as heavy traffic routes.
a. These permits may be granted only when use of a non-designated route is necessary for the equipment to reach a construction site.
b. No permit may be issued unless the person or corporation owning the equipment agrees to reimburse and hold the Village harmless for any damage done to the Village street by the equipment and/or personal injury or property damage caused in part or in whole by the street damage.
2. Village-owned or operated equipment is specifically excluded from the provisions of this section.
(4) LIABILITY. Any operator, corporation, owner or agent whose heavy traffic vehicle damages any Village streets or highways in violating this section shall be liable and required to pay the Village the cost of repair/replacement of the damaged street or highway.
(5) SPECIAL AND SEASONAL WEIGHT LIMITATIONS. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to impose special or seasonal weight limits on any highway, bridge or culvert maintained by the Village to prevent injury to the roadway or for the safety of the users of such bridge or culvert and shall be
Traffic Controls - 10
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
responsible for erecting uniform traffic control devices giving notice thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 16.03.
(6) HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES DESIGNATED. All streets and alleys within the Village are designated Class "B" highways subject to the weight limitations of Wis. Stats. §346.16, except the following highways or parts thereof within the jurisdiction of the Village are hereby designated heavy traffic routes and are excepted from the Class "B" weight limitations:
(a) Prospect Avenue from north Village limits to south Village limits.
(b) Minnesota Avenue from north Village limits south to the intersection of Garfield Street.
(c) McKinley Street from Prospect Avenue east to the dead end.
(d) Harrison Street from Prospect Avenue Park Ridge Lane east to Ohio Street.
(e) Ohio Street from Harrison Street southeast to Indiana Avenue.
(f) Indiana Avenue from Ohio Street south to Lakeshore Drive.
(g) Lakeshore Drive from Van Dyne Road northeast to US Highway 45.
(h) Winnebago Street from Rolling Meadows Drive east to Indiana Avenue.
(i) Michigan Avenue from Prospect Avenue north to Harrison Street.
(j) North Rolling Meadows Drive from north Village limits to south Village limits.
(k) North Pioneer Road from north Village limits to south Village limits.
(l) Park Ridge Lane from Pioneer Road north to the dead end.
(m) Westwood Avenue from Prospect Avenue to Park Ridge Lane.
(7) GROSS WEIGHTS. No vehicle with a loaded weight greater than 5 tons shall travel upon the following streets or bridges:
(a) Wisconsin Avenue bridge located between Center Street and Clinton Street.
16.11 Bus Loading Zones. When signs or markers are placed, giving notice thereof, the operator of any vehicle, other than a passenger bus, shall not park, stop or leave standing such vehicle in the areas designated bus loading zones in the most current Fond du Lac Area Transit Map & Schedule for Route #10 except for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers. The operator of any passenger bus shall not stop the same for the purpose of loading or discharging any bus passenger at any intersection where a bus loading zone is established, unless such stop is made within such designated not established, such stops shall be made at the near side of the intersection.
(1) DESIGNATED BUS LOADING ZONES. (a) Commencing at the northwest corner of Michigan Avenue and Prospect Avenue and running 65 feet north of the right-of-way line of Michigan Avenue along Prospect Avenue right-of-way; thence east 8.5 feet; thence south and parallel with the right-of-way line a distance of 65 feet; thence westerly 8.5 feet to the place of beginning.
(b) Commencing at the northwest corner of Jefferson Street and Prospect Avenue and running 65 feet north of the right-of-way line of Jefferson Street along Prospect Avenue; thence east 8.5 feet; thence south and parallel with the right-of-way line of Prospect Avenue a distance of 65 feet; thence westerly 8.5 feet to the place of beginning.
16.12 Bicycles, In-line Skates and Play Vehicles.
(1) PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. The Village elects the provisions of Wis. Stats. §346.01, §346.02(4), and §346.77 to §346.81 relating to bicycles and play vehicles.
(2) REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS. It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the Village of North Fond du Lac to operate a bicycle upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place in the Village without having first registered such bicycle and secured a license to the vehicle.
(3) Application for registration and license for bicycles shall be made by the owner, in writing, upon
Traffic Controls - 11
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
forms furnished by the Village of North Fond du Lac Police Department.
(a) Upon payment of a registration fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Village board, a lifetime license sticker for that bike shall be issued.
(b) When possession of a bicycle that is registered in the Village of North Fond du Lac is legally transferred to a new owner, the new owner can transfer the attached license into his or her name for a fee that is set by a resolution of the Village Board.
(c) Loss of or Illegible License Stickers. Licensee shall report immediately to the police department the loss of or the illegibility or destruction of a license sticker. A new license sticker shall be issued upon payment of a fee of $5.00.
(3) RULES FOR RIDING AND OPERATING. All operators of bicycles shall observe and obey all laws dealing with vehicular traffic and, in addition to the rules contained in this chapter, shall obey the following:
(a) Every bicycle when operated upon a pubic roadway or trail shall be in good and safe mechanical condition.
(b) Persons riding bicycles or in-line skating upon a roadway shall ride or skate single file on all roadways and as close as possible to the right side of the roadway.
(c) No person operating a bicycle, in-line skates or other play vehicle shall cling or attach himself/herself or the conveyance they are operating to any other moving vehicle.
(d) The operator of a bicycle, skate board or in-line skates emerging from an alley, driveway, garage or private sidewalk shall stop immediately prior to driving onto or across the public sidewalk or onto or across a public sidewalk line projected across an alley and shall exercise extreme care in making such movements.
(e) No person shall operate a bicycle, or in-line skates upon a highway, bicycle lane or bicycle way during hours of darkness unless such bicycle is equipped with or the operator is wearing a lamp emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front of such bicycle or in-line skater. Such bicycle shall also be equipped with a red reflector that has a diameter of at least two (2) inches of surface area on the rear so mounted and maintained as to be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 500 feet to the rear, when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on motor vehicles. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to, but not in lieu of, the red reflector.
(f) Skate boards, in-line skates, roller skates or bicycles, having wheels of a diameter of 16 inches or less may be operated on sidewalks or walkways except where prohibited by official sign, but in single file only. Newspaper carriers, while making deliveries or collections may ride a bicycle, having wheels of a diameter of more than 16 inches, on sidewalks.
1. No bicycle, skateboard, in-line skates or roller skates shall be operated on the sidewalks of Wisconsin Avenue between Harrison Street and Garfield Street.
2. No bicycle shall be operated in any park within the Village during any organized athletic event, picnic or festival where bicycle operation places the general public at risk, or where bicycle operation poses a hazard to the public or the operator of the bicycle.
3. When approaching a pedestrian, a cyclist on the sidewalk, shall reduce the speed of the bicycle to that which is no greater than necessary to continue the safe operation of the bicycle without the rider dismounting and shall not be increased until the pedestrian has passed.
(4) PARKING BICYCLES. In all permitted bicycle parking areas, it shall be unlawful to park along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with the movement of pedestrians, or on roadways where such parking may interfere with pedestrians or vehicle traffic or movement, or with persons alighting from or entering a motor vehicle.
Traffic Controls - 12
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(5) SPEED. No bicycle shall be operated at any time faster than the posted speed on street or highway and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the rider and of other persons and property.
(6) TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. Every person operating a bicycle shall strictly observe all traffic signs and signals and all other traffic rules and regulations, applicable thereto, and shall obey the orders and directions of every officer of the Village authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
(7) TRICK RIDING. No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or engage in any kind of stunt or acrobatics on any public roadway or trail.
(8) TURNS-STARTING-STOPPING. The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn, shall follow the right-hand edge of the roadway, and the operator of a bicycle on a roadway when making a left turn shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway. No operator of a bicycle shall slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first indicating such movement as provided by law.
(9) ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR RIDING AND OPERATING BICYCLES.
(a) Yield Right-of-way. Any person riding a bicycle shall yield the right-of-way in the following circumstances:
1. When two (2) vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the same time, the operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. The operator of any vehicle driving at an unlawful speed forfeits any right-of-way that he/she would otherwise have.
2.The operator of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left across the path of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
3. The operator of a vehicle shall stop as required before entering a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered or are approaching the intersection upon the through highway.
4. When entering a highway from an alley or from a point of access other than another highway.
5. When moving from a parked position.
6. When approaching any intersection at which a yield sign has been installed.
7. When intending to turn to the left into an alleyway or private driveway across the path of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
(b) Riding Through Safety Zones. No rider of a bicycle shall ride through any safety zone, unless directed by traffic signals, a police officer, or any official posted sign.
(c) Racing on Highways. No person operating a bicycle upon a public highway or street shall participate in any race, speed or endurance contest unless such race or contest has a permit from the Village.
(d) Obstructing View of Rider. No person shall ride a bicycle that is so loaded as to obstruct the view of the rider, or to interfere with the safe operation of the bicycle.
(e) Crossing Sidewalk, Emerging from Driveway, Alley or Garage. Any person riding a bicycle shall stop before crossing a crosswalk, sidewalk or intersection, or when emerging from an alley, garage or driveway.
(f) Interfering with Traffic. No person shall operate or park a bicycle in a manner which would obstruct, endanger, or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic on public or private property.
(g) Improper Riding on Bicycle. No person shall operate a bicycle from any part of a bicycle not intended for such use.
(h) Spilling Loads. No person shall operate any bicycle so loaded as to spill such load.
(i) Crossing Center Line of Highway. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle to cross the center line of any roadway on the left in order to pass any other vehicle unless the way ahead is clear and
Traffic Controls - 13
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
no traffic is approaching. It shall be unlawful for any operator to cross the centerline on a grade or curve if such operator's view is obstructed for such a distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
(j) Marked Lanes on Two-way Streets. If a roadway is divided into marked lanes, the operator of bicycle shall:
1. Ride in the right lane unless overtaking another vehicle or when about to make a left turn.
2. Ride within a single lane, and change only when safe to do so.
3. If there are three (3) lanes, the middle lane should be used only for passing or overtaking another vehicle or for making a left turn.
(k) Following Too Closely. The operator of a bicycle shall remain at a safe and reasonable distance behind any other vehicle.
(l) Approach of Emergency Vehicles. When an ambulance, fire engine, or other emergency vehicle gives warning of its approach, the operator of a bicycle shall pull to the nearest curb in his lane of operation and stop until such emergency vehicle has passed.
(m) Following or Parking near Fire Apparatus. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a bicycle to follow any fire apparatus closer than 500 feet, or to drive into or to park within the same block where or within 300 feet of where the fire apparatus has stopped in response to an alarm.
(n) Crossing Railroad Tracks. No operator of a bicycle shall cross any railroad track unless he/she can do so safely, and shall not drive on or across a railroad crossing under any of the following circumstances:
1. While any traffic officer or railroad employee signals to stop.
2. While any warning device signals to stop, except that if the operator of the vehicle, after stopping and investigating finds that no train is approaching he/she may proceed.
3. Shall not drive through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(10) RENTAL AGENCIES.
(a) Registration. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to rent, or offer to rent, any bicycles without first complying with the provisions of section (2) of this section relating to registration and licensing of bicycles.
(b) Equipment. Bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be equipped with the lights and other equipment required by this ordinance and shall be kept in good and safe working condition. Rental agencies shall comply with all provisions of this ordinance, and shall be responsible for the condition of the bicycles they rent.
(c) Inspection. The Chief of Police or his/her designees may make periodic inspections of the rental agencies to insure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(11) OTHER PROVISIONS. (a) Inspection. Any member of the police department is authorized to inspect any bicycle, at any time, for the purpose of making a check of the license sticker and license number, serial number, and for the purpose of determining the mechanical condition of the bicycle.
(b) Removal of Serial Number or License Sticker. It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully or maliciously, to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number of any bicycle licensed hereunder; or to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license sticker during the time in which the license sticker is in force. The Chief of Police or the chief’s designee is hereby authorized to stamp numbers on the frame of a bicycle in a legible manner for identification purposes, upon which no serial number can be found, or upon which the serial number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.
(c) Use of Bicycle Without Consent of Owner. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle without the consent of the owner.
Traffic Controls - 14
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(d) Bicycle Without Serial Numbers. It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the Village, or any dealer in bicycles operating in the Village, to purchase, receive in trade, or otherwise acquire any bicycle from which the serial number on the frame has been removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered, without first reporting the same to the Chief of Police.
(e) Enforcement of Provisions. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this section.
1. Juveniles 12 years of age and older may be issued citations for Village ordinance violations.
2. Juveniles 16 years and older may be given a Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation and fined, or forfeiture imposed according to law.
(f) Penalties. Juveniles 12 through 15 years of age who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction of such violation forfeit $1.00 to $500.00 with no costs of prosecution added. Juveniles 16 years and older who shall violate any provisions of this section shall upon conviction of such violation forfeit $1.00 to $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution.
16.13 Snowmobiles and All-terrain Vehicles.
(1) SNOWMOBILES. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any street, highway, or alley within the Village, in violation of the provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 350 or the following:
(a) §346.04 – Obedience to a Traffic Officer, Sign and Signal, Fleeing from an Officer.
(b) §346.06 – Meeting a Vehicle.
(c) §346.11 – Passing or Meeting Frightened Animals.
(d) §346.14(1) – Distance Between Vehicles.
(e) §346.18 – General Rules of Right of Way.
(f) §346.19 – What to do on Approach of Emergency Vehicle.
(g) §346.20 – Right of Way of Funeral Processions and Military Convoys.
(h) §346.21 – Right of Way of Livestock.
(i) §346.26 – Blind Pedestrians on the Highway.
(j) §346.27 – Persons Working on the Highway.
(k) §346.33 – Where Turns Prohibited, Exceptions.
(l) §346.35 – Method of Giving Signals or Turning and Stopping.
(m) §346.37 – Traffic Control Signal Legend.
(n) §346.39 – Flashing Signals.
(o) §346.40 – Whistle Signals.
(p) §346.44 – All Vehicles to Stop at Signal Indicating Approach of a Train.
(q) §346.46 – Vehicles to Stop at Stop Signs and School Crossings.
(r) §346.47 – When Vehicles Using Alley or Non-Highway Access to Stop.
(s) §346.48 – Vehicles to Stop for School Bus Displaying Flashing Lights.
(t) §346.50(1)(b) – Exceptions to Stopping and Parking Restrictions.
(u) §346.51 – Stopping, Standing, or Parking Outside of Business or Residence Districts.
(v) §346.52 – Stopping Prohibited in Certain Specified Places.
(w) §346.53 – Parking Prohibited in Certain Specified Places.
(x) §346.54 – How to Park and Stop on a Street.
(y) §346.55 – Other Restrictions on Stopping or Parking.
(z) §346.87 – Limitations on Backing.
(aa) §346.88 – Obstruction of Operator’s View or Driving Mechanism.
(bb) §346.89 – Inattentive Driving.
Traffic Controls - 15
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(cc) §346.90 – Following Emergency Vehicle.
(dd) §346.91 – Crossing a Fire Hose.
(ee) §346.92(1) – Illegal Riding.
(ff) §346.94(1) – Driving on Sidewalk.
(gg) §346.94(9) – Alighting From or Boarding a Moving Vehicle.
(hh) Except as otherwise authorized under Wis. Stats. Chapter 350, snowmobiles shall only be operated on designated snowmobile routes or trails authorized or designated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Fond du Lac County or the Village.
(2) ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle upon any street, highway, or alley within the Village, in violation of Wis. Stats. Chapter 23.33 or any of the following:
(a) §346.04 – Obedience to a Traffic Officer, Sign and Signal, Fleeing from an Officer.
(b) §346.06 – Meeting a Vehicle.
(c) §346.11 – Passing or Meeting Frightened Animals.
(d) §346.14(1) – Distance Between Vehicles.
(e) §346.18 – General Rules of Right of Way.
(f) §346.19 – What to do on Approach of Emergency Vehicle.
(g) §346.20 – Right of Way of Funeral Processions and Military Convoys.
(h) §346.21 – Right of Way of Livestock.
(i) §346.26 – Blind Pedestrians on the Highway.
(j) §346.27 – Persons Working on the Highway.
(k) §346.33 – Where Turns Prohibited, Exceptions.
(l) §346.35 – Method of Giving Signals or Turning and Stopping.
(m) §346.37 – Traffic Control Signal Legend.
(n) §346.39 – Flashing Signals.
(o) §346.40 – Whistle Signals.
(p) §346.44 – All Vehicles to Stop at Signal Indicating Approach of a Train.
(q) §346.46 – Vehicles to Stop at Stop Signs and School Crossings.
(r) §346.47 – When Vehicles Using Alley or Non-Highway Access to Stop.
(s) §346.48 – Vehicles to Stop for School Bus Displaying Flashing Lights.
(t) §346.50(1)(b) – Exceptions to Stopping and Parking Restrictions.
(u) §346.51 – Stopping, Standing, or Parking Outside of Business or Residence Districts.
(v) §346.52 – Stopping Prohibited in Certain Specified Places.
(w) §346.53 – Parking Prohibited in Certain Specified Places.
(x) §346.54 – How to Park and Stop on a Street.
(y) §346.55 – Other Restrictions on Stopping or Parking.
(z) §346.87 – Limitations on Backing.
(aa) §346.88 – Obstruction of Operator’s View or Driving Mechanism.
(bb) §346.89 – Inattentive Driving.
(cc) §346.90 – Following Emergency Vehicle.
(dd) §346.91 – Crossing a Fire Hose.
(ee) §346.92(1) – Illegal Riding.
(ff) §346.94(1) – Driving on Sidewalk.
(gg) §346.94(9) – Alighting From or Boarding a Moving Vehicle.
(hh) Further no person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle in violation of Sections NR 64.03, NR 64.04, NR 64.05, NR 64.06, NR 64.08, NR 64.12, or Chapter NR 45, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Traffic Controls - 16
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(ii) Except as otherwise authorized under Wis. Stats. Chapter 23.33, or Chapters NR 64 or NR 45, Wisconsin Administrative Code, all-terrain vehicles shall only be operated on designated all-terrain vehicle routes or trails authorized or designated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Fond du Lac County or the Village.
16.14 Automobile and Other Vehicle Regulations. The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic in the following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of said statutes, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this code. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. §349.03 and §349.06, the Village’s adoption of specifically enumerated statutory regulations is intended to incorporate, as if fully set forth herein, any and all changes, modifications or amendments to said statutes made by the Wisconsin Legislature subsequent to the Village’s adoption of the same.
(1) §340.01, §343.01 and §348.01 Words and phrases defined.
(2) §341.04 Penalty for operating unregistered or improperly registered vehicle.
(3) §342.05 Certificate of title required.
(4) §342.31(2) Report of stolen or abandoned vehicles.
(5) §342.34 DOT to be notified of destruction or junking of vehicle.
(6) §343.05 Operators to be licensed; exceptions.
(7) §343.07 Instruction permits.
(8) §343.43 Unlawful use of license.
(9) §343.44 Driving while disqualified or ordered out-of-service or after license revoked or suspended.
(10) §343.45 Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
(11) §343.46 Duty of persons renting vehicles to another.
(12) §346.02 Applicability of chapter.
(13) §346.03 Applicability of rules of the road to authorized emergency vehicles.
(14) §346.04 Obedience to traffic officers, signs and signals; fleeing from officer.
(15) §346.05 thru §346.16 Driving, meeting, overtaking and passing.
(16) §346.18 thru §346.21 Right-of- way.
(17) §346.23 thru §346.29 Respective Rights and duties of drivers, pedestrians and bicyclists.
(18) §346.31 thru §346.35 Turning and stopping and required signals.
(19) §346.37 thru §346.42 Traffic signs, signals and markings.
(20) §346.44 thru §346.48 Required stops.
(21) §346.50 thru §346.55 Restrictions on stopping and parking.
(22) §346.61 thru §346.64 Reckless and drunken driving.
(23) §346.66 thru §346.69, §346.70 (1) and §346.72 Accidents and accident reports.
(24) §346.77 thru §346.81 Bicycles and play vehicles.
(25) §346.87 Limitations on backing.
(26) §346.88 Obstruction of operator’s view or driving mechanism.
(27) §346.89 Inattentive driving.
(28) §346.90 Following emergency vehicle.
(29) §346.91 Crossing fire hose.
(30) §346.92 Illegal riding.
Traffic Controls - 17
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(31) §346.94 Miscellaneous prohibited acts.
(32) §347.02 Applicability of chapter 347.
(33) §347.03 Sale of prohibited equipment unlawful.
(34) §347.04 Owner responsible for improperly equipped vehicle.
(35) §347.06 thru §347.29 Lighting equipment.
(36) §347.35 thru §347.49 Other equipment.
(37) §348.02 Applicability of chapter.
(38) §348.05 thru §348.10 Size and load
(39) §348.15 thru §348.20 Weight limits.
(40) §348.25 thru §348.27 Permits.
(41) §349 Applicability of Chapter (42) PROHIBITING OPERATORS FROM LEAVING KEYS IN PARKED MOTOR VEHICLES. Every passenger motor vehicle shall be equipped with a lock suitable to lock either the starting levers, throttle, steering apparatus, gearshift lever or ignition systems; and no person shall permit a motor vehicle in his/her custody to stand or remain unattended on any street, alley, or in any other public place, except an attended parking area, unless either the starting lever, throttle, steering apparatus, gearshift or ignition of said vehicle is locked and the key for such lock is removed from the vehicle. This code does not apply to municipal vehicles in the performance of their duties.
(43) SPEED LIMITS.
(a) State Speed Limits Adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stat. §346.57, §346.58 and §346.59 relating to the maximum and minimum speed of vehicles are hereby adopted as part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
(b) The speed limit for all alleys located in the Village is 5 m.p.h.
(44) OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PREMISES HELD OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
(a) This section shall apply to all premises held open to the public for use by motor vehicles, whether such premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use thereof.
(b) Definitions: for the purpose of this section, the Village of North Fond du Lac hereby adopts Wis. Stats. §340.01 (22), (35), (41), (46), (54), and (64).
(c) The operator of a motor vehicle operating on premises held open to the public for use by motor vehicles must obey the following traffic regulations. The operator shall:
1. Not exceed the posted limit when the maintenance authority in charge of the premises erects signs indicating the speed limit.
2. When approaching an official stop sign at an intersection, cause such vehicle to stop before entering the intersection and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered or are approaching the intersection upon a highway, driveway, or private road that is not controlled by an official traffic sign or signal.
3. Not participate in any race or speed or endurance contest upon any driveway or private road.
4. Upon all roadways of sufficient width, drive on the right half of the roadway except:
a. When making an approach for a left turn under circumstances in which the rules relating to left turns require driving on the left half of the roadway; or
b. When overtaking and passing under circumstances in which the rules relating to overtaking and passing permit or require driving on the left half of the roadway; or
c. When the right half of the roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; or
d. When overtaking and passing pedestrians, animals or obstructions on the right half of the roadway.
5. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle giving audible signal by siren, yield the right-of-way and immediately drive such vehicle to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right curb or the right-hand edge of the shoulder of the roadway or private drive, clear of any intersection.
Traffic Controls - 18
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
Unless otherwise directed by a traffic officer, the operator shall stop and remain standing in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed.
This section does not relieve the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard under the circumstances for the safety of all persons using the highway, driveway, or private road.
6. Comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic officer.
a. No operator of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or signal unless otherwise directed by a traffic officer.
b. No operator of a vehicle shall, after having received a visual or audible signal from a traffic officer, or marked police vehicle, knowingly flee or attempt to elude any traffic officer by willful or wanton disregard of such signal so as to interfere with or endanger the operation of the police vehicle, or the traffic officer or other vehicles or pedestrians, nor shall he increase the speed of his vehicle or extinguish the lights of his vehicle in an attempt to elude or flee.
7. Not follow an authorized emergency vehicle responding to a call or alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park his or her vehicle within the block where, or within 300 feet of the driveway entrance or similar point of access to a driveway or road on which, fire apparatus has stopped in response to an alarm. The personal vehicles of members of an official public safety department answering the alarm are considered on official business.
8. Unless given consent by the fire department official in command, not drive a vehicle over any unprotected hose of a fire department when such hose is laid down on any street, private driveway, or private road to be used at any fire or alarm of fire.
9. When approaching from the front or rear any school bus which has stopped on a roadway or private road, when the bus is equipped according to Wis. Stats. §347.25 (2) and when it is displaying flashing red warning lights, stop the vehicle not less than 20 feet from the bus and remain stopped until the bus resumes motion or the operator extinguishes the flashing red warning lights. The operator of any school bus which approaches from the front or rear any school bus which has stopped and is displaying flashing red warning lights shall display its flashing red lights while stopped.
10. Not drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard for the actual and potential hazards then existing. The speed of a vehicle shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any object, person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering the driveway or private road in compliance with legal requirements and using due care.
11. Consistent with the requirements of sub. (2), drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, when passing school children, roadway construction or maintenance workers or other pedestrians, and when special hazard exists with regard to other traffic or by reason of weather or roadway conditions.
(c) Citations for violations of this section shall only be issued for offenses committed on premises not covered by the traffic code provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) All citations for violations of this section shall be written as a Village municipal code citation.
(e) A monetary forfeiture may be assessed in accordance with section 24.04 against any operator of a motor vehicle that is convicted of a violation of this section, but no demerit point assessment shall be made against the driver's license of the offender.
(45) COMPRESSION BRAKING PROHIBITED.
(a) No operator of a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the Village of North Fond du Lac shall brake a motor vehicle by the compression of the engine (commonly referred to as “Jake brakes,”
Traffic Controls - 19
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
“engine breaks,” or “compression brakes”).
(b) The prohibiting of this ordinance shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, or where braking by compression of the engine is necessary for the protection of persons or property.
(46) Neighborhood Electric Vehicles. All provisions of Wisconsin Statutes relating to the licensing and use of Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEVs) are hereby adopted and made part hereof.
(1) DEFINITIONS. Neighborhood Electric Vehicle (NEV) is defined in Sates Statute 340.01 (36r) and means a motor vehicle that is propelled by electric power that conforms to the definition and requirements for low speed vehicles as adopted in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for low speed vehicles. The definition of a Neighborhood Electric Vehicle does not include a golf cart.
(2) STANDARDS. An NEV must be titled and registered by the State of Wisconsin, and must display a State-issued license plate. An NEV shall have four wheels and have a speed range of at least 20 miles per hour and not more than 25 miles per hour on a paved surface and shall have a gross vehicle weight of less than 3000 pounds. An NEV shall have the following equipment:
(a) headlamps; (b) stop lamps; (c) front and rear turn signals; (d) reflex reflectors, one red on each side as far to the rear as practicable, and one red on the rear; (e) an exterior mirror mounted on the driver’s side and either an exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rearview mirror; (f) parking brake; (g) a windshield that conforms to the federal safety standard on glazing; (h) a vehicle identification number (VIN) that complies with federal law; and (i) a type 1 or type 2 seatbelt assembly that conforms with federal law for each designated seating position.
(3) PERMITTED OPERATORS AND USES. Individuals who hold a valid Wisconsin drivers license may operate an NEV on any street within the jurisdictional limits of the Village of North Fond du Lac that has a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less. No NEV may be operating on or cross USH 45.
(4) TRAFFIC CODE. Operation of NEVs within the Village of North Fond du Lac shall comply with the provisions of the Village Traffic Code (Chapter 16) and all other Village ordinances.
(5) ENFORCEMENT. Enforcement of this ordinance regulating Neighborhood Electric Vehicles shall be pursuant to, 16.14, 16.25 and 24.05 of the Village Code of Ordinances.
(47) MOTOR VEHICLE FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
(a) Mandatory Liability Insurance. The provisions of Wis. Stat. §344.61 to §344.65 relating to mandatory liability insurance are hereby adopted as part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
16.25 Penalty. In lieu of or in addition to other penalties as prescribed, the penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be as provided in section 24.05 of this code.
(a) Each day that any such provision is violated by any person shall be and constitute a separate violation hereunder.
(b) Handicapped parking violations shall be $50.00 if paid within five (5) days. After five (5) days but within twenty-eight (28) days, the fine is increased to $75.00. After twenty-eight (28) days, the forfeiture imposed remains $75.00, but additional penalties may apply as outlined in (e) below.
(c) Parking penalties for the first violation of the winter parking ordinance during any snow removal season will be $15.00 if paid within five (5) days. After five (5) days, but within twenty-eight (28) days, the fine is increased to $30.00. The penalty for the second violation will be $30.00 if paid within five (5) days. After five (5) days, but within twenty-eight (28) days, the fine is increased to $45.00. The penalty for the third violation shall be $50.00 if paid within five (5) days. After five (5) days, but within twenty-eight (28) days, the fine is increased to $65.00. The penalty for the fourth and subsequent violations of the winter parking ordinance during a snow removal season will be $100.00, but additional penalties may apply as outlined in (e) below.
(d) All other citations issued in an amount of $15.00 are payable within five (5) days. After five (5) days but within twenty-eight (28) days, the forfeiture imposed is increased to $30.00. After twenty-eight
Traffic Controls - 20
__
Village of North Fond du Lac March 8, 2006
(28) days, the fine remains $30.00, but additional penalties may apply as outlined in (e) below.
(e) If a parking ticket is not paid within the twenty-eight (28) days from the date of issuance of the citation, the Village will make application to the Department of Transportation in accordance with Wisconsin State Statutes to suspend the vehicles registration and refuse to renew registration of any and all vehicles registered to the violator. Such suspension shall be in effect until such time that the Village gives written notice to the Department of Transportation that the forfeitures imposed has been satisfied.
1
Ordinance-2018-11 Chapter 19
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
19.01. Authority
19.02. Findings of Fact
19.03. Purpose and Intent
19.04. Applicability and Jurisdiction
19.05. Definitions
19.06. Technical Standards
19.07. Performance Standards
19.08. Permitting Requirements, Procedures and Fees
19.09. Storm Water Management Plan
19.10. Maintenance Agreement
19.11. Financial Guarantee
19.12. Fee Schedule
19.13. Enforcement
19.14. Appeals
19.15. Severability
19.16. Effective Date
19.17. Storm Water Utility
19.18. Storm Water Utility Credit Policy
19.19. Illicit Discharge and Connection to the Storm Water System
2
19.01 AUTHORITY.
(1) This ordinance is adopted by the Village Board of Trustees under the authority granted by s. 61.354, Wis. Stats. This ordinance supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under s. 61.35, Wis. Stats., that relate to storm water management regulations. Except as otherwise specified in s. 61.354, Wis. Stats., s. 61.35, Wis. Stats., applies to this ordinance and to any amendments to this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body.
(3) The Village Board of Trustees hereby designates the administering authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not pre-empt more stringent storm water management requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under ss. 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(b) Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under s. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(c) Rules related to State-approved Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) standards applicable to the Upper Fox and Wolf River Basins.
19.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
The Village Board of Trustees finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
(1) Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperature.
(2) Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants.
(3) Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads.
(4) Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
(5) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor drainage facilities.
(6) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and volumes.
(7) Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding.
19.03 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(1) PURPOSE. The general purpose of this ordinance is to establish long-term, post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to:
(a) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
(b) Prevent and control the adverse effects of storm water; prevent and control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve
3
ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth.
(c) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger downstream property.
(2) INTENT. It is the intent of the Village Board of Trustees that this ordinance regulates post-construction storm water discharges to waters of the state. This ordinance may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The Village Board of Trustees recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the storm water performance standards set forth in this ordinance is through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level storm water management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional storm water devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance standards developed under s. 281.16, Wis. Stats., for regional storm water management measures and have been approved by the Village Board of Trustees, it is the intent of this ordinance that the approved plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the community.
19.04 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
(1) APPLICABILITY.
(a) Where not otherwise limited by law, this ordinance applies to all post-construction sites, unless the site is otherwise exempt under paragraph (b).
(b) A post-construction site that meets any of the criteria in this paragraph is exempt from the requirements of this ordinance.
1. 1- and 2-family residential dwellings that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale and that result in less than 1 acre of disturbance.
2. Non-point discharges from agricultural activity areas.
3. Non-point discharges from silviculture activities.
4. Mill and crush operations.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph (a), this ordinance applies to post-construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the administering authority, is likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety.
(2) JURISDICTION. This ordinance applies to post construction sites within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(3) EXCLUSIONS. This ordinance is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under s. 227.01 (1), Wis. Stats., but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under s. 281.33 (2), Wis. Stats.
19.05 DEFINITIONS.
4
(1) “Administering authority” means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under s. 61.354, Wis. Stats., that is designated by the Village Board of Trustees to administer this ordinance.
(2) “Agricultural activity area” means the part of the farm where there is planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or outside yarding of livestock, including sod farms and silviculture. Practices in this area may include waterways, drainage ditches, diversions, terraces, farm lanes, excavation, filling and similar practices. The agricultural activity area does not include the agricultural production area.
(3) “Agricultural production area” means the part of the farm where there is concentrated production activity or impervious surfaces. Agricultural production areas include buildings, driveways, parking areas, feed storage structures, manure storage structures, and other impervious surfaces. The agricultural production area does not include the agricultural activity area.
(4) “Average annual rainfall” means a calendar year of precipitation, excluding snow, which is considered typical. For purposes of this ordinance, average annual rainfall means measured precipitation in Green Bay, Wisconsin between March 29 and November 25, 1969.
(5) “Best management practice” or “BMP” means structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
(6) “Business day” means a day the office of the administering authority is routinely and customarily open for business.
(7) “Cease and desist order” means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
(8) “Combined sewer system” means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and storm water runoff.
(9) “Common plan of development or sale” means a development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one plan. A common plan of development or sale includes, but is not limited to, subdivision plats, certified survey maps, and other developments.
(10) “Connected imperviousness" means an impervious surface that is directly connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious flow path.
(11) “Construction site” means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
(12) “Design storm” means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall. The Atlas 14, MSE4, 24-hour design storms for the Village of North Fond du Lac are: 1-year, 2.23 inches; 2-year, 2.55 inches; 5-year, 3.13 inches; 10-year, 3.69 inches; 25-year, 4.57 inches; 50-year, 5.33 inches; and 100-year, 6.16 inches.
(13) “Development” means residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, or other land uses and associated roads.
(14) “Direct conduits to groundwater” means wells, sinkholes, swallets, fractured bedrock at the surface, sand or gravel surficial deposits, mine shafts, non-metallic mines, tile inlets discharging to groundwater,
5
quarries or depressional groundwater recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock.
(15) “Division of land” means the creation from one or more parcels or building sites of additional parcels or building sites where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a 5 year period.
(16) “Effective infiltration area” means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment.
(17) “Erosion” means the process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
(18) "Exceptional resource waters" means waters listed in s. NR 102.11, Wis. Adm. Code.
(19) “Existing development” means development in existence on October 1, 2004 or development for which a stormwater permit in accordance with subch. III of Ch. NR 261, Wis. Adm. Code, was received on or before October 1, 2004.
(20) “Extraterritorial” means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village.
(21) “Filtering layer” means soil that has at least a 3-foot deep layer with at least 20 percent fines; or at least a 5-foot deep layer with at least 10 percent fines; or an engineered soil with an equivalent level of protection as determined by the administering authority.
(22) "Final stabilization" means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(23) “Financial guarantee” means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the administering authority by the responsible party to assure that requirements of the ordinance are carried out in compliance with the storm water management plan.
(24) “Governing body” means town board of supervisors, county board of supervisors, city council, village board of trustees or village council.
(25) “Groundwater” means any of the waters of the stat, as defined in s.218.01 Wis. Stats., occurring in a saturated subsurface geological formation of rock or soil.
(26) “High groundwater level” or “Subsurface saturation” means the higher of either the elevation to which the soil is saturated as observed as a free water surface in an unlined hole, or the elevation to which the soil has been seasonally or periodically saturated as indicated by soil color patterns throughout the soil profile.
(27) “Highway” has the meaning given in s. 340.01 (22), Wis. Stats.
(28) “Highway reconditioning” has the meaning given in s. 84.013 (1)(b), Wis. Stats.
(29) “Highway reconstruction” has the meaning given in s. 84.013(1)(c), Wis. Stats.
(30) “Highway resurfacing” has the meaning given in s. 84.013(1)(d), Wis. Stats.
(31) “Impervious surface” means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that typically are impervious. Gravel surfaces are considered
6
impervious, unless specifically designed to encourage infiltration.
(32) “Impervious surface disturbance” means any land disturbing construction activity in which any new impervious surfaces are created or existing impervious surfaces are redeveloped.
(33) “In-fill area” means a new development area less than 5 acres in size that is located within existing urban sewer service areas, surrounded by already existing development or existing development and natural or man-made features where development cannot occur. “In-fill does not include any undeveloped area that was part of a larger new development for which a stormwater permit in accordance with subch. II of Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code was required to be submitted after October 1, 2004 to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services (formerly Department of Commerce).
(34) “Infiltration” means the entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil.
(35) “Infiltration system” means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only.
(36) “Karst feature” means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
(37) “Land disturbing construction activity” (or “disturbance”) means any man-made alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities, and soil stockpiling.
(38) “Maintenance agreement” means a legal document that provides for long-term maintenance of storm water management and best management practices.
(39) “MEP” or “maximum extent practicable” means the highest level of performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard identified within this ordinance. MEP applies when the permit applicant demonstrates to the administering authority’s satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance level is the MEP, the permit applicant shall take into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions.
(40) “Minor reconstruction of a highway” means reconstruction of a highway that is limited to 1.5 miles in continuous or aggregate total length of realignment and that does not exceed 100 feet in width of roadbed widening.
7
(41) “Navigable waters” and “Navigable waterway” has the meaning given in s. 30.01(4m) Wis. Adm. Code.
(42) “New development” means that portion of a post-construction site where impervious surfaces are being created or expanded. Any disturbance where the amount of impervious area for the post-development condition is greater than the pre-development condition is classified as new development. For purposes of this ordinance, a post-construction site is classified as new development, redevelopment, routine maintenance, or some combination of these three classifications as appropriate.
(43) “Off-site” means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application.
(44) “On-site” means located within the property boundary described in the permit application.
(45) "Ordinary high-water mark" has the meaning given in s. NR 115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
(46) “Outstanding resource waters” means waters listed in s. NR 102.10, Wis. Adm. Code.
(47) “Percent fines” means the percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through a # 200 sieve.
(48) “Performance standard” means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
(49) “Permit” means a written authorization made by the administering authority to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
(50) “Permit administration fee” means a sum of money paid to the administering authority by the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the
expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit.
(51) “Pervious surface” means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
(52) “Pollutant” has the meaning given in s. 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
(53) “Pollution” has the meaning given in s. 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
(54) “Post-construction site" means a construction site following the completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
(55) “Post-development” means the extent and distribution of land cover types present after the completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
(56) “Pre-development” means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner.
(57) “Preventive action limit” has the meaning given in s. NR 140.05(17), Wis. Adm. Code.
(58) "Redevelopment ” means that portion of a post-construction site where impervious surfaces are being reconstructed, replaced, or reconfigured. Any disturbance where the amount of impervious area for the post-development condition is equal to or less than the pre-development condition is classified as redevelopment. For purposes of this ordinance, a post-construction site is classified as new development, redevelopment, routine maintenance, or some combination of these three classifications as appropriate.
8
(59) “Responsible party” means any entity holding fee title to the property or other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and maintain post-construction storm water BMPs.
(60) “Routine maintenance” means that portion of a post-construction site where pre-development impervious surfaces are being maintained to preserve the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, drainage pattern, configuration, or purpose of the facility. Remodeling of buildings and resurfacing of parking lots, streets, driveways, and sidewalks are examples of routine maintenance, provided the lower ½ of the impervious surface’s granular base is not disturbed. The disturbance shall be classified as redevelopment if the lower ½ of the granular base associated with the pre-development impervious surface is disturbed or if the soil located beneath the impervious surface is exposed. For purposes of this ordinance, a post-construction site is classified as new development, redevelopment, routine maintenance, or some combination of these three classifications as appropriate.
(61) “Runoff” means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(62) “Separate storm sewer” means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
(b) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
(c) Is not draining to a storm water treatment device or system.
(d) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(63) “Silviculture” means activities including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity.
(64) “Site” means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity occurred.
(65) “Stop work order” means an order issued by the administering authority which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
(66) “Storm water management plan” means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from storm water after the site has under gone final stabilization following completion of the construction activity.
(67) “Storm water management system plan” is a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
(68) “Targeted performance standard” means a performance standard that will apply in a specific area, where additional practices beyond those contained in this ordinance, are necessary to meet water quality standards. A total maximum daily load is an example of a targeted performance standard.
(69) "Technical standard" means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method.
(70) “Top of the channel” means an edge, or point on the landscape, landward from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12%
9
continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark.
(71) “Total maximum daily load” or “TMDL” means the amount of pollutants specified as a function of one or more water quality parameters that can be discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still ensure attainment of the applicable water quality standard.
(72) “TR-55” means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986.
(73) “Transportation facility” means a public street, a public road, a public highway, a public mass transit facility, a public-use airport, a public trail, or any other public work for transportation purposes such as harbor improvements under s. 85.095(1)(b), Stats. “Transportation facility” does not include building sites for the construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of employment that are regulated by the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to s. 281.33, Wis. Stats.
(74) “Waters of the state” has the meaning given in s. 281.01 (18), Wis. Stats.
19.06 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
The following methods shall be used in designing and maintaining the water quality, peak discharge, infiltration, protective area, fueling / vehicle maintenance, and swale treatment components of storm water practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this ordinance:
(1) Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Technical standards and guidance identified within the NEWSC Storm Water Reference Guide.
(3) Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the administering authority.
(4) In this ordinance, the following year and location has been selected as average annual rainfall: Green Bay, 1969 (Mar. 29-Nov. 25).
19.07 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(1) RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The responsible party shall implement a post-construction storm water management plan that incorporates the requirements of this section.
(2) PLAN. A written storm water management plan in accordance with 19.09 shall be developed and implemented for each post-construction site.
(3) REQUIREMENTS. The storm water management plan shall meet the following minimum requirements to the maximum extent practicable:
(a) TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS AND TOTAL PHOSPHORUS. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended solids and total phosphorus carried in runoff from the post-construction site as follows. The total suspended solids reduction shall be based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls.
1. For post-construction sites with 20,000 square feet or more of impervious surface disturbance and post-construction sites with 1 acre or more of land
10
disturbance, and not within a TMDL watershed, the following is required:
a. Reduce the total suspended solids load by 80% or to the minimum requirements of the TMDL referenced in subsection 19.01(4)c, whichever is greater for new development.
b. Reduce the total suspended solids load by 40% for redevelopment or to the minimum requirements of the TMDL referenced in subsection 19.01(4)c, whichever is greater.
c. No total suspended solids load reduction is required for routine maintenance areas with less than 5 acres of disturbance, unless runoff from the routine maintenance area discharges into a proposed water quality BMP.
2. For post-construction sites with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance and not within a TMDL watershed, reduce the total suspended solids load using BMPs from the NEWSC Storm Water Reference Guide or to the minimum requirements of the TMDL referenced in subsection 19.01(4)c, whichever is greater. These sites are not required to satisfy a numeric performance standard.
3. Sites with a cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet or greater of impervious surfaces after the adoption date of this ordinance (October 20, 2008) are required to satisfy the performance standards within 19.07(3)(a)1.a, b, and c.
4. The amount of total suspended solids control previously required for the site shall not be reduced as a result of the proposed development or disturbance.
5. For all sites, reduce the total phosphorus load to the minimum requirements of the TMDL referenced in subsection 19.01(4)c.
5. For sites within a TMDL watershed, additional water quality requirements will apply as determined by the administering authority. These additional requirements will involve phosphorus reductions as well as total suspended solids reductions.
6. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from offsite areas shall be taken into account in determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the BMP efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly. The pollutant load reduction provided by the BMP for an offsite area shall not be used to satisfy the required onsite pollutant load reduction, unless otherwise approved by the administering authority.
7. Notwithstanding subds. 1. to 5., if the design cannot achieve the applicable total suspended solids reduction specified, the storm water management plan shall include a written and site-specific explanation why that level of reduction is not attained and the total suspended solids load shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
(b) PEAK DISCHARGE. BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control peak discharges from the post-construction site as follows:
1. For post-construction sites with 20,000 square feet or more of impervious surface disturbance and post-construction sites with 1 acre or more of land disturbance, the following is required:
a. The peak post-development discharge rate shall not exceed the peak pre-development discharge rate for the 1-year, 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year, 24-hour design storms. These peak discharge requirements apply to new development and redevelopment areas. No peak discharge control is required for routine maintenance areas, unless runoff
11
from the routine maintenance area discharges into a proposed peak flow control facility.
b. TR-55 methodology shall be used for peak discharge calculations, unless the administering authority approves an equivalent methodology. The meaning of “hydrologic soil group” and “runoff curve number” are as determined in TR-55. Hydrologic analyses shall be performed using the MSE4 NRCS rainfall distribution and Atlas 14 rainfall depths outlined within 19.05. Unless the site is currently woodland, peak pre-development discharge rates shall be determined using the following runoff curve numbers for a “meadow” vegetative cover.
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers
Vegetative Cover
Hydrologic Soil Group
A
B
C
D
Meadow
30
58
71
78
Woodland
30
55
70
77
2. For post-construction sites with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance, reduce peak post-development discharge rates using BMPs from the NEWSC Storm Water Reference Guide. These sites are not required to satisfy a numeric performance standard.
3. Sites with a cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet or greater of impervious surfaces after the adoption date of this ordinance (October 20, 2008) are required to satisfy the performance standards within 19.07(3)(b)1.a and b.
4. The amount of peak discharge control previously required for the site shall not be reduced as a result of the proposed development or disturbance.
5. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from offsite areas shall be taken into account in determining the performance of the practice. Any impact on the BMP performance shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly. The peak discharge reduction provided by the BMP for an offsite area shall not be used to satisfy the required onsite peak discharge reduction, unless otherwise approved by the administering authority.
6. An adequate outfall shall be provided for each point of concentrated discharge from the post-construction site. An adequate outfall consists of non-erosive discharge velocities and reasonable downstream conveyance.
7. All new development sites shall have a minimum1 foot of vertical separation between the lowest floor surface and the high ground water level and/or bedrock as defined in 19.05 and described in the NEWSC Stormwater Reference Guide.
Sites not able to meet this separation shall quantify the anticipated amount of groundwater that will be discharged to the surface. System-wide management of the proposed groundwater discharge shall be required. All management practices shall be approved by the administering authority and indicated on the drainage plan.
A post-construction site that is near an area indicated on the Regional bedrock map as having a depth to carbonate bedrock of 50 feet or less is required to perform field verification as outlined in Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) Technical Standard 1002. The stormwater plan shall discuss the risk to BMP failure, etc. Remediation or mitigation strategies shall be presented as part of the stormwater plan.
12
8. Direct conduits to groundwater, as defined in 19.05, shall be identified. Direct conduits to groundwater requires a unique approach to stormwater design. If the proposed site is located within the watershed of a direct conduit to groundwater, an analysis of practical measures to avoid direct discharge shall be provided. Additional guidance may be found within the NEWSC Stormwater Reference Guide.
9. Exemptions. The following transportation facilities are not required to meet the peak discharge requirements of this paragraph (b) provided the transportation facility is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale:
a. A transportation facility where the change in hydrology due to development does not increase the existing surface water elevation at any point within the downstream receiving surface water by more than 0.01 of a foot for the 2-year, 24-hour storm event.
b. A highway reconstruction site.
c. A transportation facility that is part of a redevelopment project.
(c) INFILTRATION. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance with the following, except as provided in subds. 7. through 11.
1. For post-construction sites with 20,000 square feet or more of impervious surface disturbance and post-construction sites with 1 acre or more of land disturbance, the following is required:
a. Low Imperviousness. For development up to 40 percent connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and low density residential development, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 90 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when
designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area.
b. Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than 40 percent and up to 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as medium and high density residential, multi-family development, industrial and institutional development, and office parks, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 75 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2 percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area.
c. High imperviousness. For development with more than 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and commercial downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume shall be at least 60 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2 percent of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration area.
2. Pre-development condition shall assume “good hydrologic conditions” for appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55 or an equivalent methodology approved by the administering authority. The meaning of “hydrologic soil group” and “runoff curve number” are as determined in TR-55. The actual pre-development vegetative cover and the
13
following pre-development runoff curve numbers shall be used:
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff
Curve Numbers
Vegetative Cover
Hydrologic Soil Group
A
B
C
D
Woodland
30
55
70
77
Grassland
39
61
71
78
Cropland
55
69
78
83
3. For post-construction sites with less than 20,000 square feet of new impervious surfaces, infiltrate runoff volume using BMPs from the NEWSC Storm Water Reference Guide. These sites are not required to satisfy a numeric performance standard.
4. Sites with a cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet or greater of impervious surfaces after the adoption date of this ordinance (October 20, 2008) are required to satisfy the performance standards within 19.07(3)(c)1, 2, and 3.
5. The amount of infiltration previously required for the site shall not be reduced as a result of the proposed development or disturbance.
6. Agricultural production areas shall infiltrate runoff volume using BMPs from the NEWSC Stormwater Reference Guide.
7. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from offsite areas shall be taken into account in determining the performance of the practice. Any impact on the BMP performance shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP accordingly. The runoff volume reduction provided by the BMP for an offsite area shall not be used to satisfy the required onsite runoff volume reduction, unless otherwise approved by the administering authority in accordance with 19.07(5).
8. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in accordance with subd. 11. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
9. Source are prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to meeting the requirements of 19.07(3)(c) unless demonstrated to meet the conditions of 19.07(3)(c)14.
a. Areas associated with a tier 1 industrial facility identified in s. NR 216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage, loading, and parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the [administering authority].
b. Storage and loading areas of a tier 2 industrial facility identified in s. NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
c. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Rooftops of fueling and vehicle maintenance areas may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the [administering authority].
d. Agricultural production areas that contain livestock, animal waste, or feed storage.
10. Source area exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from these sources is optional:
14
a. Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for commercial development.
b. Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for industrial development not subject to the prohibitions under 19.7(3)(c)10.
c. Except as provided under 19.7(3)(c)6., redevelopment and routine maintenance areas.
d. In-fill development areas less than 5 acres.
e. Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses, and arterial residential roads.
f. Except as provided under 19.7(3)(c)6., transportation facility highway reconstruction and new highways.
11. Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the following areas:
a. Areas within 1,000 feet up gradient or within 100 feet downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater.
b. Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in s. NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within the separation distances listed in s. NR 812.08, Wis. Adm. Code, for any private well or non-community well for runoff infiltrated from commercial, including multi-family residential, industrial, and institutional land uses or regional devices for one- and two-family residential development.
c. Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in s. NR 720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the soil through which infiltration will occur.
12. Separation distances. Infiltration practices shall be located so that the characteristics of the soil and the separation distance between the bottom of the infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock are in accordance with the following:
Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics
Source Area
Separation Distance
Soil Characteristics
Industrial, Commercial, Institutional Parking Lots and Roads
5 feet or more
Filtering Layer
Residential Arterial Roads
5 feet or more
Filtering Layer
Roofs Draining to
Subsurface Infiltration Practices
1 foot or more
Native or Engineered Soil with Particles Finer than Coarse Sand
Roofs Draining to
Surface Infiltration Practices
Not Applicable
All Other Impervious Source Areas
3 feet or more
Filtering Layer
Notwithstanding 19.07(3)©12, applicable requirements for injection wells classified under ch. NR 815, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be followed.
13. Infiltration rate exemptions. infiltration practices located in the following areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement under the following conditions, but the decision to infiltrate under these conditions is optional:
a. Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than 0.6 inches per hour using a scientifically credible field test method.
b. Where the least permeable soil horizon to 5 feet below the proposed bottom of the infiltration system using the U.S. Department of Agriculture method of soils analysis is one of the following:
15
sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay. ]
14. Alternate uses. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry or irrigation or storage on green roofs where an equivalent portion of the runoff is captured permanently by rooftop vegetation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by 19.07(3)(c).
15. Groundwater standards.
a. Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this 19.07(3)(c) shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards application in accordance with ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code. However, if site specific information indicates that compliance with a preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent practicable.
b. Notwithstanding 19.07(3)(c)13.a., the discharge from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standards application.
16. Where the conditions of 19.07(3)(c)7. through 11. limit or restrict the use of infiltration practices, the performance standard of 19.07(3)(c) shall be met to the maximum extent practicable.
(d) PROTECTIVE AREAS.
1. “Protective area” means an area of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this paragraph, “protective area” does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
a. For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, and for wetlands in areas of special natural resource interest as specified in s. NR 103.04, 75 feet.
b. For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a United States geological survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50 feet.
c. For lakes, 50 feet.
d. For highly susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands include the following types: fens, sedge meadows, bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows, shallow marshes, deep marshes and seasonally flooded basins.
e. For moderately susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Moderately susceptible wetlands include, but are not limited to: shrub wetlands, floodplain forests, fresh wet meadow, deep/shallow marshes, and forested wetlands. Perennial and intermittent streams also fit in this protective area designation.
f. For less susceptible wetlands, 10 percent of the average wetland width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include degraded wetlands dominated by invasive species such as reed canary grass.
g. In sub d. 1.a., d. and e., determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and
16
runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and criteria in s. NR 103.03.
h. For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130 acres, 10 feet.
2. Wetlands shall be delineated. Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in accordance with s. NR 103.08(1m). This paragraph (d) does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been placed.
3. This paragraph (d) applies to post-construction sites located within a protective area, except those areas exempted pursuant to subd. 6 below.
4. The following requirements shall be met:
a. Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area to the maximum extent practicable. The storm water management plan shall contain a written site-specific explanation for any parts of the protective area that are disturbed during construction.
b. Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective area, and where no impervious surface is present, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70% or greater shall be established and maintained. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur.
c. Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention basins, that are designed to control pollutants from non-point sources may be located in the protective area.
5. A protective area established or created after the adoption date of this ordinance (October 17, 2016) shall not be eliminated or reduced, except as allowed in subd. 6.b, c, or d below.
6. Exemptions. The following areas are not required to meet the protective area requirements of this paragraph (d):
a. Redevelopment and routine maintenance areas provided the minimum requirements within in subd. 5 above are satisfied.
b. Structures that cross or access surface waters such as boat landings, bridges and culverts.
c. Structures constructed in accordance with s. 59.692(1v), Wis. Stats.
d. Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter the surface water, except to the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
(e) FUELING AND VEHICLE MAINTENANCE AREAS. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have BMPs designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, such that the runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen.
(f) SWALE TREATMENT FOR TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES. This 19.07(3)(f) is not applicable to transportation facilities that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
1. Applicability. Except as provided in subd. 2., transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant removal meet all of the requirements of this section, if the swales are
17
designed to the maximum extent practicable to do all of the following:
a. Be vegetated. However, where appropriate, non-vegetative measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check dams.
b. Swales shall comply with the Department of Natural Resources Technical Standard 1005 “Vegetated Infiltration Swale” except as otherwise authorized in writing by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
2. Exemptions. The administering authority may, consistent with water quality standards, require other provisions of this section be met on a transportation facility with an average daily travel of vehicles greater than 2500 and where the initial surface water of the state that the runoff directly enters is any of the following:
a. An outstanding resource water.
b. An exceptional resource water.
c. Waters listed in s. 303(d) of the federal clean water act that are identified as impaired in whole or in part, due to nonpoint source impacts.
d. Waters where targeted performance standards are developed under s. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code, to meet water quality standards.
(g) EXEMPTIONS. The following areas are not required to meet the performance standards within 19.07(3):
1. Underground utility construction such as water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, cable television, and fiber optic lines. This exemption does not apply to the construction of any above ground structures associated with utility construction.
2. The following transportation facilities are exempt, provided the transportation facility is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
a. Reconditioning or resurfacing of a highway.
b. Minor reconstruction of a highway. Notwithstanding this exemption, the protective area requirements within NR 151.24(6) Wisconsin Administrative Code apply to minor reconstruction of a highway.
c. A redevelopment transportation facility with no increase in exposed parking lots or roads.
d. A transportation facility with less than 10% connected imperviousness based on complete development of the transportation facility, provided the cumulative area of all parking lots and rooftops is less than one acre.
e. Routine maintenance for transportation facilities if performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
(4) GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ON-SITE AND OFF-SITE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES. The following considerations shall be observed in managing runoff:
(a) Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this section.
(b) Emergency overland flow for all storm water facilities shall be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety.
(5) LOCATION AND REGIONAL TREATMENT OPTION.
18
(a) The BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional storm water device, practice or system.
(b) Post-construction runoff within a non-navigable surface water that flows into a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, is not required to meet the performance standards of this ordinance. Post-construction BMPs may be located in non-navigable surface waters.
(c) Except as allowed under par. (d), post-construction runoff from new development shall meet the post-construction performance standards prior to entering a navigable surface water.
(d) Post-construction runoff from any development within a navigable surface water that flows into a BMP is not required to meet the performance standards of this ordinance if:
1. The BMP was constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance and the BMP either received a permit issued under ch. 30, Stats., or the BMP did not require a ch. 30, Wis. Stats., permit; and
2. The BMP is designed to provide runoff treatment from future upland development.
(e) Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and in-fill areas shall meet the post-construction performance standards in accordance with this paragraph.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, BMPs shall be located to treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable surface waters.
2. Post-construction BMPs for such runoff may be located in a navigable surface water if allowable under all other applicable federal, state and local regulations such as ch. NR 103, Wis. Adm. Code and ch. 30, Wis. Stats.
(f) The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet detention pond, or after a series of such BMPs is
subject to this chapter.
(g) The administering authority may approve off-site management measures provided that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The administering authority determines that the post-construction runoff is covered by a storm water management system plan that is approved by the Village of North Fond du Lac and that contains management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this ordinance.
2. The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
a. The facility is in place.
b. The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of storm water control equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the performance standards of this ordinance.
c. The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and maintenance.
(h) Where a regional treatment option exists such that the administering authority exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site storm water management requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with the administering authority. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff, the administering authority shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option.
(6) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The administering authority may establish storm water management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the administering authority determines that an added level of protection is needed
19
to protect sensitive resources. Also, the administering authority may establish storm water management requirements less stringent than those set forth in this section if the administering authority determines that less protection is needed to protect sensitive resources and provide reasonable flood protection. However, the alternative requirements shall not be less stringent than those requirements promulgated in rules by Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under NR 151 Wisconsin Administrative Code.
19.08 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES AND FEES.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction activity without receiving a post-construction runoff permit from the administering authority prior to commencing the proposed activity.
(2) PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES. Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance, any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the administering authority a permit application made on a form provided by the administering authority for that purpose.
(a) Unless otherwise excepted by this ordinance, a permit application must be accompanied by a storm water management plan, a maintenance agreement and a non-refundable permit administration fee.
(b) The storm water management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of 19.07 and 19.09, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of 19.10, the financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of 19.11, and fees shall be those established by the Village Board of Trustees as set forth in 19.12.
(3) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PERMIT APPLICATION. The administering authority shall review any permit application that is submitted with a storm water management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used:
(a) Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all items as required by sub. (2), the administering authority shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) If the storm water permit application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees in lieu of storm water management practices is made, the administering authority shall issue the permit.
(c) If the storm water permit application, plan or maintenance agreement is disapproved, the administering authority shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval.
(d) The administering authority may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the administering authority shall have 30 calendar days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved (see note (3)(a)).
(e) Failure by the administering authority to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 30 calendar days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued (see note (3)(a)).
(4) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. All permits issued under this ordinance shall be subject to the
20
following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this ordinance shall be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The administering authority may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the responsible party. An action by the administering authority to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with 19.14.
(a) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
(b) The responsible party shall design and install all structural and non-structural storm water management measures in accordance with the approved storm water management plan and this permit.
(c) The responsible party shall notify the administering authority at least 2 business days before commencing any work in conjunction with the storm water management plan, and within the next business day upon completion of the storm water management practices. If required as a special condition under sub. (5), the responsible party shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the administering authority so that practice installations can be inspected during construction.
(d) Practice installations required as part of this ordinance shall be certified "as built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed storm water management practices must pass a final inspection by the administering authority or its designee to determine if they are in accordance with the approved storm water management plan and ordinance. The administering authority or its designee shall notify the responsible party in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance with the conditions of this permit.
(e) The responsible party shall notify the administering authority of any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved storm water management plan. The administering authority may require that the proposed modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to incorporation into the storm water management plan and execution by the responsible party.
(f) The responsible party shall maintain all storm water management practices in accordance with the storm water management plan until the practices either become the responsibility of the Village Board of Trustees, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved maintenance agreement.
(g) The responsible party authorizes the administering authority to perform any work or operations necessary to bring storm water management measures into conformance with the approved storm water management plan, and consents to a special assessment or charge against the property as authorized under subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under 19.11.
(h) If so directed by the administering authority, the responsible party shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the approved storm water management plan.
(i) The responsible party shall permit property access to the administering authority or its designee for the purpose of inspecting the property for
21
compliance with the approved storm water management plan and this permit.
(j) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the administering authority may require the responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or public safety.
(k) The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties detailed in 19.13, if the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of this permit.
(l) The permit applicant shall post the “Certificate of Permit Coverage” in a conspicuous location at the construction site.
(5) PERMIT CONDITIONS. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions established by administering authority in addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance standards in 19.07 or a financial guarantee as provided for in 19.11.
(6) PERMIT DURATION. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the administering authority notifies the responsible party that all storm water management practices have passed the final inspection required under sub. (4)(d).
(7) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The administering authority may prescribe alternative requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water management performance standards under 19.07 (5) or for applicants seeking a permit for a post-construction site with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance.
19.09 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
(1) PLAN REQUIREMENTS. The storm water management plan required under 19.08 (2) shall comply with the NEWSC Storm Water Reference Guide and contain at a minimum the following information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the landowner and responsible parties.
(b) A legal description of the property proposed to be developed.
(c) Pre-development site map with property lines, disturbed limits, and drainage patterns.
(d) Post-development site map with property lines, disturbed limits, and drainage patterns.
1. Total area of disturbed impervious surfaces within the site.
2. Total area of new impervious surfaces within the site.
3. Performance standards applicable to site.
4. Proposed best management practices.
5. Groundwater, bedrock, and soil limitations.
6. Separation distances. Storm water management practices shall be adequately separated from wells to prevent contamination of drinking water.
(2) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The administering authority may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water management performance standards under 19.07 (5) or for applicants seeking a permit for a post-construction site with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance.
22
19.10 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
(1) MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT REQUIRED. The maintenance agreement required under 19.08 (2) for storm water management practices shall be an agreement between the administering authority and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of storm water practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the storm water management practices.
(2) AGREEMENT PROVISIONS. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information and provisions and be consistent with the maintenance plan required by 19.09(1)(f):
(a) Identification of the storm water facilities and designation of the drainage area served by the facilities.
(b) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the storm water management system consistent with the storm water management plan required under 19.08 (2).
(c) Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city, county, town or village responsible for long term maintenance of the storm water management practices identified in the storm water management plan required under 19.08 (2).
(d) Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization, or city, county, town or village shall maintain storm water management practices in accordance with the schedule included in par. (b).
(e) Authorization for the administering authority to access the property to conduct inspections of storm water management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement.
(f) A requirement on the administering authority to maintain public records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the responsible party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the storm water management practice into proper working condition.
(g) Agreement that the party designated under par. (c), as responsible for long term maintenance of the storm water management practices, shall be notified by the administering authority of maintenance problems which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set by the administering authority.
(h) Authorization of the administering authority to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible party designated under par. (c) does not make the required corrections in the specified time period. The administering authority shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the property pursuant to subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(3) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The administering authority may prescribe alternative requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water management performance standards under 19.07 (5) or for applicants seeking a permit for a post-construction site with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance.
19.11 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GUARANTEE. The administering authority may require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type
23
of which shall be acceptable to the administering authority. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the administering authority to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the storm water management practices during the period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the administering authority the authorization to use the funds to complete the storm water management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved storm water management plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the administering authority that the requirements of this ordinance have not been met.
(2) CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as follows:
(a) The administering authority shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section, less any costs incurred by the administering authority to complete installation of practices, upon submission of "as built plans" by a licensed professional engineer. The administering authority may make provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development stages.
(b) The administering authority shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this section to assure maintenance of storm water practices, less any costs incurred by the administering authority, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement.
(3) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The administering authority may prescribe alternative requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water management performance standards under 19.07 (5) or for applicants seeking a permit for a post-construction site with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface disturbance.
19.12 FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees referred to in other sections of this ordinance shall be established by the administering authority and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the administering authority shall be available for review in the office of the Department of Public Works.
19.13 ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after the effective date of this ordinance by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the ordinance provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
(2) The administering authority shall notify the responsible party by certified mail of any non-complying land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be taken.
(3) Upon receipt of written notification from the administering authority under sub. (2), the responsible party shall correct work that does not comply with the storm water management plan or other provisions of this permit. The responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the administering authority in the notice.
24
(4) If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance are likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the administering authority may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the administering authority plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible party.
(5) The administering authority is authorized to post a stop work order on all land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this ordinance, or to request the village attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
(6) The administering authority may revoke a permit issued under this ordinance for non-compliance with ordinance provisions.
(7) Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the administering authority or by a court with jurisdiction.
(8) The administering authority is authorized to refer any violation of this ordinance, or of a stop work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this ordinance, to the village attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
(9) Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $5 dollars or more than $500 dollars per offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(10) Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings.
(11) When the administering authority determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance has failed to follow practices set forth in the storm water management plan, or has failed to comply with schedules set forth in said storm water management plan, the administering authority or a party designated by the administering authority may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The administering authority shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to 19.11 of this ordinance. Where such a security has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon.
19.14 APPEALS.
(1) BOARD OF APPEALS. The board of appeals, created pursuant to section 1.04(3)(a) of the Village of North Fond du Lac ordinances pursuant to s. 61.354(4)(b), Wis. Stats, shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the administering authority in administering this ordinance. The board shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from the provisions of this ordinance that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship.
25
(2) WHO MAY APPEAL. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the Village of North Fond du Lac affected by any decision of the administering authority.
19.15 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
19.16 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its adoption and publication. The above and foregoing ordinance was duly adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of North Fond du Lac on the 17th day of October, 2016.
19.17 STORM WATER UTILITY.
(1) CREATION. There is hereby established a storm water utility in the Village of North Fond du Lac. The operation of the storm water utility shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works who shall oversee the operation and maintenance of the storm water management system, the provision of storm water management services, and compliance with storm water regulations.
(2) AUTHORITY. The Village, acting through the storm water utility, may without limitation due to enumeration, (i) acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage and finance storm water management facilities; (ii) undertake operations and activities, as are deemed by the Village to be proper and reasonably necessary to manage the quantity and quality of storm water; and (iii) take the steps necessary to comply with storm water regulations. Storm water management facilities may include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining walls, ponds, streets, roads, ditches and such other facilities as will support storm water management.
(3) RATES AND CHARGES.
(a) The basis for computing storm water utility charges is established under this Section. The establishment of formulas for the calculation of charges, the creation of customer classifications for the imposition of charges, the amount of charge to be imposed, and changes in such formulas, customer classifications, and charges may be made by further resolution of the Board of Trustees. All charges established pursuant to this Section shall be fair and reasonable. A schedule of current charges shall be maintained and on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
(b) Charges shall be imposed to recover all or a portion of the costs of the storm water utility. Such charges, which shall be established pursuant to further resolution of the Village of North Fond du Lac Board of Trustees, may include the following components:
1. Equivalent runoff unit charge (ERU). An equivalent runoff unit charge may be imposed on all property that has an impervious area. The ERU charge shall be assessed based upon the impervious area as reasonably determined by the Village for a typical residential unit of property. Other units of property will be charged multiples of the ERU based on the impervious area of the property.
2. Special charge (SC). A special charge may be imposed on property that is in an area specially
26
served by a particular storm water management measure. This charge will be developed to reflect the additional services provided in a particular area that may not be appropriate to allocate to property throughout the Village. The special charge will be calculated on an ERU basis.
(c) In the event the owner and users of a particular property are not the same, the liability for the charges attributable to that property shall be joint and severable.
(4) APPLICATION FOR SERVICE. The property owner shall be responsible for completing the storm water utility service application form any time a building permit is issued, exclusive of those issued to existing single family residences, or when a site plan review is conducted. The form shall be provided by the Building Inspector with each application for a building permit (exclusive of building permits for single family residences) or application for site plan review. Failure to submit a completed storm water utility service application form or providing false information on said form, shall result in denial of both the building permit and storm water utility service applications, and the imposition of a penalty as provided in 19.17(9). In addition to any other penalties, the owner shall also be liable for storm water charges which would have been imposed for the improvement from the date construction of the improvement began.
(5) BILLING AND COLLECTION.
(a) The charges established will be billed to the utility customer at the same time and in the same manner as the sanitary sewer bill. A storm water utility bill will be established for those properties that do not receive a sanitary sewer bill. Unless otherwise provided elsewhere, such charges shall not be payable in installments.
(b) Bills for storm water utility charges shall be mailed to the recipient designated by the owner of the property to which the bill relates, provided that such mailing shall not relieve the owner of any property from liability for the charges in the event payment is not made. The owner of any property which is occupied by tenants shall have the right to examine the appropriate records of the Village to determine whether such rates and charges have been paid by such tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office at which the records are kept during normal business hours.
(c) All storm water service charges shall be taxed and collected, and shall be a lien upon the property served in the same manner as water service charges are taxed and collected under the provisions of Sec. 66.0809, Wis. Stats.
(d) A late payment charge as established by further resolution of the Board of Trustees will be added to bills not paid within 20 days of issuance.
(6) ADJUSTMENTS OF ERUS AND CREDIT POLICY.
(a) A non-residential customer may apply for an adjustment to the ERUs assigned to his, her or its property if the customer believes the impervious area measurements on which the ERU calculation is based are inaccurate. Requests for adjustments of the ERUs allocated to a parcel of property shall be limited to the non-residential customer class.
(b) All requests for adjustments shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works, who shall have the authority to develop and administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of ERUs as established in this subsection. Requests for adjustments shall be in writing and set forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought.
27
(c) The nonresidential customer requesting the adjustment shall be required, at his, her or its own expense, to provide any supplemental information requested by the Director of Public Works, including but not limited to survey data and engineering reports approved by a professional engineer (P.E.) Failure to provide such information within the time limits established by the Director, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the adjustment request.
(d) Once a completed adjustment request and all required information is fully submitted, the Director shall have thirty (30) calendar days within which to render a written decision. In considering an adjustment request, the Director shall consider whether the calculation of the ERUs for the property is correct.
(e) The Director’s decision shall be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request and service shall be complete upon mailing. Appeals from the Director’s decisions concerning ERUs adjustment requests shall follow the process set out in 19.17(7), except that no concurrent payment of any fees is required.
(f) All appeals must be in writing and shall specify the grounds for challenging the Director’s decision. The appeal must specifically address the Director’s conclusions and shall not merely repeat the bases for the initial adjustments request. All appeals shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of mailing the Director’s decision. Failure to timely and properly appeal shall deprive the Village Administrator of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
(g) Requests for adjustment to the user fees, as opposed to requests for adjustments of ERUs which
are governed by this subsection, shall be governed by 19.17(7) below.
(h) Concurrent payment of any charges based on the ERUs allocated to the property is not required as a condition precedent to a request for review under this subsection 19.17(6).
(i) Customers may apply for a credit to their storm water charge if the property is eligible for a credit pursuant to the Village Storm Water Credit Policy. The Village Storm Water Credit Policy shall be available from the Village Clerk and on the Village’s official web page.
(7) Appeals.
(a) The Village of North Fond du Lac elects not to be subject to the administrative review provisions contained within Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and establishes the following as a complete and final review procedure.
(b) As a condition precedent to challenging any storm water utility charge, the charge must be timely paid in full under protest to the Village.
(c) An appeal shall be to the Village Administrator and can be undertaken only by filing a written appeal with the Village Clerk concurrent with the date of payment. The written appeal shall specify all grounds for challenge to the amount of the charge and shall state the amount of charge that the appellant considers to be appropriate. Failure to timely and properly appeal shall deprive the Village Administrator of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
(d) In considering an appeal, the Village Administrator shall determine whether the storm water utility charge is fair and reasonable and, in the event the appeal is granted, whether or not a refund is due the appellant and the amount of the refund. The Village Administrator shall conduct a formal or informal hearing at such time and place as designated
28
in a hearing notice to the appellant, providing five (5) business days notice to the appellant. The Village Administrator shall obtain sufficient facts upon which to make a determination. The decision shall be based upon the evidence presented. The Village Administrator shall notify the appellant in writing of the determination by first class mail addressed to the individual and at the address listed within the appeal. Service is conclusive upon mailing.
(e) The decision of the Village Administrator is final except if the property owner appeals the decision to the Board of Trustees by filing a written appeal with the Village Clerk no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of mailing the decision of the Village Administrator. The written appeal shall specify all grounds for challenge to the Village Administrator’s decision and shall again state the amount of charge that the appellant considers to be appropriate. The appeal must specifically address the Village Administrator’s conclusions and shall not merely repeat the bases for the initial appeal. Failure to timely and properly appeal shall deprive the Board of Trustees of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
(f) In considering an appeal, the Board of Trustees shall determine whether the storm water utility charge is fair and reasonable and, in the event the appeal is granted, whether or not a refund is due the appellant and the amount of the refund. The Board of Trustees shall consider the appeal in the same manner as a new resolution, pursuant to its rules for procedure in existence at the time of consideration. The Village Clerk shall provide written notice to the address listed within the appeal of the time and place of the Council’s consideration of the appeal at least five (5) business days prior to such consideration. The Board of Trustees shall base its decision upon the information presented at its
meeting. The Village Clerk shall notify the appellant in writing of the Board of Trustees’ determination by first class mail addressed to the individual and at the address listed within the appeal. Service is conclusive upon mailing.
(g) The decision of the Board of Trustees is final except if the property owner appeals the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. Such appeal shall be filed no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of mailing the decision of the Board of Trustees. Such appeal shall be by writ of certiorari and the reviewing court shall be limited to the record created before the Board of Trustees. Costs, but not attorney fees, shall be awarded to the prevailing party, at the sole discretion of the court.
(h) If the result of any appeal is that a refund is due the appellant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the appellant’s next storm water bill.
(8) BUDGET EXCESS REVENUES. The storm water utility finances shall be accounted for in a separate Storm Water Utility Fund by the Village. The Public Works Director or designee shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all operation and maintenance costs, debt service and other costs related to the operation of the storm water utility. The budget is subject to approval by the Board of Trustees. Any excess of utility revenues collected over expenditures in a year will be retained by the Fund for subsequent years’ needs.
(9) PENALTY. A person violating any provision of this Section shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture not to exceed $75.00 for each offense, in addition to the costs of prosecution which are allowed by law. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(10) ALTERNATIVE METHOD TO COLLECT STORM WATER CHARGES. In addition to any
29
other method for collection of the charges established under this Section or subsequent resolution, the Village may levy and impose charges for storm water management on property as a special charge pursuant to Sec. 66.0627, Wis. Stats. The mailing of the bill for storm water utility charges to a property owner shall serve as notice to the property owner that failure to pay the charges when due may result in the charges being imposed pursuant to the authority of Sec. 66.0627, Wis. Stats. The procedures contained in Sec. 66.0627, Wis. Stats., shall govern such notice and further collection procedures.
19.18 STORM WATER UTILITY CREDIT POLICY.
(1) PURPOSE AND SCOPE. The Purpose of this Storm Water Utility Credit Policy is to encourage actions by property owners within the utility district that 1) reduce storm water flows and volumes, 2) reduce storm water pollution, and 3) reduce the utility district’s costs in providing proper management of storm water runoff. 19.18(3)(c) (Riparian Properties) applies to any property that meets the definition of “riparian”. All other credit conditions defined in this policy apply only to parcels within the village. Credits to user fees will only be allowed when it can be demonstrated by the customer that a condition or activity on the property results in a direct reduction in costs for Storm Water Utility services. Those conditions and activities are specified in this policy document.
(2) CREDIT STRUCTURE. For the purposes of generating applicable credit rates, the municipal storm water management services, which are funded through the user fee, are divided into three categories.
Storm Water Base Fee: 30%
Storm Water Flow Fee: 35%
Storm Water Quality Fee: 35%
(a) Fees to support the Storm Water Base programs are applied throughout the utility customer base, and credits are not allowed for these components. The Storm Water Base costs are required to conduct the storm water management program throughout the village.
(b) Only the costs associated with the Storm Water Flow and Storm Water Quality Fees are eligible for a credit. These costs are associated with the utility’s efforts to maintain the capacity of the storm water conveyance system, reduce flooding, and reduce pollution to meet regulations. Properties that demonstrate they are reducing the impacts on the storm water flow and/or storm water quality components may be eligible for a portion or all of these credits.
(c) The tasks included under each category, and the percent credit for each category under this policy, may be reviewed and modified on an as-needed basis. Modifications must be approved by Village Board resolution.
(3) CREDIT CRITERIA.
(a) PROPERTIES THAT EXCEED VILLAGE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE FLOW CONTROL REQUIREMENTS. This credit applies to all properties that provide privately constructed and maintained runoff flow control measures. Properties that implement flow control management practices so as to exceed Village of North Fond du Lac’s storm water management standards, may be eligible for a credit. The utility customer must submit documentation demonstrating that a management practice on their property exceeds the peak flow reduction criteria to the Department of Public Works (DPW). The amount of credit will be based on the prorated amount that the property is
30
exceeding the requirements. The acceptable methodologies for computing the peak flow are described in 19.07(3)(b). See 19.18(4) for submittal requirements.
The amount of Storm Water Flow Fee credit will be based on the following criteria:
1. Post-development flow from all three design storms (as defined in 19.07(3)(b)) meet the minimum requirements.
2. Property must reduce the peak flow requirement of the 10-year design storm below the required rate as defined by the village storm water management ordinance. All calculations shall use the 10-year, 24-hour, SCS Type II distribution rainstorm of 3.9 inches in 24 hours.
The credit amount will be based on the percentage the property exceeds the minimum flow control requirements. An example of credit calculations is provided in the following table:
Example Storm Water Flow Fee Credit Calculations
Reduce flow below the
requirement by:
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Multiply by 35% (maximum
eligible credit)
35%
35%
35%
35%
35%
35%
The utility fee credit will be:
0%
7%
14%
21%
28%
35%
(b) PROPERTIES THAT IMPLEMENT STORM WATER QUALITY PRACTICES. This credit applies to all properties that provide privately constructed and maintained runoff pollution control measures. Properties that implement pollution control management practices so as to reduce storm water sediment (total suspended solids) below the requirements of the village’s Storm Water Management Ordinance may be eligible for a credit. The utility customer must submit documentation demonstrating the sediment control effectiveness of the management practice on their property to the Department of Public Works (DPW). The amount of credit will be based on the prorated amount as described below. See 19.18(4) for submittal requirements.
The amount of Storm Water Quality Fee credit will be based on the following criteria:
1. For new development and redevelopment properties as defined in the village’s storm water management ordinance:
a. All requirements of the village’s storm water management ordinance must be met.
b. If the storm water sediment control practices exceed the minimum requirements, then a credit shall be applied pro-rated to the level of sediment control achieved. An example of credit calculations is provided in the following table.
Example Storm Water Quality Fee Credit Calculations for a New Development Parcel
Required to Reduce Sediment by 80%
Parcel reduces sediment
pollution by:
80%**
85%
90%
95%
Multiply 35% (maximum
eligible credit) by:*
0%
5%
10%
15%
The utility fee credit
will be:
0%
9%
18%
27%
* credit pro-rated based on the percent sediment control remaining after the minimum requirement is met.
** column does not exceed minimum requirement of village ordinance, thus no storm water utility credit is applied.
2. For existing developed properties with no pollution control requirements, the credit will be based directly on the percent sediment control achieved compared to the property under the pre-management condition. In no case will the credit exceed 35%.
For example: If an existing developed property installs a storm water pollution management measure that reduces sediment pollution from the property by 20%, the property shall be eligible for a 20% credit.
31
(c) RIPARIAN PROPERTIES. Properties that discharge storm water from all or a portion of their property directly into Lake Winnebago, without entering a Village of North Fond du Lac municipally owned storm water conveyance system, may be eligible for a credit. The credit amount will be pro-rated based on the percent impervious area of the property that drains directly to Lake Winnebago or DNR mapped wetlands contiguous with Lake Winnebago. Properties located on other creeks, streams and/or ditches, are not eligible for this credit. For example if a property has 50% of its impervious area draining directly to Lake Winnebago without entering the village’s storm water conveyance system, the eligible credit will be calculated as follows:
Storm Water Base Fee Portion = 30% (no credit applied)
Storm Water Flow Fee Portion = 35% x 50% = 17.5%
Storm Water Quality Fee Portion = 35% x 50% = 17.5%
See 19.18(4) for submittal requirements.
(4) CREDIT REQUEST SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS. The Director of Public Works shall review credit request submittal for compliance with this policy.
(a) REVIEW FEE. Prior to review by the Director, the property owner requesting the review shall pay a one-time review fee of $500.00 per credit application for properties seeking a credit under Section 19.18(3)(a) or 19.18(3)(b) of this policy. There shall be no application fee for properties seeking a credit under 19.18(3)(c) (Riparian Properties).
(b) REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION
1. Application. The application request letter shall contain the following information:
a. Tax Parcel Number
b. Parcel Address
c. Owner Name
d. Owner Address
e. Amount and Type of Credit Requested
2. Owner Certification. The applicant shall provide written certification that the peak flow management practice(s) that are the subject of the credit have been constructed and are functioning in the manner indicated on the credit request calculations; and/or
The applicant shall provide written certification that the percentage of parcels draining to riparian waters are correct and that drainage patterns have not been altered.
3. Operations and Maintenance Manual. The applicant shall provide for DPW review and approval a manual for the operation, inspection, and maintenance of all management practices, to ensure that the practices will continue to function as designed.
4. Supporting Plans and Calculations. The applicant shall provide for DPW review and approval, any hydrologic/hydraulic studies, plans, and other supporting documentation required to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director, that the measures taken meet the requirements for the credits requested. A Registered Engineer or Hydrologist, licensed in the State of Wisconsin, must certify supporting Plan and Calculations.
(c) APPROVAL PROCESS
1. Director’s (or Designee’s) Review
The Director shall have thirty (30) calendar days to review credit applications, whereupon the Director may approve or deny the application as submitted, or provide comments for resubmittal. In the event of a resubmittal request, the thirty-day period referred to
32
above shall begin again pending the receipt of all information requested.
2. Appeals. See Section 19.14 of the ordinance.
3. Annual Reevaluation. All Credits shall be subject to an annual review for compliance with the current year’s credit policy. Credits may vary or be eliminated over time subject to the terms of the current year’s credit policy. It is the responsibility of the billed customer to provide the Director with any and all changes to the conditions of the onsite management practices and conditions that may affect the credit rate for the site. Violations of the terms and/or conditions of the credit request may be subject to collection of utility fees retroactive to the date of the violation.
4. Retroactivity. Pending approval of the credit request, any and all credits will be granted retroactive to the date of the initial, complete credit request submittal. The Director shall determine whether a submittal is complete using the current credit request submittal requirements.
5. This Storm Water Utility Credit Policy shall take effect upon adoption of this ordinance.
19.19 ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION TO THE STORM WATER SYSTEM.
(1) PURPOSE/INTENT. The Purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Village of North Fond du Lac through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law, and s. NR 216.07(3)(a), Wis. Adm Code This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(a) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user.
(b) To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
(c) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
(2) DEFINITIONS. In addition to those defined in 19.05, for the purposes of 19.19, the following shall mean:
(a) Accidental Discharge: a discharge prohibited by this ordinance which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.
(b) Authorized Enforcement Agency: employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this ordinance.
(c) Best Management Practices (BMPs): schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
(d) Clean Water Act: The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
33
(e) Construction Activity: Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits and activities meeting the applicability requirements of the Village of North Fond du Lac Ordinance Chapter 20.04.. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
(f) Hazardous Materials: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
(g) Illicit Discharge: Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the MS4, except as exempted in 19.19(7) of this ordinance.
(h) Illegal Connections: An illegal connection is defined as either of the following:
1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4 including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or,
2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
(i) Industrial Activity: Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).
(j) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4): any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catchbasins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, culverts, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: (1)owned by the Village of North Fond du Lac; (2)not a combined sewer; and (3)not a part of a publicly owned treatment works.
(k) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit: Means a permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC §1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
(l) Non-Storm Water Discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
(m) Person: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner’s agent.
(n) Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; cokking grease, detergents, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
34
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
(o) Pollution: The contamination or other alteration of any water’s physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.
(p) Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
(q) Storm Water or Stormwater runoff: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
(r) Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan: A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Storm Water, Storm Water Conveyance Systems, and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent Practicable.
(s) Wastewater: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility.
(t) Water of the State: The meaning given is s. 281.01(18), Wis. Stats.
(3) APPLICABILITY. This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless otherwise authorized and explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
(4) RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION. The Village of North Fond du Lac shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
(5) SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this ordinance.
(6) ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY. The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend no imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(7) DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
(a) PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, or allow others under their control to discharge into the MS4 or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
35
applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows:
1. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted natural stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated-typically less than on PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants as determined by the administering authority in writing.
2. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety is exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance.
3. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
4. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
(b) PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illegal connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
4. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the administering authority requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the administering authority
(8) SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
(a) SUSPENSION DUE TO ILLICIT DISCHARGES IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS. The Village of North Fond du Lac may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
36
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the State. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the State, or to minimize danger to persons.
(b) SUSPENSION DUE TO THE DETECTION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
(9) INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
(a) APPLICABILITY. This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity WPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the administering authority prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(b) ACCESS TO FACILITIES.
1. The Village of North Fond du Lac shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
ordinance. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
2. Facility operators shall allow the Village of North Fond du Lac ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The Village of North Fond du Lac shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s storm water discharge.
4. The Village of North Fond du Lac has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the Village of North Fond du Lac and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village of North Fond du Lac access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of
37
this ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance.
7. If the Village of North Fond du Lac has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(10) REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. The Village of North Fond du Lac will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the MS4, or waters of the state. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(11) WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
(12) NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, MS4 or water of the state said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the
38
event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Village of North Fond du Lac within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill.
(13) ENFORCEMENT.
(a) NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Whenever the Village of North Fond du Lac finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
1. The notice of violation will contain:
a. The name and address of the alleged violator
b. The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure, or land upon which the violation is occurring or has occurred;
c. A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
d. A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this section and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
e. A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed.
2. Such notice may require without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting:
b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
d. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
e. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
f. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(14) APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within 10 days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
(15) ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 10 days of the decision of the municipal authority
39
upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
(16) COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION. Within 45 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objection to the amount of the assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessments against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 1sr day following discovery of the violation.
(17) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Ordinance. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of the ordinance, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(18) COMPENSATORY ACTION. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this Ordinance, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
(19) VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(20) CRIMINAL PROSECUTION. Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $5 to $500 dollars per violation per day. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorneys’ fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
(21) REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE. The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(22) ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect 1 day after
40
its final passage and adoption. All prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed.
1
Ordinance 2016-06 Chapter 20
EROSION CONTROL ORDINANCE
20.01. Authority
20.02. Findings of Fact
20.03. Purpose
20.04. Applicability and Jurisdiction
20.05. Definitions
20.06. Technical Standards
20.07. Performance Standards
20.08. Permitting Requirements, Procedures and Fees
20.09. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Statement and Amendments
20.10. Fee Schedule
20.11. Inspection
20.12. Enforcement
20.13. Appeals
20.14. Severability
20.15. Effective Date
20.01 AUTHORITY.
(1) This ordinance is adopted under the authority granted by s. 61.354, Wis. Stats. This ordinance supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under s. 61.35, Wis. Stats., that relate to construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in s. 61.354, Wis. Stats., s. 61.35, Wis. Stats., applies to this ordinance and to any amendments to this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body.
(3) The Village Board of Trustees hereby designates the administering authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under ss. 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(b) Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under s. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
20.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
The Village Board of Trustees finds that runoff from land disturbing construction activity carries a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants
2
to the waters of the state in the Village of North Fond du Lac.
20.03 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; prevent and control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth, by minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the state in the Village of North Fond du Lac.
20.04 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
(1) APPLICABILITY.
(a) This ordinance applies to the following land disturbing construction activities except as provided under sub. (b):
1. A construction site, which has 4,000 square feet or greater of land disturbing construction activity.
2. A construction site, which has 100 cubic yards or greater of excavation volume, filling volume, or some combination of excavation and filling volume.
3. A construction site, which has 100 linear feet or greater of land disturbance to a highway, street, driveway, swale, ditch, waters of the state, wetland, protective area, or other non-agricultural drainage facility which conveys concentrated flow. Wetlands shall be delineated in accordance with s. NR 103.08(1m).
(b) This ordinance does not apply to the following:
1. Land disturbing construction activity that includes the construction of 1- and 2-family residential dwellings that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale and that result in less than 1 acre of disturbance. These construction sites are regulated by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services under s. SPS 321.125 Wis. Adm. Code.
2. A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or regulations from the requirement to have a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued under chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 122, for land disturbing construction activity.
3. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural activity areas.
4. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
5. Mill and crush operations.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph (a), this ordinance applies to construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the administering authority, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety.
(2) JURISDICTION.
This ordinance applies to land disturbing construction activity on construction sites located within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(3) EXCLUSIONS.
This ordinance is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under s.
3
227.01 (1), Wis. Stats., but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under s. 281.33 (2), Wis. Stats.
20.05 DEFINITIONS.
(1) “Administering authority” means a governmental employee, or a regional planning commission empowered under s. 61.354, Wis. Stats., that is designated by the Village Board of Trustees to administer this ordinance.
(2) “Agricultural activity area” means the part of the farm where there is planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or outside yarding of livestock, including sod farms and silviculture. Practices in this area may include waterways, drainage ditches, diversions, terraces, farm lanes, excavation, filling and similar practices. The agricultural activity area does not include the agricultural production area.
(3) “Agricultural production area” means the part of the farm where there is concentrated production activity or impervious surfaces. Agricultural production areas include buildings, driveways, parking areas, feed storage structures, manure storage structures, and other impervious surfaces. The agricultural production area does not include the agricultural activity area.
(4) “Average annual rainfall” means a calendar year of precipitation, excluding snow, which is considered typical. For purposes of this ordinance, average annual rainfall means measured precipitation in Green Bay, Wisconsin between March 29 and November 25, 1969.
(5) "Best management practice” or “BMP” means structural or non-structural measures, practices,
techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
(6) “Business day” means a day the office of the administering authority is routinely and customarily open for business.
(7) “Cease and desist order” means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
(8) “Common plan of development or sale” means a development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one plan. A common plan of development or sale includes, but is not limited to, subdivision plats, certified survey maps, and other developments.
(9) “Construction site” means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development.
(10) “Design Storm” means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency and total depth of rainfall. The design storm shall be analyzed using the MSE4 NRCS rainfall distribution, 24-hour duration, and average soil moisture conditions as defined by NRCS.
(11) “Development” means residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, or other land uses and associated roads.
(12) “Division of land” means the creation from one or more parcels or building sites of additional parcels or building sites where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive partition within a 5 year period.
4
(13) “Erosion” means the process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
(14) “Erosion and sediment control plan” means a comprehensive plan developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during construction.
(15) “Extraterritorial” means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village.
(16) “Final stabilization” means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70 percent of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(17) “Governing body” means town board of supervisors, county board of supervisors, city council, village board of trustees or village council.
(18) “Land disturbing construction activity” (or “disturbance”) means any man-made alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities, and soil stockpiling.
(19) “MEP” or “maximum extent practicable” means the highest level of performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard identified within this ordinance. MEP
applies when the permit applicant demonstrates to the administering authority’s satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance level is the MEP, the permit applicant shall take intoaccount the best available technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions.
(20) “Performance standard” means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
(21) “Permit” means a written authorization made by the administering authority to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
(22) “Pollutant” has the meaning given in s. 283.01 (13), Wis. Stats.
(23) “Pollution” has the meaning given in s. 281.01 (10), Wis. Stats.
(24) “Protective area” has the meaning given in 20.07(3)(d) of the Village of North Fond du Lac Post-Construction Storm Water Management Ordinance.
(25) “Responsible party” means any entity holding fee title to the property or any entity performing services to meet the performance standards of this ordinance through a contract or other agreement.
(26) “Runoff” means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
5
(27) “Sediment” means settleable solid material that is transported by runoff, suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original location.
(28) “Separate storm sewer” means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
(b) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
(c) Is not draining to a storm water treatment device or system.
(d) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(29) “Silviculture” means activities including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burining, and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity.
(30) “Site” means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit application.
(31) “Stop work order” means an order issued by the administering authority which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
(32) “Targeted performance standard” means a performance standard that will apply in a specific area, where additional practices beyond those contained in this ordinance, are necessary to meet water quality standards. A total maximum daily load is an example of a targeted performance standard.
(33) “Total maximum daily load or TMDL” means the amount of pollutants specified as a function of
one or more water quality parameters, that can be discharged per day into a water quality limited segment and still ensure attainment of the applicable water quality standard.
(34) "Technical standard" means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method.
(35) “Waters of the state” has the meaning given in s. 281.01 (18), Wis. Stats.
20.06 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
(1) DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. All BMPs required to comply with this ordinance shall meet the design criteria, standards and specifications based on any of the following:
(a) Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Technical standards and other guidance identified within the NEWSC Storm Water Reference Guide.
(c) For this ordinance, average annual basis is calculated using the appropriate annual rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the R factor, or an equivalent design storm using an MSE4 NRCS rainfall distribution, with consideration given to the geographic location of the site and the period of disturbance.
(2) OTHER STANDARDS. Other technical standards not identified or developed in sub. (1), may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the administering authority.
20.07 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
6
(1) RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The responsible party shall implement an erosion and sediment control plan, developed in accordance with 20.09 that incorporates the requirements of this section.
(2) PLAN. A written erosion and sediment control plan shall be developed in accordance with 20.09 and implemented for each construction site.
(3) REQUIREMENTS. The erosion and sediment control plan shall meet the following minimum requirements to the maximum extent practicable:
(a) BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff from the construction site as follows.
1. For construction sites with 1 acre or greater of land disturbing construction activity, discharge no more than 5 tons per acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial grade to final stabilization. No person shall be required to exceed the performance standard of 5 tons per acre per year to meet the requirements of this paragraph. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be used alone or in combination to meet the requirements of this paragraph. Credit toward meeting the sediment reduction shall be given for limiting the duration or area, or both, of land disturbing construction activity, or other appropriate mechanism.
2. For construction sites with less than 1 acre of land disturbing construction activity, reduce the total suspended solids load using BMPs from the NEWSC Storm Water Reference Guide or the WDNR Technical Standards. These sites are not required to satisfy a numeric performance standard.
(b) Notwithstanding par. (a), if BMPs cannot be designed and implemented to meet the 5 tons per acre per year goal, the plan shall include a written and site-specific explanation as to why the 5 tons per acre per year goal is not attainable and the sediment load shall be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
(c) Where appropriate, the plan shall include sediment controls to do all of the following to the maximum extent practicable:
1. Prevent tracking of sediment from the construction site onto roads and other paved surfaces.
2. Prevent the discharge of sediment as part of site de-watering.
3. Protect the separate storm drain inlet structure from receiving sediment.
(d) The use, storage and disposal of building materials, chemicals, cement, concrete truck washout, litter, sanitary waste, and other compounds and materials used on the construction site shall be managed during the construction period, to prevent their entrance into storm sewers and waters of the state. However, projects that require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by this paragraph.
(4) LOCATION. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be located prior to runoff entering waters of the state.
(5) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The administering authority may establish requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the administering authority determines that an added level of protection is needed for sensitive resources.
20.08 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES AND FEES.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No responsible party may commence a land disturbing construction activity subject to this ordinance without receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment control
7
plan for the site and a permit from the administering authority.
(2) PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES. At least one responsible party desiring to undertake a land disturbing construction activity subject to this ordinance shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of 20.09 and shall pay an application fee to the administering authority. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the administering authority to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PERMIT APPLICATION. The administering authority shall review any permit application that is submitted with an erosion and sediment control plan, and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used:
(a) Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of a complete permit application, as required by sub. (2), the administering authority shall inform the applicant whether the application and plan are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) If the permit application and plan are approved, the administering authority shall issue the permit.
(c) If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the administering authority shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval.
(d) The administering authority may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the administering authority shall have 30 calendar days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan is either approved or disapproved.
(e) Failure by the administering authority to inform the permit applicant of a decision within 30 calendar days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
(4) SURETY BOND. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the administering authority may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved erosion control plan and any permit conditions.
(5) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. All permits shall require the responsible party to:
(a) Notify the administering authority within 48 hours of commencing any land disturbing construction activity.
(b) Notify the administering authority of completion of any BMPs within the next business day after their installation.
(c) Obtain permission in writing from the administering authority prior to any modification pursuant to 20.09(3) of the erosion and sediment control plan.
(d) Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment control plan.
(e) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment control plan.
(f) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainage ways resulting from land disturbing construction activities and document repairs in weekly inspection reports.
8
(g) Conduct construction site inspections at least once per week and within 24 hours after a precipitation event of 0.5 inches or greater. Repair or replace erosion and sediment control BMPs as necessary within 24 hours of an inspection or notification that repair or replacement is needed. Maintain, at the construction site, weekly written reports of all inspections. Weekly inspection reports shall include all of the following: date, time and location of the construction site inspection; the name of individual who performed the inspection; an assessment of the condition of erosion and sediment controls; a description of any erosion and sediment control BMP implementation and maintenance performed; and a description of the present phase of land disturbing construction activity at the construction site.
(h) Allow the administering authority to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the control plan. Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan, storm water management plan, amendments, weekly inspection reports, and permit at the construction site until permit coverage is terminated.
(i) The permit applicant shall post the “Certificate of Permit Coverage” in a conspicuous location at the construction site.
(6) PERMIT CONDITIONS. Permits issued under this section may include conditions established by administering authority in addition to the requirements set forth in sub. (5), where needed to assure compliance with the performance standards in 20.07.
(7) PERMIT DURATION. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 180 days, or the length of the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The administering authority may extend the period one or more times for up to an additional 180 days. The administering authority may require additional BMPs as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
(8) MAINTENANCE. The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance until the site has undergone final stabilization.
(9) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The administering authority may prescribe requirements less stringent for applicants seeking a permit for a construction site with less than 1 acre of disturbance.
20.09 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN, STATEMENT, AND AMENDMENTS.
(1) PLAN REQUIREMENTS. The erosion and sediment control plan required under 20.07 (2) shall comply with the NEWSC Storm Water Reference Guide and contain at a minimum the following information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the landowner and responsible parties.
(b) A legal description of the property proposed to be developed.
(c) A site map with property lines, disturbed limits, and drainage patterns.
(d) Total area of the site and total area of the construction site that is expected to be disturbed by construction activities.
(e) Performance standards applicable to site.
(f) Proposed best management practices.
9
(2) EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN STATEMENT. For each construction site identified under 20.04 (1)(c), an erosion and sediment control plan statement shall be prepared. This statement shall be submitted to the administering authority. The control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, including a site map. Further, it shall also include the best management practices that will be used to meet the requirements of the ordinance, including the site development schedule.
(3) For construction sites with greater than one acre of disturbance, the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include construction site soil loss and sediment discharge calculations in accordance with current WDNR Technical Standards and Guidance.
(4) AMENDMENTS. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following occur:
(a) There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not otherwise been addressed in the plan.
(b) The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction site runoff.
(c) The administering authority notifies the applicant of changes needed in the plan.
(4) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The administering authority may prescribe requirements less stringent for applicants seeking a permit for a construction site with less than 1 acre of disturbance.
20.10 FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees referred to in other sections of this ordinance shall be established by the administering authority and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the administering authority shall be available for review in the office of the Department of Public Works.
20.11 INSPECTION.
If land disturbing construction activities are being carried out without a permit required by this ordinance, the administering authority may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of ss. 66.0119(1), (2), and (3), Wis. Stats.
20.12 ENFORCEMENT.
(1) The administering authority may post a stop-work order if any of the following occurs:
(a) Any land disturbing construction activity regulated under this ordinance is being undertaken without a permit.
(b) The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner.
(c) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
(2) If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stop-work order posted under this section or fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the administering authority may revoke the permit.
(3) If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not cease the activity after being notified by the administering authority, or if a responsible party violates a stop-work order posted under sub. (1), the administering authority may request the village attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
(4) The administering authority may retract the stop-work order issued under sub. (1) or the permit revocation under sub. (2).
10
(5) After posting a stop-work order under sub. (1), the administering authority may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with this ordinance. The administering authority may go on the land and commence the work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed under this subsection by the administering authority, plus interest at the rate authorized by the Village Board shall be billed to the responsible party or recovered from the surety bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant to subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(6) Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $1000 and the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(7) Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunctional proceedings.
20.13 APPEALS.
(1) BOARD OF APPEALS. The board of appeals created pursuant to section 1.04(3)(a) of the village's ordinance pursuant to 61.354(4)(b), Wis. Stats.:
(a) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the administering authority in administering this ordinance except for cease and desist orders obtained under 20.12 (3).
(b) Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this ordinance which are not contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship; and
(c) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
(2) WHO MAY APPEAL. Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any office, department, board, or bureau of the Village of North Fond du Lac affected by any decision of the administering authority.
20.14 SEVERABILITY.
If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
20.15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its adoption and publication. The above and foregoing ordinance was duly adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of North Fond du Lac on the 17h day of October, 2016.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002

4-19-93
rev 1-26-18
CHAPTER 21
ZONING
CODE

i
CHAPTER 21
ZONING CODE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Title Page
PART "A" - GENERAL INFORMATION
21.01 INTRODUCTION
(1) Authority 1
(2) Title 1
(3) General Purpose 1
(4) Intent and Purposes 1
(5) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 3
(6) Interpretation 3
(7) Severability and Non-Liability 3
(8) Repeal and Effective Date 3
21.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) Control Over Use 5 (2) Control Over Site 6
(3) Control Over Bulk 8
(4) Control Over Corner-Lot Sight Lines 12
(5) Regulations Governing Airports and Their Surroundings 12
(6) Mobile Homes, Trailers, Boats, Snowmobiles, Semis, Buses 12
(7) Sewerage and Water Systems 13
(8) Floodplain Requirements 14
(9) Exemption for Public Utilities 14
(10) Storage of Junk, Refuse, and Disabled or Damaged 14
Motor Vehicles
21.03 ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT MAP
(1) Establishment of Districts 17
(2) Annexed Land 17
(3) Vacation of Streets 17
(4) Zoning Map 17
(5) Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries 18
(6) Lot in Two or More Districts 18
ii
PART "B" – ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
21.04 CONSERVANCY AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
(1) Intent 21 (2) Single-Family Detached Dwellings 22
(3) Open Space and Conservation Uses and Public Utilities 22
(4) Shoreland District 22
21.041 SHORELAND – WETLAND DISTRICT
(1) Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Statement of
Purpose and Title 29
(2) General Provisions 29
(3) (S)-Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District 31
(4) Nonconforming Structures and Uses 36
(5) Administrative Provisions 36
(6) Amending Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Regulations 40
(7) Enforcement and Penalties 42
(8) Definitions 42
(9) Schedule 21.041-A Land Uses or Activities in
Shoreland, Conservancy, and Agricultural Districts 46
21.05 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
(1) Intent 47
(2) General Provisions 48
(3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities
In Residential Districts 50
(4) Schedule 21.05-A Land Uses or Activities 55
(5) Schedule 21.05-B Bulk Requirements in Residential Districts 59
21.06 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
(1) Intent 61
(2) General Provisions 61
(3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities 63
In Business Districts
(4) Design Standards for Land Uses in (B-2) Business District 66
(5) Schedule 21.06-A Land Uses or Activities in Business Districts 69
(6) Schedule 21.06-B Bulk Requirements in Business Districts 73
21.07 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
(1) Intent 75
(2) General Provisions 75
(3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities 77
in Industrial Districts
(4) Schedule 21.07-A Land Uses or Activities in Industrial Districts 80
(5) Schedule 21.07-B Bulk Requirements in Industrial Districts 83
iii
21.071 BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT
(1) Intent 85
(2) General Provisions 85
(3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities in
Business Park Districts 86
(5) Schedule 21.071-A Land Uses or Activities 89
(6) Schedule 21.071-B Bulk Requirements 93
21.08 OFFICE/INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
(1) Intent 95
(2) General Provisions 95 (3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities
in Office/Institutional District 96
(4) Schedule 21.08-A Land Uses or Activities in
Office/Institutional District 99
21.09 MOBILE HOME DISTRICT
(1) Intent 101
(2) Permitted Uses 101
(3) General Provisions 101
(4) Declaration of Restrictions/Restrictive Covenants 107
(5) Detailed Site Plans and Information Required 107
(6) Management 108
(7) Licenses 109
(8) Definitions 110
21.10 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
(1) Purpose of the Planned Unit Development District 113
(2) Types of Planned Unit Developments 113
(3) Permitted Uses 113
(4) Special Uses 113
(5) District Standards 113
(6) Preliminary Development Plan Application 115
(7) Procedure for Review of a Preliminary Planned Unit Development 116
(8) Environmental Review and Design Standards 117
(9) Action by the Village Board on the Preliminary
Development Plan Application (PDPA) 119
(10) Application for Final Development Plan Approval 119
(11) Final Development Plan Approval 119
(12) Basis for Approval of the Final Development Plan 120
(13) Filing of Final Development Plan 122
(14) Official Map Designation 122
(15) Final Development Plan Changes 123
(16) Termination of Final Development Plan Approval 123
(17) Extended Staged Planned Unit Development 123
(18) Building Permit Approval 123
iv
PART "C" - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
21.11 SPECIAL USE PERMITS
(1) Statement of Purpose - Special 125
(2) Authority of the Plan Commission and Village Board;
Requirements 125
(3) Initiation of Special Use 126
(4) Application for Special Use Permit 126
(5) Hearing on Application 126
(6) Notice of Hearing on Application 127
(7) Standards for Special Use Permits 127
(8) Denial of Application for Special Use Permit 128
(9) Conditions and Guarantees 129
(10) Validity of Special Use Permit 130
(11) Complaints Regarding Special Use Permits 131
(12) Specific Requirements for Certain Land Uses and Activities 131
21.12 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
(1) General 143
(2) Satellite Earth Station (Satellite Dish) 149
(3) Central Air-Conditioning Equipment 150
(4) Outside Storage – General 152
(5) Outside Storage of Firewood 152
(6) Fences and Hedges 153
(7) Swimming Pools 157
(8) Antennas and Towers 160
21.13 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY, PARKING, AND LOADING
(1) Vision Clearance Triangle 165
(2) Highway Access 165
(3) General Parking and Loading Regulations 165
(4) Off-Street Parking 167
(5) Off-Street Loading 169
(6) Schedule 21.13 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements 172
(7) Remarks for Schedule 21.13 174
21.14 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
(1) Purpose 175
(2) General Provisions 175 (3) Special Signs and Devices 177
(4) Prohibited Signs 180
(5) Special Sign District 180
(6) Construction and Maintenance 181
(7) Revocation 182
(8) Schedule 21.14-A Design Standards and Specifications for Signs 183
v
21.15 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS – INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS
(1) Intent 185
(2) Noise 185
(3) Vibration 185
(4) External Lighting 185
(5) Odor 185
(6) Particulate Emissions 185
(7) Visible Emissions 186 (8) Hazardous Pollutants 186
21.16 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
(1) Intent 187
(2) Authority to Continue Existing Nonconforming Buildings,
Structures, and Uses 187
(3) Moving of a Nonconforming Building or Structure 187
(4) Restoration of Damaged Nonconforming Buildings or Structures 188
(5) Discontinuance of Use of Nonconforming Building or Structure 188
(6) Change of Use in Nonconforming Building or Structure 188
(7) Nonconforming Use of Land 188
(8) Signs and Billboards 189
PART "D" - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
21.17 GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM
(1) Intent 191
(2) Zoning Administrator 191
(3) Role of Specific Village Officials in Zoning Administration 193
(4) Certification of Compliance 193
(5) Plan Review and Approval 194
(6) Occupancy Permit 198
21.18 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
(1) General 201
(2) Procedure 201
(3) Public Hearing 201
(4) Findings 201
(5) Conditions and Safeguards 202
(6) Plan Commission Recommendation 202
(7) Village Board Approval 202
(8) Fees 202
vi
21.19 BOARD OF APPEALS
(1) Establishment of Board 205
(2) Membership and Terms of Office 205
(3) Procedures, Meetings, Records and Decisions 205
(4) Jurisdiction 206
(5) General Powers 207
(6) Application Procedures 207
(7) Appeals from Administrative Decisions 208
(8) Appeals for a Variance 209
(9) Appeals for Interpretations 210
(10) Public Hearings 210
(11) Appeal of Board of Appeals Decisions 211
21.20 AMENDMENTS
(1) Power of Amendments 213
(2) Initiation 213
(3) Procedures 213
(4) Public Hearing and Notice 213
(5) Final Approval 213
21.21 ENFORCEMENT, REMEDIES, PENALTIES
(1) Enforcement 215
(2) Remedies 215
(3) Razing, Removal, Demolition Orders 215
(4) Penalties 215
PART "E" - DEFINITIONS
21.22 DEFINITIONS
(1) Application 217
(2) Rules 217
(3) Definitions 217
HISTORY OF MODIFICATION 237
4-19-93 Chapter 21-1
PART "A"
GENERAL INFORMATION
SECTION 21.01 INTRODUCTION
(1) Authority.
This Chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Sections 61.35, 61.351, and 87.30 of the Wisconsin Statutes and amendments thereto.
State Law Reference: Sections 61.35 and 61.351, Wis. Stats.
(2) Title.
This Chapter shall be known as, referred to and cited as the "Zoning Code, Village of North Fond du Lac" and is hereinafter referred to as the "Code" or "Chapter."
(3) General Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the people of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(4) Intent and Purposes.
The general intent and purposes in view of this Chapter are to regulate and restrict the use of all structures, lands and waters and to:
(a) Promote and protect the comfort, public health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the people;
(b) Divide the Village into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business and manufacturing and other specified uses;
(c) Protect the character and the stability of the residential, business, manufacturing and other districts within the Village and to promote the orderly and beneficial development thereof;
(d) Regulate lot coverage, the intensity of use of lot areas and the size and location of all structures so as to prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation and drainage;
4-19-93 Chapter 21-2
(e) Regulate population density and distribution so as to avoid sprawl or undue concentration and to facilitate the provision of adequate public services, utilities and other public requirements;
(f) Promote the development of a well-balanced diversity of housing types and densities;
(g) Regulate parking, loading and access so as to lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of streets and highways;
(h) Secure safety from fire, panic, flooding, pollution, contamination and other dangers;
(i) Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Village;
(j) Preserve and protect the beauty of the Village of North Fond du Lac;
(k) To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
(l) To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district;
(m) Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of the surface and subsurface waters;
(n) Further the maintenance of safe and healthy water conditions;
(o) Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize expenditures for flood relief and flood control projects;
(p) Provide for and protect a variety of suitable commercial and industrial sites;
(q) Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial streets and highways;
(r) Implement those municipal, county, watershed and regional comprehensive plans or components of such plans adopted by the Village;
(s) Provide for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter; and to provide penalties for the violation of this Chapter.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-3
(5) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall govern.
(6) Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the Village.
(7) Severability and Non-Liability.
(a) If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(b) If any application of this Chapter to a particular structure, land or water is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgement shall not be applicable to any other structure, land or water not specifically included in said judgement.
(c) The Village does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the Village, its agencies or employees for any flood damages, sanitation problems or structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon and conformance with this Chapter.
(8) Repeal and Effective Date.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Village inconsistent or conflicting with this Chapter, to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict only, are hereby repealed.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-4
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-5
SECTION 21.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) Control Over Use.
(a) NEW USES.
Any use of a building, structure or lot established after the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, shall be for a use which is set forth in this Ordinance as a permitted use, or a use permitted with special conditions attached, or a use permitted by a special use permit, and shall comply with the regulations applicable to the district in which such building, structure or lot is located.
(b) EXISTING USES OR BUILDING PERMITS.
1. Where a building permit for a building or structure has been duly issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and where construction has been begun within six (6) months of such effective date of such permit and is being prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans, and further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy for the use originally designated when construction is completed according to approved plans.
2. Where the use of a structure or the use of land existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance is made nonconforming by the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions of Section 21.16 shall apply to such use.
3. Where the use of a building, structure or lot lawfully exists on the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, and is classified by this Ordinance as a use permitted by special use permit in the district where it is located, such use shall be continued as a lawful special use. Any expansion or major alteration of such legally preexisting special use shall require a special use permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Section 21.11 of this Ordinance.
(c) SPECIAL USES.
1. To provide for the location of special classes of uses which are deemed desirable for the public welfare within a given district or districts, but which are potentially incompatible with typical uses specified as permitted uses in the various schedules of this Ordinance, a classification of special uses is hereby established and specific special uses are listed in the various schedules.
2. An application for a special use permit shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 21.11 of this Ordinance. The
4-19-93 Chapter 21-6
Village Board may thereafter grant a special use permit when the proposed use is in accordance with such statutory requirements and in compliance with regulations herein set forth in Section 21.11 and additional regulations that the Village Board considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
3. Development plans and specifications shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions for site plan review.
(2) Control Over Site.
(a) STREET FRONTAGE. To be buildable, a lot shall comply with the frontage requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
(b) PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES. All principal structures shall be located on a lot. Only one (1) principal structure shall be located, erected or moved onto a lot. The Plan Commission may permit as a special use more than one (1) principal structure per lot in any district where more than one (1) such structure is needed for the orderly development of the parcel. Where additional structures are permitted, the Plan Commission may impose additional yard requirements, landscaping requirements or parking requirements, or require a minimum separation distance between principal structures.
(c) DEDICATED STREET. Building permits shall only be issued for a lot which abuts a public street dedicated to its proposed width. Exceptions may be made in the following circumstances:
1. A dedicated access easement is provided;
2. The lot is legally combined under common ownership with another lot that does abut a public street dedicated to its proposed width.
(d) LOTS ABUTTING MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICTS. Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and rear yards not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting district. The street yard setbacks in the less restrictive district shall be modified for a distance of not less than sixty (60) feet from the more restrictive district boundary line so such street yard setbacks shall be not less than the average of the street yards required in both districts.
(e) SITE SUITABILITY. No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is held unsuitable for such use or structure by the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low percolation rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of this community. The Plan Commission, in applying the
4-19-93 Chapter 21-7
provisions of the Section, shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence contesting such unsuitability if he so desires. Thereafter, the Plan Commission may affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability when making its recommendation to the Village Board.
(f) PRESERVATION OF TOPOGRAPHY. In order to protect the property owner from possible damage due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands and to aid in preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of the landscape, no change in the existing topography of any land shall be made which would result in increasing any portion of the slope to a ratio greater than one and one-half (1½) horizontal to one (1) vertical, within a distance of twenty (20) feet from the property line, except with the written consent of the owner of the abutting property and with the approval of the Director of Public Works, or which would alter the existing drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect the adjoining property. In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved, and all slopes shall be protected against erosion.
(g) DECKS.
1. DEFINITIONS
a. Deck: An unenclosed exterior structure, attached or adjacent to the exterior wall of a building, which has a floor, but no roof.
b. Attached Deck: Any deck that is physically connected to the principal building or accessory structure.
c. Detached Deck: Any deck that is not physically attached to the principal building or accessory structure and is not more than 24 inches above the ground elevation adjacent to the deck as determined by the Building/Zoning Inspector.
d. Swimming Pool Decks: Any deck that serves a swimming pool. Refer to the Section 21.12(7) for swimming pool structure information.
2. SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
a. Attached Deck
R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8
Front Yard 30 25 25 25 25 25 30 25
Side Yard 12 ½ 10 6 6 6 12 ½ 15 6
Rear Yard 15 15 15 15 15 20 50 15
4-19-93 Chapter 21-8
• Corner lots will have the front yard set back applied to the side yard adjacent to the street.
• All areas zoned B1 (Business District), B2 (Business District),O (Office), BP (Business Park), I1 (Industrial), I2 (Industrial), MH (Mobile Home District), PUD (Planned Unit Development and C (Conservancy) will be reviewed using the bulk requirements listing in their specific zoning section.
b. Detached Deck.
R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8
Front Yard Not Allowed in the Front Yard Set Back Area.
Side Yard 12 ½ 10 6 6 6 12 ½ 15 6
Rear Yard 15 15 15 15 15 20 50 15
• Corner lots will not have decks located in the front yard setback area. The front yard setback area will apply to all street sides of the lot.
• All areas zoned B1 (Business District), B2 (Business District), O (Office), BP (Business Park), I1 (Industrial), I2 (Industrial), MH (Mobile Home District), PUD (Planned Unit Development and C (Conservancy) will be require at least a 20 foot rear setback and must comply with all other bulk requirements of the zoning district.
• Any detached deck elevated more than 24 inches off will require plan commission approval.
c. Swimming Pool Deck. No part of the swimming pool deck shall be closer than ten (10) feet from any side or rear lot line or closer than the front setback line of the main building. Refer to the Section 21.12(7) for swimming pool structure information.
(3) Control Over Bulk.
(a) NEW STRUCTURES.
New structures shall conform with the bulk requirements established herein for the district in which each such structure is located.
(b) EXISTING STRUCTURES.
Existing structures shall not be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted, or relocated in such a manner as to conflict or further conflict with the bulk regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which such structures are located, except under those conditions when conversion is permitted by this Ordinance.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-9
(c) EXISTING RESIDENTIAL LOT OF RECORD.
A lot of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, which lot is in a residential district and does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance as to area or width, may be used for a single-family detached dwelling provided it shall meet all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the following additional requirements.
1. The applicant shall furnish with the application for a building permit a drawing to scale showing the lot upon which he proposes to erect a single-family detached dwelling and also showing the lots on either side of the said lot with all improvements thereon and widths of adjoining side yards and any projections of buildings or structures therein duly plotted on said drawing. The applicant shall, by affidavit, certify that he is not, and has not been at any time since the effective date of this Ordinance, the owner of any interest, direct or indirect, in a contiguous lot or lots.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a permit for erecting a single-family detached dwelling on the subject lot upon compliance with all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
(d) HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE.
1. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which the structure is located, except as noted below.
a. Architectural projections, such as spires, belfries, parapet walls, cupolas, domes, flues and chimneys are exempt from the height limitations of this Chapter.
b. Special structures, such as elevator penthouses, gas tanks, grain elevators, radio and television receiving antennas, manufacturing equipment and necessary mechanical appurtenances, cooling towers, water storage towers or tanks, fire towers, substations, smoke stacks and flag poles are exempt from the height limitations of this Chapter.
c. Essential services, utilities, water towers, electric power and communication transmission lines are exempt from the height limitations of this Chapter.
d. Communication structures, such as radio and television transmission and relay towers, aerials and observation towers, shall not exceed in height three (3) times their distance from the nearest lot line.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-10
e. Agricultural structures, such as barns, silos and windmills, shall not exceed in height twice their distance from the nearest lot line.
f. Public or semi-public facilities, such as schools, churches, hospitals, monuments, sanitariums, libraries, governmental offices and stations, may be erected to a height of sixty (60) feet, provided all required yards are increased not less than one (1) foot for each foot the structure exceeds the district's maximum height requirement.
2. The grade from which structure height is measured shall be the existing or established grade at the building setback line midway between the side lot lines. Where the buildable area has a slope between any two (2) corners, the grade from which the building height is measured shall be at the uphill building line midway between the side lot lines.
(e) TWO OR MORE USES ON ONE LOT.
When two (2) or more permitted or special uses are provided in the same building or on the same lot the required minimum lot area, setback and yard requirements shall be the largest which would be required for any of the uses individually. Minimum off-street parking requirements shall be the total of that required for each use on the lot.
(f) LOT DIVISION.
No lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership unless all lots resulting from each such division shall have lot areas and widths as required in this Ordinance, have complied with the subdivision control ordinance, and have paid a public site fee in accordance with Section 8.96.
(g) YARDS AND OPEN SPACE.
1. All yards and open space required by this ordinance shall be located on the same lot as the principal structure or use and shall not be less than the minimum specified for the district and the applicable schedule of bulk requirements, unless a special exception has been granted by the Board of Appeals or the provisions of Section 21.02 (3)(i) or 21.12 are applicable.
2. No yard shall be less than the minimum specified in the application schedule of bulk requirements, unless a variance has been granted by the Board of Appeals, except that side and rear yard setbacks may conform with existing conditions.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-11
3. Except as may be otherwise provided for in Section 21.16 of this ordinance, no yard allocated to a building, structure or use existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be subsequently reduced so as to be less than the applicable yard requirements of this Ordinance. When a structure existing on the effective date of this Ordinance extends into a yard which adjoins a street, the setback line established by such structure may be extended provided that on a corner lot, no such extension is closer than twenty (20) feet from the intersection of the rights-of-way lines of the intersecting streets. No part of any lot, yard, parking area or other space required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use.
(h) THROUGH LOTS.
On through lots both street right-of-way lines shall be front lot lines and front yard setbacks shall apply. For purposes of siting accessory buildings and other yard obstructions the requirements for rear yards may be applied to one front yard area, as determined by the Board of Appeals, in each individual case.
(i) FRONT YARD SETBACK.
Where at least forty percent (40%) of the lots fronting on a street within a block have established front yard building setbacks which are less than required by this Ordinance for the zoning district in which such lots are located, the minimum setback requirement for new development in such block shall be no less than the front yard depth of the lot which has the least degree of nonconformity. In cases where established front yard setbacks are less than required by this ordinance, the minimum required setback shall be the average of the nearest adjacent nonconforming setbacks.
(j) SCREENS AND BUFFERS.
1. Required Screens and Buffers. Where screens or buffers are required by this Chapter or the Plan Commission to reduce the impact of proposed uses on adjacent properties, the following standards shall be followed. Buffer yards and screens may be required jointly or separately.
2. Buffer Yards. Buffer yards are horizontal separations along lot lines that are intended to increase the physical separation between incompatible uses. The width of the required buffer yard shall be determined by the Plan Commission or Zoning Administrator. The minimum width shall be ten (10) feet.
3. Screens. Screens are barriers located in a limited space of ten (10) feet or less intended to perform a buffering effect, particularly for noise reduction or visual screening. Screens may consist of existing or planted vegetation, fences, walls, earth berms or similar techniques. Plant screens shall be
4-19-93 Chapter 21-12
sufficient to provide a year-round screen within three (3) years of installation. Walls or earth berms shall be required where noise reduction is necessary. Screen plantings shall be permanently maintained by the owner of the property, and any plant materials which do not live shall be replaced within six (6) months.
(4) Control Over Corner-Lot Sight Lines.
(a) At all street intersections where there is no traffic light control, no obstruction of vision shall be erected, installed, planted, parked or otherwise placed on any lot between two-and-one-half (2.5) and ten (10) feet above the grade of the sidewalk adjacent to such streets and within the vision clearance triangle as defined in Section 21.13 of this Ordinance.
(b) Allowable installations within the vision clearance triangle are: utility and street light poles when no safer alternative is available; trees with growth characteristics which develop no significant foliage which will obstruct view in the vision clearance area; official signs and signals; signs in accordance with Section 21.14; and on street parking when traffic controls exist which permit decreased sight lines.
(5) Regulations Governing Airports and Their Surroundings.
Airports and their surroundings are subject to the rules and regulations of the Wisconsin State Aeronautics Commission and where property within the Village is located within an area which has an officially approved approach plan, the height limitations of the approach plan shall, if more restrictive than those contained in this Ordinance, take precedence.
(6) Mobile Homes, Trailers, Boats, Snowmobiles, Semis, Buses.
(a) Except as otherwise set forth in this section, mobile homes, travel trailers or camping trailers shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes except in a lawfully established mobile home park or tourist camp. No more than one camping trailer, travel trailer or motor home may be parked or stored in the open on a lot in a residence district and then only at the side or rear of the principal building.
(b) Trailers shall not be permanently affixed to the ground as a principal or accessory structure on a lot in any district except that a business trailer meeting the requirements of the building code may be permitted by special permit.
(c) Temporary parking and use of a mobile home or trailer shall be permitted when a temporary permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator for the following purposes:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-13
1. Use for temporary lodging on a lot containing a dwelling, provided such mobile home is not parked or used thereon for more than four days in any consecutive 30-day period.
2. Use for a temporary office or for storage incidental to and only for the period of construction of a building development provided such mobile home or trailer is located on the same or contiguous lot as said building development and moved promptly at the end of construction or upon notice by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Use as an interim dwelling during construction of a permanent residence or in the event a permanent residence has been damaged or destroyed.
Any temporary permit issued under the provisions of this section shall expire in twelve (12) months from the date of issuance but may be extended for up to twelve (12) additional months, for cause, by the Zoning Administrator.
The request for extension must be made in writing and state the causes that require an extension; the Zoning Administrator's approval of the extension must also be made in writing.
(d) Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained on any lot, except such small tents as are customarily used for recreation purposes and are located on the same lot as a dwelling. Temporary use of tents for religious, amusement and recreation, business or manufacturing purposes shall be permitted by special permit.
(e) Boats, snowmobiles, cargo trailers, recreation vehicles and similar vehicles may be parked or stored in the open when customary in the operation of a lawfully established principal use, and one such vehicle may be stored or parked on a residential lot provided that it is not located in any required front yard and no major repair, disassembly or rebuilding operations are conducted thereon. Recreational vehicles and travel trailers under 35 feet in length and licensed where appropriate may be parked in a front yard driveway for loading, unloading, and maintenance reasons for no more than 48 hours per seven day period. (O-2018-08)
(f) Vehicles and/ or equipment not normally associated with a residential use are specifically prohibited from being parked outdoors on a residential property include but are not limited to: semi-trucks, semi-trailers, walk-in trucks or vans, dump trucks, school buses, and passenger vehicles over twenty-one feet in length. EXCEPTION: a maximum of one (1) commercial vehicle per dwelling may be parked outdoors on a driveway in a residential property if it is used by the resident of the dwelling unit and has a gross vehicle weight of 12,000 pounds or less and is less than twenty-one feet in length. (O-2018-08)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-14
(g) No more than one (1) vehicle at a time may be offered for sale by owner. Such vehicle may not be parked in any yard while advertised for sale.
(7) Sewerage and Water Systems.
(a) Each use hereafter established within the Village which requires sewer and water facilities shall be served by public or community sewerage and water systems.
(b) The above to the contrary notwithstanding, such uses, hereafter established on lots in areas that are not served with public sewer and/or water systems, may be served with individual sewage disposal systems and/or private wells, provided that the Village Board shall find after receiving recommendations of the Plan Commission that it is impracticable or unnecessary to require public sewerage and/or water systems or install community systems to serve the area.
(c) Installation of individual sewage disposal systems and private wells or community sewer and water systems shall be in accordance with standards and specifications set forth in applicable laws of the Village, County, and State, except that in no case shall leaching beds be located in a required side yard.
(8) Floodplain Requirements.
All use of floodplain land shall be in accordance with Chapter 9, the Floodplain Ordinance of the North Fond du Lac Municipal Code.
(9) Exemption for Public Utilities.
The following public utility installations are permitted in any district: poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, underground vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves or any other similar distributing installations. However, such installations shall conform with applicable Federal, State, County and Village laws.
(10) Storage of Junk, Refuse, and Disabled or Damaged Motor Vehicles.
The open storage of junk, refuse, scrap, disabled or damaged motor vehicles, whether awaiting repair or not, is prohibited in all zoning districts. Enclosed storage, when permitted within a zoning district, shall be completely surrounded by a solid fence or wall which completely obscures vision of the storage from beyond the property.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-15
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-16
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-17
SECTION 21.03 ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT MAP
(1) Establishment of Districts.
(a) DISTRICTS. For the purpose of this Chapter, present and future, provision is hereby made for the division of the Village of North Fond du Lac into the following basic zoning districts:
1. S Shoreland District
2. C Conservancy District
3. A-1 Agricultural District
4. A-T Agricultural Transition District
5. R-1 Residential District - Single Family, Low Density
6. R-2 Residential District - Single Family, Moderate Density
7. R-3 Residential District - Single Family, Medium Density
8. R-4 Residential District - Single Family, High Density
9. R-5 Residential District - Two Family
10. R-6 Residential District - Multiple Family
11. R-7 Residential District - Temporary Unclassified
12. R-8 Residential District - Manufactured Housing
13. B-1 Business District - General
14. B-2 Business District - Highway
15. I-1 Manufacturing District - General
16. I-2 Manufacturing District - Limited
17. O Office/Institutional District
18. MH Mobile Home District
19. PUD Planned Unit Development District
(2) Annexed Land.
Any addition to the incorporated area of the Village by annexation or other means shall be automatically classified in the (R-7) Residential District - Temporary Unclassified for zoning purposes pending adoption of a permanent zoning ordinance designation.
The Fond du Lac County shoreland zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation remain in effect but shall be administered by the municipality for all areas annexed by the municipality after the adoption of this Ordinance. These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official annexation records. The Fond du Lac County shoreland zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal Zoning Administrator.
(3) Vacation of Streets. Unless otherwise specified in the vacation action, vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the vacated land reverts.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-18
(4) Zoning Map.
(a) The Village of North Fond du Lac is hereby divided into zoning districts as shown upon a map designated as the Official Zoning Map of the Village of North Fond du Lac, adopted and made a part of this Chapter. The Official Zoning Map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this Ordinance and shall have the same force and effect as if the matters and information set forth by said map were fully described herein. The Official Zoning Map shall be properly attested and kept on file along with the text of the Official Zoning Regulations in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
(b) The district boundaries shall be determined by measurement from and as shown on the Official Zoning Map, and in case of any question as to the interpretation of such boundary lines, the Plan Commission shall interpret the map according to the reasonable intent of this ordinance. Unless otherwise specifically indicated or dimensioned on the map, the district boundaries are normally lot lines; section, quarter section or sixteenth section lines; or the centerlines of streets, highways, railways or alleys.
(5) Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(a) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(b) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
(c) Boundaries indicated as approximately following Village boundaries shall be construed as following municipal boundaries.
(d) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
(e) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(f) Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extension of, features indicated in the preceding shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-19
(6) Lot in Two or More Districts.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the district regulations of either portion of the lot may, at the owner's discretion, extend into the other district after review and approval by the Board of Appeals.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-20
4-19-93 Chapter 21-21
(for future use)
PART "B"
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION 21.04 CONSERVANCY, AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
(1) Intent.
(a) GENERAL.
The General intent of this Section is to set forth land uses or activities which are permitted in areas which are environmentally sensitive, are of environmental concern, or are rural in character. This Section also sets forth the uses which are allowed with special conditions and land uses which must receive a special use permit.
(b) (C) CONSERVANCY DISTRICT.
The intent of the (C)-Conservancy District is to protect areas that are unsuitable for residential, commercial, or industrial development due to flooding, high water table, bad drainage, slope, adverse soil or geologic conditions, important natural habitat features or by reason of being designated a public park or a common open space area. Most of these areas contain valuable environmental qualities which should be retained in a substantially undeveloped state in order to conserve the area's natural resources while protecting and preserving the amenities of the area's environment. Further, the intent of this District is to protect ground water recharge areas, prevent overcrowding of land, curtail pollution, siltation, and alleviate flooding hazards.
(c) (A) AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
The intent of the (A)-Agricultural District is to preserve productive agricultural land for food and fiber production, preserve productive farms by preventing land use conflicts between incompatible uses, maintain a viable agricultural base to support agricultural processing and service industries, reduce costs of providing services to scattered non-farm uses, pace and shape urban growth, implement the provisions of the Fond du Lac County Farmland Preservation Plan and comply with the provisions of the Farmland Preservation Law to permit eligible land owners to receive tax credits under Chapter 91 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) (A-T) AGRICULTURAL TRANSITION DISTRICT.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-22
The intent of the (A-T) Agricultural Transition District is to provide for the orderly transition of agricultural land to other uses in areas planned for eventual urban expansion, defer urban development until the appropriate local governmental bodies determine that adequate public services and facilities can be provided at a reasonable cost, insure that urban development is compatible with local land use plans and policies, provide periodic review to determine whether all or part of the land should be transferred to another zoning district. Such review shall occur: a) a minimum of every five (5) years; b) upon completion or revision or a County Agricultural Preservation Plan which affects lands in the district; or c) upon extension of public services such as sewer and water, necessary to serve urban development. Furthermore, the agricultural transition zoning classification is meant to comply with the provisions of the Farmland Preservation Law as set forth in Section 91.14 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) (S) SHORELAND DISTRICT.
The intent of the (S) Shoreland Zoning District is to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structure and land uses and reserve shore cover and natural beauty.
1.0 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND TITLE
1.1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stat. sec. 61.35 and 61.353 or 62.23 and 62.233.
1.2 FINDING OF FACT AND PURPOSE
Uncontrolled use of shorelands and pollution of the navigable waters of the municipality would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base. The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
A. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
B. Limit certain land use activities detrimental to shorelands; and
C. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by controlling the location of structures in shoreland areas and restricting the removal of natural shoreland vegetation.
2.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-19-93 Chapter 21-23
2.1 COMPLIANCE
The use of shorelands within the shoreland area of the municipality shall be in full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this ordinance.
2.2 MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stat. sec. 13.48(13) applies.
2.3 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
2.31 This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any other applicable municipal ordinance except that where another municipal ordinance is more restrictive than this ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
2.32 This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this ordinance imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
2.4 INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes or Wisconsin Constitution.
2.5 SEVERABILITY
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
2.6 APPLICABILITY OF SHORELAND DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The Shoreland Zoning District regulations apply only to the following shorelands:
A. A shoreland that was annexed by the Village of North Fond du lac after May 7, 1982, and that prior to annexation was subject to a county shoreland zoning ordinance under Wis. Stat. sec. 59.692; and
B. A shoreland that before incorporation by the Village of North Fond du Lac was part of a town that was subject to a county shoreland zoning
4-19-93 Chapter 21-24
ordinance under Wis. Stat. sec. 59.692 if the date of incorporation was after April 30, 1994.
2.6.1 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The Shoreland District areas regulated by this ordinance shall include all the lands (referred to herein as shorelands) in the Village of North Fond du Lac that are:
A. Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary highwater mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Surface Water Data viewer available on the DNR website, or are shown on United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps.
B. Within 300 feet of the ordinary highwater mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as continuous waterways or intermittent waterways on United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps. Flood hazard boundary maps, flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary-floodway maps, county soil survey maps or other existing county floodplain zoning maps shall be used to delineate floodplain areas.
C. Determinations of navigability and ordinary highwater mark location shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for a final determination of navigability or ordinary highwater mark.
D. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. sec. 61.353(7) or 62.233, the Shoreland Zoning District does not include lands adjacent to an artificially constructed drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin if the drainage ditch, pond or retention basin is not hydrologically connected to a natural navigable water body.
2.6.2. EFFECT OF EXISTING LAND DIVISION, SANITARY, ZONING AND OTHER REGULATIONS.
The lands within the Shoreland Zoning District are subject to all applicable provisions of the Village of North Fond du Lac Municipal Code. Where the provisions of this ordinance are more restrictive than other regulations in the Municipal Code, the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-25
3.0. SETBACKS FROM THE WATER.
A. Principal Building Setbacks.
1. All principal buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from the ordinary high-water mark.
2. Adjustment of Shore Yards. A setback less than that required by subsection A.1. may be allowed if all of the following apply:
a. The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land containing a principal building; and
b. The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal to the average setback of the principal building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark, whichever distance is greater.
4.0. VEGETATIVE BUFFER ZONE.
Pursuant to Wis. Stat. sec. 61.353(3) or 62.233, a landowner must maintain a vegetative buffer zone, as follows:
A. A person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation must maintain that vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone along the entire shoreline of the property and extending 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark of the navigable water, except as provided in sub. B.
B. If the vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone contains invasive species or dead or diseased vegetation, the owner of the shoreland property may remove the vegetation, except that if the owner removes all of the vegetation in the vegetative buffer zone, the owner shall establish a vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation.
C. A person who is required to maintain or establish a vegetative buffer zone under sub. A may remove all of the vegetation in a part of that zone in order to establish a viewing or access corridor that is no greater than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of shoreline frontage and extends no more than 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark.
5.0 Definitions
4-19-93 Chapter 21-26
In this ordinance:
5.1 “Principal building” means the main building or structure on a single lot
or parcel of land and includes any attached garage or attached porch.
5.2 “Shorelands” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. sec. 59.692(1)(b).
5.3 “Shoreland setback area” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. sec. 59.692(1)(bn)
(2) Single-Family Detached Dwellings.
Residential dwellings must have been constructed prior to the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance or be constructed on lots of record existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance unless they are clearly accessory to or associated with agricultural uses. Residential single-family detached dwellings shall be considered accessory to agricultural uses provided such dwellings are occupied by a person or a family at least one of which earns a substantial part of his or her livelihood from farming operations on the farm parcel or parents or children of the farm operator.
(3) Open Space and Conservation Uses and Public Utilities.
(a) Any private development shall be exclusively for a permitted use and applicant shall receive a permit or license under Chapter 29, Wisconsin Statutes, where applicable.
(b) The construction and maintenance of launching ramps, roads, and public utility transmission lines are permitted provided that:
1. The road or utility cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
2. The road or utility is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetlands;
3. The roads shall be designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use;
4. Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and
5. Only limited filling, dredging, ditching, tilling or excavating necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road or utility is permitted.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-27
(c) Ditching, excavating, dredging, dike and dam construction, other than that allowed for roads or utilities above, is allowed only for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-28
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-29
(for future use)
SECTION 21.041 SHORELAND -WETLAND DISTRICT
(1) Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Statement of Purpose and Title.
(a) STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization given in sections 61.35, 6 1.351, 87.30, and 144.26, Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) FINDING FACT AND PURPOSE
Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and pollution of the navigable waters of the Village would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base. The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
1. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general wetlands;
2. Maintain the storm and flood water storage capacity of wetlands;
3. Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
4. Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat;
5. Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
6. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other moving activities.
(2) General Provisions.
(a) COMPLIANCE
The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland areas of the Village shall be in full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. (However, see section (4) of this ordinance, for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) All permitted development in the (S)-Shoreland-Wetland District shall require the issuance of a
4-19-93 Chapter 21-30
zoning permit unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this ordinance.
(b) MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if section 13.48(13), Wisconsin Statues, applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt when section 30.12(4)(a), Wisconsin Statutes, applies.
(c) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
1. This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under sections 6 1.35, 62.23 or 87.30, Wisconsin Statutes, which relate to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
2. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
(d) INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this ordinance is required by a standard in chapter NR 117, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and where the ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the chapter NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this ordinance.
(e) SEVERABILITY
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
(f) ANNEXED AREAS
The Fond du Lac County shoreland zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation remain in effect administered by the municipality for all areas annexed
4-19-93 Chapter 21-31
by the municipality after May 7, 1982. These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. .The Fond du Lac County shoreland zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal Zoning Administrator.
(3) (S)-Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District.
(a) INTENT
The intent of the (S)-Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District is to: prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, the placement of structures and land uses; and to preserve shore cover and the natural environment adjacent to lakes, rivers and streams and other water bodies.
(b) SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING MAPS
The following maps are hereby adopted and made part of this ordinance and are on file in the office of the Village Clerk:
1. Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps stamped "FINAL" on June 2, 1993.
2. Floodplain zoning maps titled Village of North Fond du Lac and dated December 4, 1979.
3. United States Geological Survey maps dated November, 1986.
4. Zoning maps titled Village of North Fond du Lac Official Map and dated April 18, 1994.
(c) DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
1. The (S)-Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in the municipality which are five (5) acres or more in size and are shown on the final Wetland Inventory Map that has been adopted and made a part of this ordinance and which are:
a. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the municipality shall be presumed to be navigable if they are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this ordinance.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-32
b. Within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this ordinance. Floodplain zoning maps adopted in section (3)(b)2 shall be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas.
2. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark location shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark.
3. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the DNR to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped is in error. If DNR staff concur with the Zoning Administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors or acknowledge exempted wetlands designated in section (3)(c)4 and (3)(c)5, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period.
4. Filled Wetlands. Wetlands which are filled prior to June 2, 1993, the date on which the village received final wetland inventory maps, in a manner which affects their wetland characteristics to the extent that the area can no longer be defined as wetland, are not subject to this ordinance.
5. Wetlands Landward Of A Bulkhead Line. Wetlands located between the original ordinary high water mark and a bulkhead line established prior to May 7, 1982 under s. 30. 11, Statutes are not subject to this ordinance.
(d) PERMITTED USES
The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of chapters 30 and 31, Wisconsin Statutes, and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-33
1. Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
a. Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling, and boating;
b. The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
c. The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning, and harvesting of timber;
d. The pasturing of livestock;
e. The cultivation of agriculture crops; and
f. The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
2. Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
a. The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected;
b. The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries;
c. The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore pre-existing levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible;
d. The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
e. The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
4-19-93 Chapter 21-34
f. The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in section (6)(a)3 of this ordinance; and
g. The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction.
3. Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a special use permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
a. The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under section (3)(d) of this ordinance, provided that:
(1) The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
(2) The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section 6.13 of this ordinance;
(3) The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use;
(4) Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and
(5) Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or maintenance of the road.
b. The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings provided that:
(1) The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals;
4-19-93 Chapter 21-35
(2) The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
(3) The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
(4) Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support for the building is allowed.
c. The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
(1) Any private development allowed under this paragraph shall be used exclusively for the permitted purpose;
(2) Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed;
(3) The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted under this paragraph are allowed only where such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in section (3)(d)3a of this ordinance; and
(4) Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
d. The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage collection lines, and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that:
(1) The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
(2) Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or maintenance is allowed; and
4-19-93 Chapter 21-36
(3) Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in section (6)(a)3 of this ordinance.
(e) PROHIBITED USES
1. Any use not listed in section (3)(d) of this ordinance is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this ordinance in accordance with section (6) of this ordinance.
2. The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters are prohibited.
(4) Nonconforming Structures and Uses.
(a) The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the time this ordinance, or an applicable amendment to this ordinance, took effect and which is not in conformity with the provisions of the ordinance, including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the following conditions:
1. The shoreland-wetland provisions of this ordinance authorized by s. 61.351, Wisconsin Statutes, shall not limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure or of any environmental control facility related to such a structure in existence on the effective date of the shoreland-wetland provisions. All other modifications to nonconforming structures are subject to s. 62.23(7)(h), Wisconsin Statutes, which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to 50% of current fair market value.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to this ordinance.
(c) Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this ordinance adopted under sections 62.351 or 62.231, Wisconsin Statutes, may be continued although such does not conform with the provisions of the ordinance. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended.
(d) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of section 30.121, Wisconsin Statutes.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-37
(e) Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses.
(5) Administrative Provisions.
(a) ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers when administering and enforcing this ordinance.
1. Advise applicants as to the provisions of this ordinance and assist them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms.
2. Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this ordinance.
3. Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions.
4. Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. for the purpose of performing these duties.
5. Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments within ten (10) days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate district office of the DNR.
6. Investigate and report violations of this ordinance to the appropriate municipal planning agency and the district attorney or municipal attorney.
(b) ZONING PERMITS
1. When Required. Unless another section of this ordinance specifically exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator before any new development, as defined in section (8)(b)6, of this ordinance, or any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated.
2. Application. An application for a zoning permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the village and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the following information:
a. General Information
4-19-93 Chapter 21-38
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property owner and contractor, where applicable.
(2) Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed use or development.
(3) Whether or not a private water supply or sewage system is to be installed.
b. Site Development Plan
(1) Dimensions and area of the lot;
(2) Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and center line of all abutting streets or highways;
(3) Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems;
(4) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable waterways;
(5) Boundaries of all wetlands;
(6) Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover;
(7) Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined from floodplain zoning maps;
(8) Location of existing or future access roads; and
(9) Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration.
3. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this ordinance shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance.
(c) CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
1. Except where no zoning permit or special use permit is required, no land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied, until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator subject to the following provisions:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-39
a. The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
b. Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a zoning or conditional use permit.
c. The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten (10) days after notification of the completion of the work specified in the zoning or special use permit, providing the building or premises and proposed use thereof conform with all the provisions of this ordinance.
2. The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and regulations established by the municipal governing body.
3. Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of ordinance adoption, certifying after inspection, the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this ordinance.
(d) SPECIAL USE PERMITS
1. Application. Any use listed as a special use in this ordinance shall be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Zoning Administrator and a special use permit has been granted by the Plan Commission and the Village Board following the procedures in section 21.11 of this ordinance.
2. Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the standards applicable to the special uses designated in section (3)(d)3 of this ordinance, the Plan Commission and Village Board shall attach such conditions to a special use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this ordinance, as are necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance as listed in section (l)(b). Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion controls; increased setback; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon which to base its determination, the Plan Commission and Village Board may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent information which is
4-19-93 Chapter 21-40
necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance.
(e) FEES
The Village Board may adopt fees for the following:
1. Zoning permits.
2. Certificates of compliance.
3. Public hearings.
4. Legal notice publications.
5. Special use permits.
6. Rezoning petitions.
(f) RECORDING
Where a zoning permit or special use permit is approved, an appropriate record shall be made by the Zoning Administrator of the land use and structures permitted.
(g) REVOCATION
Where the conditions of a zoning permit or special use permit are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the Plan Commission and the Village Board.
(h) BOARD OF APPEALS
Village President shall appoint a Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 21.19 of this ordinance. The Board of Appeals shall have the powers and duties to enforce this ordinance as enumerated therein.
(6) Amending Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Regulations.
(a) The Village Board may alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this ordinance in accordance with the requirements of section 62.23(7)(d)2, Wisconsin Statutes, NR 117, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and the following:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-41
1. A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate district office of the DNR within five (5) days of the submission of the proposed amendment to the municipal planning agency;
2. All proposed text or map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning regulations shall be referred to the municipal planning agency, and a public hearing shall be held after class II notice as required by section 62.23(7)(d)2, Wisconsin Statutes. The appropriate district office of the DNR shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing.
3. In order to insure that this ordinance will remain consistent with the shoreland protection objective of section 144.26, Wisconsin Statutes, the Village Board may not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions:
a. Storm and flood water storage capacity;
b. Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
c. Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
d. Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
e. Shoreline protection against erosion;
f. Wildlife habitat; or
g. Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
4. Where the district office of the DNR determines that a proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in section (6)(a)3 of this ordinance, the DNR shall so notify the municipality of its determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment.
5. The appropriate district office of the DNR shall be provided with:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-42
a. A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the municipal planning agency on a proposed text or map amendment, within ten (10) days after the submission of those recommendations to the municipal governing body.
b. Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map amendment within ten (10) days after the action is taken.
6. If the DNR notifies the municipal planning agency in writing that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in section (6)(a)3 of this ordinance, that proposed amendment, if approved by the municipal governing body, shall not become effective until more than thirty (30) days have elapsed since written notice of the municipal approval was mailed to the DNR, as required by section (6)(a)5b of this ordinance. If within the thirty (30) day period, the DNR notifies the municipality that it intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the municipality as provided by sections 62.23l(6) and 61.351 (6), Wisconsin Statutes, the proposed amendment shall not become effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under section 62.23l(6) or 61.351(6), Wisconsin Statutes, is completed or otherwise terminated.
(7) Enforcement and Penalties.
Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use or accessory use established after the effective date of this ordinance in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, by any person, firm, association, corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation. The Zoning Administrator shall refer violations to the municipal planning agency and the district attorney or municipal attorney who shall prosecute such violations. Any person, firm association, or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 per offense, together with the taxable costs of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to section 87.30(2), Wisconsin Statutes.
(8) Definitions.
(a) For the purpose of administering and enforcing this ordinance, the terms of words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number; words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory,
4-19-93 Chapter 21-43
not permissive. All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
(b) The following terms used in this ordinance mean:
1. "Accessory structure or use" means a detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principle structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the principle structure or use.
2. "Boathouse" as defined in section 30.121(1), Wisconsin Statutes, means a permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any combination of structural parts.
3. "Class 2 public notice" means publication of a public hearing notice under chapter 985, Wisconsin Statutes, in a newspaper of circulation in the affected area. Publication is required on two (2) consecutive weeks, the last at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
4. "Department" means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
5. "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials.
6. "Drainage system" means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge.
7. "Environmental control facility" means any facility, temporary or permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities.
8 "Fixed houseboat" as defined in section 30.121(1), Wisconsin Statutes, means a structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in
4-19-93 Chapter 21-44
place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway.
9. "Navigable waters" means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. Under section 144.26(2)(d), Wisconsin Statutes, not withstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under sections 61.351 or 62.221 Wisconsin Statutes and chapter NR 117, Wisconsin Statutes and chapter NR 117 Wisconsin Administrative Code, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches if;
a. Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
b. Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching; and
c. Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
"Wisconsin's Supreme Court has declared navigable bodies of water that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis [Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wisconsin 492 (1952) and DeGaynor and Co., Inc., v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wisconsin 2d 936(1975)]. For example, a stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe during normal spring high water is navigable, in fact, under the laws of this state though it may be dry during other seasons."
10. "Ordinary high-water mark" means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
11. "Planning agency" means the Plan Commission of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
12. "Shorelands" means lands within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-45
13. "Shoreland-Wetland District" means the zoning district created in this shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a part of this ordinance.
14. "Special use" means a conditional use which is permitted by this ordinance provided that certain conditions specified in the ordinance are met and that a permit is granted by the Plan Commission and the Village Board.
15. "Unnecessary hardship" means that circumstance where special conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with restrictions governing area, setback, frontage height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this ordinance.
16. "Variance" means an authorization granted by the Board of Appeals to construct or alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards of this ordinance.
17. "Wetlands" means those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
18. "Wetland alteration" means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam construction in a wetland area.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-46
(9) Schedule 21.041-A Land Uses or Activities
Shoreland, Conservancy and Agricultural Districts
(S) - Shoreland
(C) - Conservancy
(A) - Agricultural
(A-T) - Agricultural Transition
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
X = Site Plan Approval Necessary
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
S
C
A
A-T
Agricultural uses including general farming, dairying, raising grain, grass and seed crops, vegetable farming, orchards, horticulture, plant greenhouses and nurseries, forest and game management and other uses of a similar nature.
P
P
P
Construction or maintenance or piers, docks or walkways built on pilings including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction maintenance.
P
P
Harvesting of wild crops such as marsh hay, ferns, berries, tree fruits and seeds in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops.
P
P
P
P
Hiking, fishing, swimming and boating.
P
P
P
P
Open space areas and conservation uses including public and private parks, historic and scientific areas, outdoor education areas, wildlife refuges and public boat launching ramps and attendant access roads.
SC
SC
SP
SP
Public and semi-public non-profit uses such as churches, schools, libraries.
SP, X
SP, X
4-19-93 Chapter 21-47
Sanitary Landfills.
SP, X
SP, X
Single Family Detached Residential Dwellings.
SC
SC
Utility transmission lines, including electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer lines.
SC
SC
P
P
SECTION 21.05 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
(1) Intent.
(a) GENERAL.
The general intent of this Section is to set forth land uses or activities which are permitted in residential areas in the Village, to specify the zoning district in which each use or activity will be permitted, with or without special conditions, or after a special use permit has been granted, and to establish density and bulk regulations within each district.
(b) (R-1) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The intent of the (R-1) Residential District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted in areas where limitation on the use of land and density of development is necessary to minimize environmental impacts and where low density, single family housing is the desired land use.
(c) (R-2) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The intent of the (R-2) Residential District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted in areas where single family housing development at a moderate density is the desired predominant land use.
(d) (R-3) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The intent of the (R-3) Residential District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted in areas where single family housing development at a medium density is the desired predominant land use.
(e) (R-4) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The intent of the (R-4) Residential District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted in areas where single family housing development at a high density is the desired predominant land use.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-48
(f) (R-5) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The intent of the (R-5) Residential District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted in areas where a moderate to high concentration of residential dwellings, including two family and single family semi-detached dwellings, is the desired predominant land use.
(g) (R-6) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The intent of the (R-6) Residential District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted in areas where a moderate to high concentration of residential dwellings, including multiple-family housing development, is the desired predominant land use.
(h) (R-7) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The intent of the (R-7) Residential District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted in areas where substantial limitation on the use of the land and density of development is necessary to preserve present uses or protect such land for efficient future use. Such areas include newly annexed land, land which is characterized by agricultural and other open space uses, and land which is awaiting future urban type development in response to the Villages growth. Subsequent reclassification of some (R-7) land to other districts is anticipated when this can be accomplished in accordance with a program of orderly and efficient growth which is coordinated with the extension of basic utilities, streets and community facilities.
(i) (R-8) MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT.
The intent of the (R-8) Residential District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted in areas where manufactured housing would be the predominant housing type. (R-8) Residential Districts would typically be permitted in areas where a transition is desirable from a mobile home, business, or (R-5) or (R-6) district to an area where high density, single family land uses prevail or are planned for the future.
(2) General Provisions.
(a) SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.
Restrictions and controls for land uses or activities permitted in residential districts, or land uses or activities having special conditions attached to them or requiring a special use permit, are set forth in Schedule 21.05-A. Regulations for lot size, yards and similar bulk requirements are set forth in Schedule 21.05-B. Both said schedules are hereby adopted and made part of this Ordinance.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-49
(b) EXCLUDED USES OR ACTIVITIES.
A land use or activity not set forth in the attached schedule is not permitted in residential districts in the village except that uses and activities which are similar to those which are permitted in a district may be permitted by special use permit.
(c) REQUIRED OPEN SPACE.
In all residential districts the total area of all structures on a lot shall not exceed the maximum percentage of lot coverage as specified in the attached schedule. At least sixty-five percent (65%) of any required front yard area shall remain open space and shall not be used for parking and driveways.
(d) SPACING BETWEEN STRUCTURES.
When two (2) or more multiple-family dwelling structures are located on a single lot the following separations between exterior walls shall be maintained:
1. Front or rear wall of one structure facing front or rear wall of another: not less than 60 ft. separation.
2. End wall of one structure facing end wall of another: not less than 30 ft. separation.
3. End wall of one structure facing front or rear wall of another: 45 ft. separation.
The above minimum separations may be modified by the Department of Public Works when site plan review determines that building design, site layout, landscaping treatment or unusual site conditions warrant such modification. When buildings are not parallel, the average separation shall be as specified above but in no case shall the closest separation of non-parallel buildings be less than half of the required separation.
(e) SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
When the attached schedule indicates that site plan approval is necessary for a land use or activity in a Residential District the Zoning Administrator may not issue a building permit for such land use or activity until a final site plan has been approved by the Department of Public Works in accordance with this Ordinance.
(f) ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS. (O-2000-23)
(1) All single-family dwellings located in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7, and R-8 must be at least twenty-four feet wide and have a length equal to
4-19-93 Chapter 21-50
or greater than the width. All single-family dwellings must be at least 900 square feet. The 900 square feet does not include garages, unenclosed porches, or unfinished areas.
(2) All two-family dwellings must be at least twenty-four (24) feet wide and have a length equal to or greater than the width. All two-family dwellings must have at least 900 square feet for each dwelling. The 900 square feet does not include garages, unenclosed porches, or unfinished areas.
(3) The Plan Commission will establish the square foot requirements for single-family dwellings located in cluster housing developments or similar developments. The developer may request less than 900 square feet per single family dwelling, but it must be supported by historical data of comparable developments. The Plan Commission may request preliminary plans and other information prior to approving the minimum square foot requirements.
(g) LIGHTING (O-2015-01)
Site lighting shall utilize fixtures that reflect the architectural style of the building(s). Freestanding lights shall not exceed 12 feet in height. Lighting shall be confined to the site and shall not produce glare or wash onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Glare or wash which exceeds 0.50 footcandles above ambient lighting conditions on a cloudless night measured at the property line shall be considered a nuisance.
(3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities in Residential Districts.
Land uses or activities listed in Schedule 21.05-A as being "Permitted with Special Conditions" shall not be considered permitted, and the Zoning Administrator shall not issue a zoning certificate for such uses or activities, until applicable conditions, as set forth below, have been complied with or a variance has been granted.
(a) NURSERY, GREENHOUSE, TRUCK GARDEN.
Permitted when:
1. No offensive odors and dust are created.
2. Retail sales are limited to products grown on the premises and sold in the open or from a structure that is removed at the end of the growing season.
(b) DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY ABUTTING (R-1), (R-2), OR (R-3) DISTRICT.
Permitted when:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-51
1. A lot in the (R-6) District abuts or is across a street from a lot in an R-1, (R-2), or (R-3) District, the building setback requirements of the (R-1), (R-2), or (R-3) District shall be applicable in the (R-6) District and a landscaped buffer strip at least 10 feet wide (see Definitions) shall be established adjacent to the (R-1), (R-2), or (R-3) lot line and approved as part of site plan approval.
2. Trash receptacles are located not less than five (5) feet from any property line and are appropriately screened.
3. Approved facilities are provided for the outdoor or indoor storage of seasonal vehicles, recreation equipment, and similar items.
(c) DWELLING, EFFICIENCY.
One efficiency dwelling (see Definitions) is permitted when such dwelling is included within the structure of an owner-occupied one family dwelling and does
not occupy more than 30 percent of the total usable floor area not to exceed 375 square feet of such one family dwelling.
(d) DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.
Mobile homes, except those covered by a temporary permit in Section 21.02 (6)(c), are permitted only in a mobile home park approved by the Village Board.
(e) CONVERSION OF EXISTING DWELLINGS INTO ADDITIONAL DWELLING UNITS.
Permitted when:
1. The area of the lot is at least 50 percent of the minimum lot area which would be required for construction of an equivalent number of new dwelling units in the district.
2. At least 80 percent of the setback and yards requirements of the district, which would be required for new construction, can be complied with.
3. Minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet can be provided.
4. Parking and open space requirements of the district are complied with.
5. Each of the dwellings thus created contains not less than 350 square feet of habitable floor area.
(f) HOME OCCUPATIONS.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-52
Permitted when:
1. The home occupation is conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit or an attached garage. If such occupation is conducted in an attached garage it cannot displace the enclosed storage of property maintenance and recreational equipment.
2. There are no exterior alterations which change the character thereof as a dwelling and/or exterior evidence of the home occupation other than those signs permitted in the district.
3. No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or equipment related the operation of the home occupation is visible outside any structure located on the premises.
4. No use creates smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire hazard, environmental hazard, small electrical interference or any other nuisance not normally associated with the average residential use in the district.
5. Only one (1) sign is used to indicate the type of occupation or business. The sign may not exceed 200 square inches in size and may not be illuminated. The appearance and content of the sign shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
6. The use does not involve the use of commercial vehicles for more than occasional delivery of materials to or from the premises.
7. The occupation or activity is conducted by the person or persons residing in the dwelling and not more than one additional person.
8. The space required by the occupation or activity is no greater than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling on the lot or one half of an attached garage.
(g) PLACES OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
Permitted when:
1. No structure is located less than thirty (30) feet from any residential lot line.
2. A heavily landscaped buffer strip at least twelve (12) feet wide is provided along all adjacent residential lot lines.
(h) EXCAVATION, GRADING OR FILLING.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-53
Normally permitted only when such activity is carried out in conjunction with the construction of a building, subdivision, planned development, recreation area or parking area. No topsoil shall be stripped from any lot for commercial purpose and no non-construction related excavation, grading, or filling may be undertaken except by Special Permit.
(i) TEMPORARY BUILDING OR FENCE.
Permitted when such building or fence is related to a construction project and located on the same lot where such construction is being undertaken or on a lot contiguous thereto.
(j) SIGNS.
Permitted when they are in compliance with Section 21.14 of this Ordinance.
(k) BUSINESS USE.
Requirements: Within multifamily developments of eighty (80) or more units or within multifamily buildings for the elderly of fifty (50) or more units, ten percent (10%) of the first floor area of any one building may be devoted to commercial use designed to serve only the residents of the complex. (Examples of such commercial uses might include beauty or barber shop, laundry, snack bar, etc.)
(l) LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE.
Permitted when:
1. Cooking facilities are not in the lodging room (see Definitions).
2. Bathroom facilities must conform to all Village housing and health Codes.
3. One (1) on-site, off-street parking space shall be required per lodging room. If on-site parking spaces cannot be provided, required parking may be provided within 200 feet of the property where the lodging rooms are located.
4. All Wisconsin Administrative Code requirements shall be met and are hereby adopted by reference.
5. Lodging rooms shall be permitted at a density not to exceed one unit for each 2,000 square feet of lot area.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-54
4-19-93 Chapter 21-55
(for future use)
(4) Schedule 21.05-A Land Uses or Activities Residential Districts
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
X = Site Plan Approval Necessary
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
R-6
R-7
R-8
1. Agriculture on a 10 acre minimum lot.
P
2. Alternate energy installations.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
3. Art gallery and museum.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
4. Bed & Breakfast establishment.
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
5. Business use.
SP, X
6. Cemetery, crematoriums.
SP, X
SP,
X
7. Central air conditioning equipment.
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
8. Cluster housing.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
9. College and university.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
10. Convent, monastery, seminary.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
11. Conversion of existing dwelling into less than 4 dwelling units.
SP, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC,
X
12. Conversion of existing dwelling into 4 or more dwelling units.
SC, X
4-19-93 Chapter 21-56
13. Day care facility.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
14. Day care home.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
15. Duly authorized philanthropic and/or charitable institution.
SP, X
4-19-93 Chapter 21-57
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
X = Site Plan Approval Necessary
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
R-6
R-7
R-8
16. Dwelling, one-family.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
17. Dwelling, two-family.
P
P
18. Dwelling, multiple family.
SC, X
19. Dwelling, efficiency.
SC
SC
SC
SC
P
P
SC
SC
20. Dwelling, town house.
SC, X
SC, X
21. Dwelling, mobile home.
22. Dwelling for community living arrangement.
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
23. Excavation, grading or filling.
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC,
X
SC, X
24. Family care home.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
25. Fraternity and sorority for university or college.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
26. Funeral and undertaking parlor.
SP, X
27. Garage, private detached.
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
28. Golf course.
SP,
X
29. Government service.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
30. Home occupation.
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
31. Hospital.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
4-19-93 Chapter 21-58
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
X = Site Plan Approval Necessary
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
R-6
R-7
R-8
32. Housing for the elderly and handicapped.
SP, X
SP, X
SC, X
SC, X
SP,
X
33. Landfilling.
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC,
X
34. Library, public.
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
35. Lodging or rooming house.
SC, X
36. Lodge.
SP
37. Mobile home park.
38. Noncommercial garden.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
39. Nursery, greenhouses, truck garden.
SC
SC
40. Nursing home (intermediate care).
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
41. Nursery school.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
42. Parks and playgrounds (private, not-for-profit).
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
43. Parks and playgrounds (public).
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
44. Places of religious worship.
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC,
X
SC, X
45. Planned unit development.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
46. Private garage accessory to a dwelling.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4-19-93 Chapter 21-59
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
X = Site Plan Approval Necessary
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
R-6
R-7
R-8
47. School, boarding.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
48. School, elementary and secondary.
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
P, X
49. School, vocation and technical.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
50. Sign.
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
51. Temporary building or fence.
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC, X
SC,
X
SC, X
52. Utility, local service.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
53. Utility, substation.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
54. Utility, transmission line.
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP, X
SP,
X
SP, X
55. Zero lot line units.
SP, X
4-19-93 Chapter 21-60
(5) Schedule 21.05 - B Bulk Requirements Residential Districts*
DIST.
USE OR
ACTIVITY
MINIMUM LOT
AREA (SQ.FT.)*
MINIMUM LOT
WIDTH (FT)*
YARDS*
ONE TOTAL
FRONT SIDE SIDE REAR
MAX.
BLDG.
HEIGHT*
MAX. %
OF LOT
COVERED*
R-1
All permitted uses.
15,000
125
30
10
25
35
35
25
R-2
All permitted uses.
12,000
100
25
8
20
35
35
25
R-3
All permitted uses.
9,000
75
25
6
12
35
35
35
R-4 & R-8
All permitted uses.
7,200
60
25
6
12
35
35
35
R-5
Conversion of existing dwelling.
See Sec. 21.05 (3)(e)
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
1-family dwelling or 2-family dwelling with one unit over the other.
1-family - 7,200
2-family - 9,000
1-family - 60
2-family - 75
25
6
12
35
35
35
2-family dwelling with side-by-side semi-detached units:
4,500 for each dwelling unit
75
25
6
12
35
35
35
R-6
1 and 2-family dwelling.
7,200
60
25
6
15
35
35
35
Town House
15,000 or 3,000 per dwelling unit, whichever is greater.
25 for each dwelling unit. Maximum required - 125 ft.
25
10
25a
20
35
50
Multiple-family dwelling.
15,000 or 3,000 per dwelling unit, whichever is greater.
25 for each dwelling unit.
25
6
15
20
None
50
Conversion of existing dwelling.
See Sec. 21.05(3)(e)
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
Nonresidential.
6,000
60
20
6
15
20
40
50
R-7
All permitted uses.
40,000
140
30
15
40
75
35
10
(SEE NOTES NEXT PAGE)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-61
* Bulk requirements for uses permitted with special conditions or requiring a special use permit might vary from this schedule. Requirements for such uses are as may be specified in Sec. 21.05(3) or by Village Board in its consideration of the special use permit.
a. Side yards required only for end units in the row. All interior units have zero side yard requirements.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-62
SECTION 21.06 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
(1) Intent.
(a) GENERAL.
The general intent of this Section is to set forth land uses or activities which are permitted in business and commercial areas in the Village, to specify the zoning district in which each use or activity will be permitted, with or without special conditions, or after a special permit has been granted, and to establish bulk regulations for lots within each district.
(b) (B-1) BUSINESS DISTRICT.
The intent of the (B-1) Business District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted to provide a wide range of shopping, convenience goods, personal services, and entertainment businesses located through the Village.
(c) (B-2) BUSINESS DISTRICT.
The intent of the (B-2) Business District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted to provide a wide range of shopping, convenience goods, personal services, and entertainment businesses located near or along the Hwy. 41 corridor. Because of their high visibility location, however, businesses in the (B-2) Business District are required to meet higher design standards to ensure that development is efficient and attractive.
(2) General Provisions.
(a) SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.
Restrictions and controls for land uses or activities permitted in Business Districts, or land uses or activities having special conditions attached to them, or requiring a special permit, are set forth in Schedule 21.06-A. Regulations for lot size, yards and similar bulk requirements are set forth in Schedule 21.06-B. Both schedules are hereby adopted and made part of this Ordinance.
(b) EXCLUDED USES OR ACTIVITIES.
A land use or activity not set forth in Schedule 21.06-A is not permitted in Business Districts in the Village except that uses and activities which are similar to those which are permitted in a district may be permitted by special use permit.
(c) DWELLING UNITS.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-63
Other provisions of the Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, a dwelling unit may be permitted in a business district as follows:
1. In the (B-1) District one (1) attached dwelling unit or lodging room shall be permitted when located above the ground floor, or, if on the ground floor, not less than 50 feet from the front line.
2. In a (B-1) District in accordance with Sec. 21.11 (12) (u).
3. In a permitted hotel, motel, convent, monastery, parsonage or rectory.
(d) ENCLOSURE OF OPERATION.
All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except for:
1. Off-street parking or loading.
2. Drive-in type operations when conducted as a lawful permitted special use.
3. Outdoor display or sales activity which is normally associated with the operation of a permitted use or for which a special use permit has been issued.
4. The temporary sale of Christmas trees and Christmas greenery may be conducted in open lots in all Business Districts for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(e) PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
1. Performance standards for noise, vibration, smoke and particulate matters, noxious odors, fire and explosion hazard, glare, lighting, heat and radiation shall be as established and enforced by the Village.
2. When doubt exists as to conformance with such standards, a professional opinion shall be obtained before a zoning certificate is issued.
(f) PARKING LIMITATIONS.
1. Parking of trucks when accessory to the conduct of a permitted use shall be limited to vehicles having not over one and one-half (1½) tons capacity, except for pick-up or delivery services during normal business hours.
2. When a commercial activity requires that a truck in excess of one and one-half (1½) tons capacity be parked in the open within 150 feet of an
4-19-93 Chapter 21-64
adjacent residence district line, such parking area shall be screened from view from the residential property by a dense barrier of evergreens which will grow to a height of at least eight (8) feet.
(g) SCOPE OF OPERATIONS.
All business establishments shall be retail trade or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. Any assembly or production shall be clearly incidental to the basic use.
(h) SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
The Zoning Administrator may not issue a building permit for the development or expansion of any commercial or business establishment until a final site plan has been approved by the Department of Public Works in accordance with Section 21.17 (5) (b).
(3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities in Business Districts.
Land uses or activities listed in Schedule 21.06-A "Permitted with Special Conditions" shall not be considered permitted, and the Zoning Administrator shall not issue a zoning certificate for such uses or activities, until applicable conditions, as set forth below, have been complied with or a variance has been granted.
(a) SALE OF CONVENIENCE GOODS; VARIETY STORE.
Permitted when the total floor area devoted to any single establishment does not exceed 5,000 square feet except that the floor area of a grocery store may be increased to not more than 20,000 square feet and a drug store and variety store to not more than 7,000 square feet.
(b) SPECIFIED RETAIL SALES OR SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.
Permitted when the total floor area devoted to any single establishment does not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(c) HOBBY SHOP.
Permitted when:
1. Total floor area does not exceed 5,000 square feet.
2. Testing or use of items sold or displayed occurs only within the shop.
(d) BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICE.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-65
Permitted when the total ground floor area of any new construction does not exceed 2,000 square feet.
(e) RENTAL SERVICE FACILITY INCLUDING VEHICLES.
Permitted when:
1. Outdoor storage areas are located no less than ten (10) feet from any property line.
2. A landscaping plan has been approved for outdoor storage and parking areas.
3. Access drives are clearly defined by curbs and are no wider than 24 feet.
(f) PERSONAL SERVICE FACILITY.
Permitted when:
1. Not more than 5,000 square feet of floor area is devoted to dry cleaning, pressing or laundering processes which are not self-service.
(g) BATTERY AND TIRE SALES AND SERVICE.
Permitted when:
1. All storage and servicing occurs within a building and vehicles are not parked outdoors overnight.
2. Access drives to parking and service areas are clearly defined by curbs and are no wider than 24 feet.
3. All outside storage is screened from public view.
(h) DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT INCLUDING DRIVE-THRU FACILITIES.
Such facilities shall provide adequate parking and stacking space so that vehicles are not standing in any public street. The number, size and location of access and egress points shall be approved by the Director of Public Works.
(i) BAKERY.
Permitted when goods processed and prepared on the premises are sold only on the premises.
(j) CLUB OR LODGE.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-66
Permitted when required off-street parking is not located in any front yard nor closer than five (5) feet from any property line. Landscaping around parking areas and access drives shall be provided.
(k) FEED STORES.
Permitted when there is no outside storage of feed supplies or equipment. Landscaping of all parking areas shall be provided.
(l) SECONDHAND STORE AND RUMMAGE SALE.
Permitted when there is no outside, overnight storage of furniture, appliances or any other type of material or rummage.
(m) SIGNS.
Permitted when they are in compliance with Section 21.14 of this Ordinance.
(n) BOAT SALES AND REPAIR.
Permitted when:
1. Parking areas and access thereto are paved and clearly defined by curbing and are landscaped according to district standards or not less than a five (5) foot landscape area.
2. A five (5) foot buffer strip (see Definitions) is planted along all property lines adjacent to a residential district.
(o) MACHINE, SHEET METAL AND WELDING SHOP.
Permitted when any building used for such purposes shall be not more than 5,000 square feet or gross floor area, and operations are within the enclosed building, and glare from the welding operation is not visible from outside the building.
(p) PUBLIC UTILITY FOR TRANSMISSION OF LOCAL SERVICE.
Such utilities shall be placed underground whenever feasible or, when not so placed, shall be located along rear lot lines or in a manner which will cause the minimum adverse visual impact on the Village's streetscape. Approval of the sitting or such utility lines shall be given by the Department of Public Works.
(q) TEMPORARY GREENHOUSES.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-67
Temporary greenhouse construction shall conform to all appropriate setback requirements. Temporary greenhouse permits must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator. Temporary permits shall be in effect for a period not to exceed six months.
(r) WHOLESALE AND WAREHOUSE FACILITY.
There shall be no outside storage of materials.
(4) Design Standards for Land Uses in (B-2) Business District.
No building or use shall be constructed or established in a (B-2) District unless it conforms to the following design standards:
(a) LOT SIZE: Minimum one acre.
1. No business may be established on a parcel less than one acre.
2. No parcel shall be divided without Village approval.
(b) LOT WIDTH: Minimum 170 feet, measured at the setback line.
(c) ROAD FRONTAGE: All lots must front on a public road or street, and must have at least 100 feet of frontage on said road.
(d) SETBACKS/YARDS: Front - minimum 50 feet. Rear - minimum 50 feet. Side - minimum 20 feet on each side. The space within the setback shall be used for lawns and landscaped areas and parking lots and shall not be used for buildings, structures, or loading areas. If front is used for parking, there must be 30 feet of green area.
(e) PARKING AND LOADING AREAS: On street parking and loading is not permitted within this district. All customer parking and loading areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete within two years of occupancy.
(f) OUTSIDE STORAGE: No outside storage is allowed on the side of the lot abutting the street and/or Highway "41". All outside storage areas and items stored outside, other than vehicles, shall be completely screened from view with a fence of attractive design.
(g) PARKING: All customer parking areas and driveways shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and may be located within the setback lines provided there is a minimum of 30' of green area as outlined in (d). No on-street parking is allowed. The number of spaces provided shall be adequate for the proposed use as determined by the Plan Commission, but in no case shall spaces provided total less than:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-68
1. One (1) space for every 200 square feet of building area for retail establishments.
2. One (1) space for every 800 square feet of building area for manufacturing and wholesale establishments.
(h) LANDSCAPING: At least one 2" caliper tree shall be provided in the front yard for each 50 feet of road frontage. Buildings and parking areas shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs.
(i) EXTERNAL LIGHTING: No operation, activity, or facility that is illuminated with reflecting lights shall cause glare to vehicles traveling in an adjacent street right-of-way or on any adjacent residential land.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-69
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-70
(5) Schedule 21.06-A Land Uses or Activities
Business Districts
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
B-1
B-2
1. Antique and craft shop.
SC
SC
2. Antique and used furniture sales.
P
P
3. Automotive car wash.
SP
SP
4. Automobile engine repair, service garage, and vehicle body shop.
SP
SP
5. Automotive parts and accessories.
P
P
6. Automobile service station.
SP
SP
7. Bakery.
SC
SC
8. Bank and financial institution, including branch bank and drive-in.
P
P
9. Battery and tire sales and service.
SC
SC
10. Bicycle sales, rental and repair.
P
P
11. Blueprinting and photostating.
P
P
12. Boat sales and repair.
SP
SP
13. Bottling and distribution.
SP
SP
14. Bulk fuel and ice sales.
SP
SP
15. Business machine and equipment sales and service.
P
P
16. Catering establishment.
P
P
17. Church, chapel, temple, convent, monastery, rectory.
SC
SC
18. Club or lodge.
SC
SC
19. Cocktail lounge; tavern.
P
P
20. Day care facility.
P
P
21. Drive-in restaurant including drive-thru facilities, i.e., bank, laundry, bakery, etc.
SC
SC
22. Dry cleaning and laundry facility including linen, towel or diaper service.
SC
SC
4-19-93 Chapter 21-71
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
B-1
B-2
23. Dwelling units.
SC
24. Eating and drinking establishments except drive-in restaurants.
P
P
25. Feed store.
SC
SC
26. Fraternal, philanthropic and eleemosynary institution.
P
P
27. Frozen food and locker facility.
P
P
28. Funeral and undertaking parlor.
SP
SP
29. Furrier shop.
P
P
30. Governmental service.
P
P
31. Greenhouse.
SC
SC
32. Hobby shop.
SC
SC
33. Household appliance, radio, and TV sales and service.
P
P
34. Indoor amusement and recreation facility.
P
P
35. Indoor cinema or theater.
P
P
36. Interior decorating.
P
P
37. Landfill.
SC
SC
38. Library.
P
P
39. Liquor store.
P
P
40. Loan office.
P
P
41. Machine, sheet metal and welding shop.
SC
SC
42. Meat and fish market.
P
P
43. Medical, dental and optical clinic.
P
P
44. Meeting and exhibition hall.
SC
SC
45. Motel and hotel; bed & breakfast establishment.
SP
SP
46. New and used automobile sales.
SP
SP
4-19-93 Chapter 21-72
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
B-1
B-2
47. Newspaper office.
P
P
48. Newsstand.
P
P
49. Nursery school.
P
P
50. Outdoor amusement and recreation facility.
SP
SP
51. Parcel delivery.
P
P
52. Personal service facility i.e.; barber & beauty shop, tailor shop, self-service laundromat, shoe and clothing repair.
SC
SC
53. Pet shop.
P
P
54. Photography studio.
P
P
55. Planned unit development.
SP
SP
56. Physical culture and health facility; spa.
P
P
57. Printing and publishing shop.
P
P
58. Private parking facility not accessory to another use.
SP
SP
59. Public utility for transmission of local service.
SC
SC
60. Professional or business office including optical and dental laboratory.
P
P
61. Radio and TV studio.
P
P
62. Rental service facility.
SP
SP
63. Research laboratory.
P
P
64. Sale and display of art objects, art and school supplies, candy, ice cream; gift shop; picture framing shop.
P
P
65. Sales and service of plumbing, electrical or heating fixtures and appliances.
P
P
66. Sales and service of recreation vehicles, motorcycle and similar vehicles.
SP
SP
67. Sales of building materials.
SP
SP
4-19-93 Chapter 21-73
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
B-1
B-2
68. Sale of convenience goods such as groceries, pharmaceutical, sundries, photographic supplies, variety.
P
P
69. Secondhand store and rummage sale.
P
P
70. Sign.
SC
SC
71. Supermarket, department store, variety store; sale of clothes, shoes, furniture, hardware, flowers, jewelry, toys, china and glassware, carpet and floor coverings, luggage and leather goods, dry goods, paint and wallpaper, office supplies, sporting goods.
P
P
72. Tent and awning sales and production.
P
P
73. Ticket and travel agency.
P
P
74. Upholstering shop.
P
P
75. Utility transmission line and substation.*
SC
SC
76. Veterinary office and animal hospital or grooming shop.
SP
SP
77. Wholesale and warehouse facility.
SC
SC
* Transformers not to be in front yard.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-74
6) Schedule 21.06-B Bulk Requirements
Business Districts
DIST.
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
MIN. LOT
WIDTH
FRONT
MINIMUM YARDS*
SIDE
REAR
MAXIMUM
BUILDING
HEIGHT
B-1
All permitted uses except when special conditions or Special Permit provisions state otherwise.
None
None or compati-
ble with
adjacent
residence district yard require-ments.
None required except:
1. If side yard is provided it shall be at least 6 feet.
2. 20 feet from an existing street right-of-way.
3. 20 feet when adjacent to a residence district.
25´
3 stories
or 45 feet, whichever is less.
B-2
All permitted uses except when special conditions or Special Permit provisions state otherwise.
170´ at setback line plus 100´ of road front-age
50´
20 feet on each side
50´
3 stories or 45 feet, whichever is less.
* Bulk requirements for uses permitted by Special Permit may be modified as Village Board deems appropriate in its review of a proposal.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-75
4-19-93 Chapter 21-76
SECTION 21.07 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
(1) Intent.
(a) GENERAL.
The general intent of this Section is to set forth land uses or activities which are permitted in industrial areas in the Village, to specify the zoning district in which each use or activity will be permitted, with or without special conditions, or after a special permit has been granted, and to establish bulk regulations for lots within each district.
(b) (I-1) AND (I-2) INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
The intent of the Industrial Districts is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted to provide for industrial and related development within the framework of industrial and manufacturing growth goals of the Village. It is further intended that regulations in Industrial Districts be such as to prevent intrusion of structures and uses that are inimical to and not compatible with the use of land for desired industrial development.
In addition, it is intended that performance standards be established to provide specific controls for governing tolerable levels of emission of noise, smoke, and particulate matter, odors and other potential nuisances and for providing adequate landscaped yards and other open areas in order to maintain the desired environmental qualities within the Industrial Districts and the entire Village and its environs.
The distinction between the (I-1) and (I-2) Industrial Districts involves differences in permitted land uses and allowable densities.
(2) General Provisions.
(a) SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.
Restrictions and controls for land uses or activities permitted in Industrial Districts, or land uses or activities having special conditions attached to them, or requiring a special permit, are set forth in Schedule 21.07-A. Regulations for lot size, yards and similar bulk requirements are set forth in Schedule 21.07-B. Both said schedules are hereby adopted and made part of this Ordinance.
(b) EXCLUDED USES OR ACTIVITIES.
A land use or activity not set forth in Schedule 21.07-A is not permitted in an Industrial District in the Village except that uses and activities which are similar to those which are permitted in a district may be permitted by special use permit.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-77
(c) ENCLOSURE OF OPERATION.
All operations shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except:
1. Off-street parking and off-street loading when conforming with regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
2. Establishments of the drive-in type offering goods and services to customers waiting in parked automobiles.
3. Servicing, repairing, testing, cleaning and other operations of railroads and other transportation facilities customarily conducted out-of-doors.
4. Storage and testing areas located not less than 500 feet from a Residential District. Such areas, when located within 500 feet of a Residential District, shall be completely enclosed behind a solid fence or wall or chain-link fence faced with dense plantings of trees or shrubs which in the case of a wall or fence shall be not less than six (6) feet or more than eight (8) feet in height.
5. Other uses customarily conducted in the out-of-doors such as open sales lots for retail sales and out-of-doors recreation facilities. Such facilities shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the manufacturing use.
(d) SETBACKS ALONG DISTRICT LINES.
1. In an (I-1) or (I-2) District no building or structure, the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, repairing, cleaning, servicing or testing of materials, products or goods, shall be located less than 50 feet from a Residential or Mobile Home District boundary line or residential property line. All buildings and accessory uses shall be setback at least 50 feet from street rights-of-way.
2. Off-street parking and permitted outdoor storage may be located in such setback areas except that no parking or storage shall be located less than 30 feet from a lot line adjoining a street.
3. From an interior lot line, which line is also a boundary of a Residential or Mobile Home District or residential property line, all off-street parking or outdoor storage shall be effectively screened from its residential neighbors by a buffer strip at least twelve (12) feet wide and planted with trees and shrubs that provide an effective visual screen.
4. When industrial buildings or structures which exist on the effective date of this Ordinance have setbacks from a Residential or Mobile Home District
4-19-93 Chapter 21-78
or residential property line of less dimension than is required herein, any expansion of said buildings or structures shall, in lieu of the above requirements, be required to provide setbacks from its residential neighbors as determined by the Department of Public Works in its site plan review.
(e) SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
No land use or activity in an Industrial District may be developed or expanded without a building permit issued by the Zoning Administrator under the rules and regulations contained in this Section. The Zoning Administrator may not issue a building permit for the development or expansion of any permitted use in any Industrial District until a final site plan has been approved by the Department of Public Works in accordance with this Ordinance.
(f) EXISTING SETBACK LINES.
Where existing setback lines are less than required by this code, such setbacks may be continued so long as all parking, loading, and screening requirements can be met for the total development.
(3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities in Industrial Districts.
Land uses or activities listed in Schedule 21.07-A as being "Permitted with Special Conditions" shall not be considered permitted, and the Zoning Administrator shall not issue a building permit for such uses or activities, until applicable conditions, as set forth below, have been complied with or a variance has been granted.
(a) TEMPORARY BUILDING OR FENCE.
Permitted for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such construction and hen located on the same lot where such construction is being undertaken or a lot contiguous thereto.
(b) SIGN.
Permitted when they are in compliance with Section 21.14 of this Ordinance.
(c) MANUFACTURING, FABRICATING, ASSEMBLY, REPAIR, STORAGE, PROCESSING, CLEANING, SERVICING AND TESTING ESTABLISHMENTS.
Permitted in an (I-1) or (I-2) District only when:
1. Such land use or activity is in compliance with applicable performance standards for noise, vibration, smoke and particulate matter, toxic matter,
4-19-93 Chapter 21-79
noxious and odorous matters, fire and explosion hazard, glare and heat, radiation hazard and similar standards as administered by the Village.
2. Any use involving the storage, use or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation has been specifically licensed by the Village Board or is customarily incidental to the operation of a principal use and in conformance with applicable performance standards set by the Village.
(d) ABOVE GROUND STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS OR MATERIAL.
Permitted by special use in the (I-1) and (I-2) Districts only when such use has been reviewed and approved by the North Fond du Lac Fire Department.
(e) WATCHMAN'S DWELLING.
Permitted in an (I-1) and (I-2) District if such dwelling is located on the premises where the said watchman is employed.
(f) LABOR HALL AND OFFICE.
Off-street parking shall be provided for each four (4) seats or ninety (90) lineal inches of seating space in the main assembly hall.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-80
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-81
(4) Schedule 21.07-A Land Uses or Activities Industrial Districts
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
I-1
I-2
1. Above ground storage of flammable liquids or materials.
SP
SP
2. Ambulance service.
P
P
3. Asphalt, coal, or tar manufacture.
SP
4. Archery range, golf driving range, ice skating rink.
SP
SP
5. Bottling works.
P
P
6. Car wash.
P
P
7. Cement, lime, gypsum manufacture.
SP
P
8. Cemetery monument creation and sales.
SP
P
9. Contractor's facility, including material and equipment storage.
P
P
10. Express and parcel delivery.
P
P
11. Feed manufacture.
P
P
12. Fuel and ice retail sales
P
P
13. Governmental service.
SP
SP
14. Greenhouse and nursery.
P
P
15. Heliport.
SP
SP
16. Knitting mills.
SC
SC
17. Labor hall and office.
SC
SC
18. Landfilling.
SC
SC
19. Laundry.
P
P
20. Lumberyard, mill work.
P
P
21. Mail order house.
P
P
4-19-93 Chapter 21-82
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
I-1
I-2
22. Manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, repair, storage, processing, cleaning, servicing and testing establishment.
SC
SC
23. Milk distribution sales.
P
P
24. Miniature or par-3 golf, Go-kart track.
SP
SP
25. Mining, quarrying or extraction of sand, gravel, soil or other aggregate.
SP
SP
26. Motor freight terminal, air and rail freight terminal.
SP
SP
27. Offices with accessory research, testing, warehousing, fabricating or assembly.
SP
SP
28. Off-street parking.
P
P
29. Packing and crating.
P
P
30. Painting and enameling.
P
P
31. Planned unit development.
SP
SP
32. Plumbing and heating shops.
P
P
33. Public or private park or playground.
SP
34. Public utility.
SP
SP
35. Publishing and printing.
P
P
36. Railroad switching and repair facility.
P
37. Sheet metal working, tinsmithing, blacksmithing.
P
P
38. Sign.
SC
SC
39. Slaughterhouse, stockyard.
SP
40. Smelting.
SP
41. Storage or use of materials which decompose by detonation.
SP
SP
42. Swimming pool, tennis court, shuffleboard courts and similar facilities.
SP
SP
43. Temporary building or fence.
SC
SC
44. Trade school.
P
P
4-19-93 Chapter 21-83
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
I-1
I-2
45. Vehicle repair including painting, body and motor work.
P
P
46. Warehouse.
SP
SP
47. Watchman's dwelling.
SC
SC
48. Wholesale or jobbing establishment.
P
P
49. Sales and service of recreational vehicles, motorcycles, and similar vehicles. (O-2000-07)
P
P
4-19-93 Chapter 21-84
(5) Schedule 21.07 – B Bulk Requirements Industrial Districts*
DIST
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SQ. FT.)
MIN. LOT WIDTH (FT.)
FLOOR AREA RATIO
MINIMUM YARDS *
FRONT SIDE REAR
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
I-1
All permitted uses except when special conditions or Special Permit requirements state otherwise.
None
0.6
30´
1. Two required, each at least 15 ft.
2. 30 ft. when adjacent to a street.
3. None required when adjacent to a railroad right-of-way.
25 ft. except none required when adjacent to a railroad right-of-way.
75´
I-2
All permitted uses except when special conditions or Special Permit requirements state otherwise.
None
None
0.8
30´
1. Two required, each at least 15 ft.
2. 30 ft. when adjacent to a street.
3. None required when adjacent to a railroad right-of-way.
25 ft. except none required when adjacent to a railroad right-of-way.
60´
* Bulk requirements for uses permitted by Special Permit may be modified as Village Board deems appropriate in its review of a proposal.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-85
4-19-93 Chapter 21-86
SECTION 21.071 (BP) BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT
(1) Intent.
(a) GENERAL.
The general intent of this Section is to set forth land uses or activities which are permitted in business park areas of the Village, to specify the uses and activities that will be permitted, with or without special conditions, or after a special permit has been granted, and to establish bulk regulations for lots within the district.
(b) (BP) BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT.
The intent of the (BP) Business Park District is to combine in one zoning district light industrial, office and commercial uses.
(2) General Provisions.
(a) SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.
Restrictions and controls for land uses or activities permitted in a (BP) Business Park District, or land uses or activities having special conditions attached to them, or requiring a special permit, are set forth in Schedule 21.071-A. Regulations for lot size, yards and similar bulk requirements for uses specified in Schedule 21.071-A are set forth in Schedule 21.071-B. Both said schedules are hereby adopted and made part of this Ordinance.
(b) EXCLUDED USES OR ACTIVITIES.
A land use or activity not set forth in Schedule 21.071-A is not permitted in the (BP) Business Park Districts in the Village except that uses and activities which are similar to those which are permitted in a district may be permitted by special use permit.
(c) ENCLOSURE OF OPERATION.
All operations in a (BP) District shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except:
1. Off-street parking and off-street loading when conforming with regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
2. Establishments of the drive-in type offering goods and services to customers waiting in parked automobiles.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-87
3. Servicing, repairing, testing, cleaning and other operations customarily conducted out-of-doors.
4. Other uses customarily conducted in the out-of-doors such as open sales lots for retail sales and out-of-doors recreation facilities.
5. Storage areas located not less than 50 feet from a Residential District. Storage areas, when located within 50 feet of a Residential District, shall be completely enclosed behind a solid wall or fence, or a fence faced with plantings of trees or shrubs that provide an effective visual screen.
(d) PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Performance standards for noise, vibration, smoke and particulate matters, noxious odors, fire and explosion hazard, glare, lighting, heat and radiation shall be as established and enforced by the Village.
(e) SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
The Zoning Administrator may not issue a building permit for the development or expansion of any building in a (BP) District until a final site plan has been approved by the Department of Public Works in accordance with Section 21.17 (5) (b).
(3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities in Business Districts.
Land use or activities listed in Schedule 21.071-A “Permitted with Special Conditions” shall not be considered permitted, and the Zoning Administrator shall not issue a zoning certificate for such uses or activities, until applicable conditions, as set forth below, have been complied with or a variance has been granted.
(a) BATTERY AND TIRE SALES AND SERVICE
1. Permitted when all storage and servicing occurs within a building and vehicles are not parked outdoors overnight.
2. All outside storage is screened from public view.
(b) DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT INCLUDING DRIVE-THRU FACILITIES
Such facilities shall provide adequate parking and stacking space so that vehicles are not standing in any public street. The number, size and location of access and egress points shall be approved by the Director of Public Works.
(c) FEED STORE
4-19-93 Chapter 21-88
Permitted when there is no outside storage of feed supplies or equipment.
(d) TEMPORARY GREENHOUSE
Temporary greenhouse construction shall conform to all appropriate setback requirements. Temporary greenhouse permits must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator. Temporary permits shall be in effect for a period not to exceed six months.
(e) MACHINE, SHEET METAL AND WELDING SHOP
Permitted when operations are within the enclosed building and glare from the welding operation is not visible from outside the building.
(f) PUBLIC UTILITY FOR TRANSMISSION OF LOCAL SERVICE.
Such utilities shall be placed underground whenever feasible or, when not so placed, shall be located along rear lot lines or in a manner which will cause the minimum adverse visual impact on the Village’s streetscape. Approval of such utility lines shall be given by the Department of Public Works.
(g) SIGNS
Permitted when they are in compliance with Section 21.14 of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2002-13)
(h) TEMPORARY BUILDING OR FENCE
Permitted for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such construction and when located on the same lot where such construction is being undertaken or a lot contiguous thereto.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-89
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-90
(5) Schedule 21.071-A Land Uses or Activities (BP) Business Park Districts
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
N = Prohibited
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY:
BP
1. Antique and craft shop
P
2. Antique and used furniture sales.
P
3. Automotive car wash.
SP
4. Automobile engine repair, service garage, and vehicle body shop.
SP
5. Automotive parts and accessories.
P
6. Automobile service station.
SP
7. Bakery.
P
8. Bank and financial institution, including branch bank and drive-in.
P
9. Battery and tire sales and service.
SC
10. Bicycle sales, rental and repair.
P
11. Blueprinting, photocopying, and Photostatting.
P
12. Boat sales and repair.
SP
13. Bottling and distribution.
SP
14. Bulk fuel and ice sales.
SP
15. Business machine and equipment sales and service.
P
16. Catering establishment.
P
17. Church, chapel, temple, convent, monastery, rectory.
N
18. Club or lodge.
N
19 Cocktail lounge; tavern.
P
20 Day care facility.
P
21. Drive-in restaurant including drive-thru facilities, i.e., bank, laundry, bakery, etc.
SC
22. Dry cleaning and laundry facility, including linen, towel or diaper service.
P
23. Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in restaurants.
P
24. Feed store.
SC
25. Fraternal, philanthropic and eleemosynary institution.
N
26. Frozen food and locker facility.
P
27. Funeral and undertaking parlor.
SP
28. Furrier shop.
P
29. Governmental service.
P
30. Hobby shop.
P
31. Temporary Greenhouse
SC
32. Household appliance, radio, and TV sales and service.
P
33. Indoor amusement and recreation facility.
P
34. Indoor cinema or theater.
P
35. Interior decorating.
P
36. Landfill.
N
37. Library.
P
4-19-93 Chapter 21-91
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY:
BP
38. Liquor store.
P
39. Loan office.
P
40. Machine, sheet metal and welding shop.
SC
41. Meat and fish market.
P
42. Medical, dental and optical clinic.
P
43. Meeting and exhibition hall.
SP
44. Motel and hotel; bed and breakfast establishment; extended stay hotel.
SP
45. New and used automobile sales.
SP
46. Newspaper office.
P
47. Newsstand.
P
48. Nursery school.
P
49. Outdoor amusement and recreation facility.
SP
50. Parcel delivery.
P
51. Personal service facility, i.e., barber and beauty shop, tailor shop, self-service,
Laundromat, shoe and clothing repair.
P
52. Pet shop.
P
53. Photography studio.
P
54. Planned unit development.
SP
55. Physical culture and health facility; spa.
P
56. Printing and publishing shop.
P
57. Private parking facility not accessory to another use.
SP
58. Public utility for transmission of local service.
SC
59. Professional or business office including optical and dental laboratory.
P
60. Radio and TV studio.
P
61. Rental service facility.
SP
62. Research laboratory.
P
63. Sale and display of art objects, art and school supplies, candy, ice cream; gift shop;
picture framing shop.
P
64. Sales and service of plumbing, electrical or heating fixtures and appliances.
P
65. Sales and service of recreation vehicles, motorcycle and similar vehicles.
SP
66. Sales of building materials.
SP
67. Sale of convenience goods, such as groceries, pharmaceutical, sundries, photographic
supplies, vanity.
P
68. Secondhand store and rummage sale.
P
69. Sign.
SC
70. Supermarket, department store, variety store; sale of clothes, shoes, furniture, hardware,
flowers, jewelry, toys, china and glassware, carpet and floor coverings, luggage and
leather goods; dry goods, paint and wallpaper, office supplies, sporting goods.
P
71. Tent and awning sales and production.
P
72. Ticket and travel agency.
P
73. Upholstering shop.
P
74. Utility transmission line and substation.
SP
75. Veterinary office and animal hospital or grooming shop.
SP
76. Wholesale and warehouse facilities, excluding mini-warehouse.
P
4-19-93 Chapter 21-92
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY:
BP
77. Above ground storage of flammable liquids or materials.
SP
78. Ambulance service.
P
79. Asphalt, coal, or tar manufacture.
N
80. Archery range, golf driving range, ice skating rink.
SP
81. Bottling works.
P
82. Mini-warehouse
N
83. Cement, lime, gypsum manufacture.
N
84. Cemetery monument creation and sales.
SP
85. Contractor’s facility, including material and equipment storage.
P
86. Express and parcel delivery.
P
87. Feed manufacture.
P
88. Fuel and ice retail sales.
P
89. Governmental service.
SP
90. Greenhouse and nursery.
P
91. Heliport.
SP
92 Knitting mills.
P
93. Labor hall and office.
P
94. Land filling.
N
95. Laundry.
P
96. Lumberyard, mill work.
P
97. Mail order house.
P
98. Manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, repair, storage, processing cleaning, servicing
and testing establishment.
P
99. Milk distribution sales.
P
100. Miniature or par-3 golf, Go-cart track
SP
101. Mining, quarrying or extraction of sand, gravel, soil or other aggregate.
N
102. Motor freight terminal, air and rail freight terminal.
P
103. Offices with accessory research, testing, warehousing, fabricating or assembly.
P
104. Off-street parking.
N
105. Packing and crating.
P
106. Painting and enameling.
P
107. Planned unit development.
SP
108. Plumbing and heating shops.
P
109. Public or private park or playground.
SP
110. Public utility.
SP
111. Publishing and printing.
P
112. Railroad switching and repair facility.
N
113. Sheet metal working, tinsmithing, blacksmithing.
P
114. Slaughterhouse, stockyard.
N
4-19-93 Chapter 21-93
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY:
BP
115. Smelting/foundry.
N
116. Swimming pool, tennis court, shuffleboard courts and similar facilities.
SP
117 Temporary building or fence.
SC
118. Trade school.
P
119. Vehicle repair including painting, body and motor work.
P
120. Warehouse.
SP
121. Wholesale or jobbing establishment.
P
4-19-93 Chapter 21-94
Schedule 21.071-B
Bulk Requirements - (BP) Business Park District
DIST.
LAND OR USE ACTIVITY
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SQ. FT.)
MIN. LOT WIDTH (FT.)
FLOOR AREA RATIO
MIN. BUILD. SETBACK FRONT
MIN. BUILD. SETBACK SIDE
MIN. BUILD. SETBACK REAR
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
BP
All permitted uses except when special conditions or Special Permit requirements state otherwise
None
None
0.8
30' (a)
20' (a)
25' (a)
75' (b)
(a) Side yards may be reduces to 0' when two sites are developed with recorded cross-easements
and shared parking agreements as approved by the Plan Commission.
(b) Building height subject to Fire Chief approval if greater than 36'
4-19-93 Chapter 21-95
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-96
SECTION 21.08 OFFICE/INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
(1) Intent.
The intent of the (O) Office/Institutional District is to set forth those land uses and activities which are permitted to provide for the specialized business, office, educational, institutional and cultural needs of the Village and surrounding region and which often have unique site and locational requirements.
(2) General Provisions.
(a) SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.
Restrictions and controls for land uses or activities permitted in an (O) Office/Institutional District, or land uses or activities having special conditions attached to them, or requiring a special permit, are set forth in Schedule 21.08-A. Regulations for lot size, yards and similar bulk requirements are set forth below. Schedule 21.08-A is hereby adopted and made part of this Ordinance.
(b) EXCLUDED USES OR ACTIVITIES.
A land use or activity not set forth in Schedule 21.08-A is not permitted in Office/Institutional Districts in the Village except that uses and activities which are similar to those which are permitted in a district may be permitted by special use permit.
(c) SCOPE OF OPERATION.
All operations shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings, except for accessory off-street parking and off-street loading facilities and signs. Goods and merchandise, if any, stored on the premises shall not be offered for sale or sold to the public except as may be allowed as accessory to a permitted or special use.
(d) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
Uses and structures which are necessary and desirable adjuncts to permissible principal uses and structures and are under the management or control of the responsible for the principal use and structure.
(e) PERMITTED ACCESSORY SIGNS.
Identification, informational or directional signs erected entities in connection with permissible principal uses and structures or for other public purposes. No sign shall be erected within ten (10) ft. of any side or rear lot line.
(f) OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-97
1. Offices: One (1) space per every 300 square feet of floor space.
2. Hospitals: 1.1 spaces for each bed.
3. Exhibits, museums, libraries: One (1) space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area.
(g) BULK REQUIREMENTS.
There are no minimum lot requirements. Any lot adjacent to a public street or Residential District shall have a yard at least 25 ft. in width if at the side and 25 ft. in depth if at the front or rear. Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30%. Maximum height of any structure within 40 ft. of a Residential District shall not exceed 45 ft.
(3) Special Conditions for Certain Land Uses or Activities in Office/Institutional District.
Land uses or activities listed in Schedule 21.08-A as being "Permitted with Special Conditions" shall not be considered permitted, and the Zoning Administrator shall not issue a zoning certificate for such uses or activities, until applicable conditions, as set forth below, have been complied with or a variance has been granted.
(a) DWELLING, WHEN LOCATED IN AN EXCLUSIVELY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING.
Permitted in an (O) District when such residential building is developed in conformance with the residential requirements of the (R-6) Residential District.
(b) TEMPORARY BUILDING OR FENCE.
Permitted for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such construction and when located on the same lot where such construction is being undertaken or a lot contiguous thereto.
(c) SIGN.
Permitted when they are in compliance with Section 21.14 of this Ordinance.
(d) LABOR HALL AND OFFICE.
Off-street parking shall be provided for each four seats or ninety lineal inches of seating space in the main assembly hall.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-98
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-99
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-100
(4) Schedule 21.08-A Land Uses or Activities Office/Institutional Districts
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
O
1. Arboretum.
P
2. Archery range, golf driving range, ice skating rink.
P
3. Art gallery, museum.
P
4. Automobile parking lot or garage.
SP
5. Cemetery.
SP
6. Dwelling unit, when located in an office building.
SP
7. Dwelling, when located in an exclusively residential building.
SC
8. Educational Institutions.
P
9. Flood control works.
P
10. Fraternal, philanthropic or eleemosynary use.
P
11. Golf course.
P
12. Governmental service.
P
13. Hospitals, clinics.
SP
14. Labor hall and office.
SC
15. Library.
P
16. Lumberyard mill work.
P
17. Manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, repair, storage, processing, cleaning,
servicing and testing establishment.
P
18. Mining, quarrying or extraction of sand, gravel, soil or other aggregate.
P
19. Motel and hotel; bed & breakfast establishments.
SP
20. Museum.
P
21. Nursing home.
SP
4-19-93 Chapter 21-101
P = Permitted
SC = Permitted with Special Conditions
SP = Special Use Permit Required
LAND USE OR ACTIVITY
O
22. Offices: governmental, business or professional including medical, dental or optical clinics.
P
23. Offices with accessory research, testing, warehousing, fabricating or assembly.
SP
24. Off-street parking.
P
25. Places of religious worship, convents.
P
26. Planned unit development.
SP
27. Public or private park or playground.
SP
28. Public utility installations.
SP
29. Restaurant, except drive-in type.
SC
30. Sign.
SC
31. Temporary building or fence.
SC
32. Zoo.
P
4-19-93 Chapter 21-102
SECTION 21.09 MOBILE HOME DISTRICT
(1) Intent.
(a) It is the intent of this ordinance that mobile homes be parked or used only within (MH) Mobile Home Districts as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or use any mobile home on any street, alley, highway or road or other public place, or on any parcel of land or other space within the Village on any property outside an approved licensed mobile home park as herein specified.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, establish, operate or maintain a mobile home on property except that zoned for mobile home park residence districts.
(c) Subject to the terms, conditions and limitations set forth herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property within the Village, a mobile home park which is not in compliance with this Ordinance.
(2) Permitted Uses.
The (MH) Mobile Home District provides for single-family residential development served by municipal sewer and water.
(a) PERMITTED USES: Mobile home parks.
(b) CONDITIONAL USES: None.
(3) General Provisions.
(a) MASTER PLAN: At the time of application for rezoning to the (MH) District and application for a mobile home park license under this Code, the applicant shall submit a preliminary master plan to the Village containing the following:
1. The names and addresses of all owners and developers of the proposed mobile home park.
2. The legal description and size, in acres, of the proposed mobile home park.
3. The location and approximate sizes of all mobile home sites, storage areas, recreation areas and facilities, and proposed roadways and their width, sidewalks and permanent buildings.
4. Existing landscaping features and proposed landscaping concepts.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-103
5. The location and size of all public roadways abutting the mobile home park and all street and sidewalk accesses from such streets and sidewalks to the mobile home park.
6. A drawing of a typical mobile home site showing the placement of the home, parking area, garage, setbacks, lighting, and a typical landscaping plan.
7. Other pertinent information pertaining to the proposed mobile home park as required by the Plan Commission or Director of Public Works.
(b) AREA REQUIREMENTS: Each mobile home park shall comply with the following standards:
1. A mobile home park shall have a minimum of ten (10) acres in area.
2. The minimum setback for a mobile home park building, structure or unit shall be 50 feet from the right of way line of a street or highway which abuts the development.
3. Except for public utility structures, no structure or pavement of any type shall be placed closer than twenty (20) feet from the exterior property line.
(c) SITE REQUIREMENTS: Each mobile home site shall have:
1. A minimum of 6,000 sq. ft. of land area for a single mobile home for the exclusive use of the residents of the mobile home located on the site with an average width of 60 feet and a minimum depth of 100 feet.
2. A minimum of 6,500 sq. ft. of land area for a double mobile home for the exclusive use of the residents of the mobile home located on the site with an average width of 65 feet and a minimum depth of 100 feet.
3. A minimum frontage for cul-de-sac sites shall be twenty (20) feet measured along the pavement edge.
4. Mobile home sites with their long axis parallel to the roadway ("parallel lots") shall be a minimum 100 feet wide and 60 feet deep for a single unit, and 100 feet wide and 65 feet deep for a double-wide unit.
5. Each space shall be numbered.
(d) YARD REQUIREMENTS: All mobile homes shall comply with the following yard requirements:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-104
1. No mobile home shall be parked closer than fifteen (15) feet to the front site line nor ten (10) feet to the rear site line. Cul-de-sac lots shall provide a minimum 15-foot setback from the roadway edge.
2. There shall be an open space of at least twenty (20) feet between adjacent mobile homes and twenty (20) feet between adjacent mobile homes on the rear of the site lines.
(e) PARKING: The following are minimum parking requirements for mobile home parks:
1. Each mobile home site shall have hard-surfaced off-street parking space for two (2) automobiles. The parking spaces shall total a minimum of 360 sq. ft. in area.
2. Access drives off roads to all parking spaces and mobile home spaces shall be hard-surfaced in bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete designed to accommodate normal traffic.
(f) UTILITIES: The following minimum requirements for utilities shall be maintained:
1. There shall be no permanent obstructions impeding the inspection of plumbing, electrical facilities, utilities or other related equipment or blocking or impeding access and egress from the front or rear doors of a mobile home.
2. Garbage, waste, and trash disposal plans must conform to all State and local health and pollution control regulations.
3. The owner of a mobile home park shall pay all required sewer and utility fees or assessments to the Village Clerk or appropriate utility.
4. The owner of a mobile home park may elect to either have the mobile home park master metered or to have each mobile home individually metered for water service subject to the following:
a. Should the owner elect to have the Village meter each mobile home individually, the water mains and laterals shall be installed in accordance with the Village specifications and located in accordance with the specifications acceptable to the Director of Public Works. Such mains and laterals, to the curb box, shall be conveyed to the Village by such document approved by the Village. The mains and laterals shall become part of the Village's utility distribution system.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-105
b. Should the owner elect to locate the water mains and laterals in locations that are not acceptable to the Director of Public Works, the ownership of such mains and laterals shall remain with the mobile home park owner. The mobile home park shall, however, be metered at a strategic location approved by the Director of Public Works. The meter pit or manhole shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the Village. The maintenance of the mains and laterals shall be the sole responsibility of the mobile home park owner. The mobile home park owner may purchase, install and bill each tenant directly for the water used and such meters shall be owned, read and maintained by the mobile home park owner.
5. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a sewer receptacle at least four (4) inches in diameter which shall be connected to receive the waste from the shower, bath, tub, flush toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink of the mobile home harbored on such site having any or all of such facilities. The sewer in each site shall be connected to discharge the mobile home waste into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances. Each unit shall be subject to a sewer service charge according to the license agreement with the Village Board.
6. An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home sites within the park, to meet the requirements of the park.
(g) INTERNAL STREETS: All internal streets shall meet the following minimum requirements:
1. Streets shall be hard surfaced with bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete to conform to the structural requirements of Village streets as approved by the Plan Commission.
2. All streets shall be developed with a street surface of not less than 24 feet in width. On-street parking on one side may be allowed (except at park entrance) if the street width is at least 28 feet wide. Streets shall be at least 32 feet wide if on-street parking is permitted on both sides.
3. Streets shall be designed to provide suitable drainage without on-street ponding of stormwater. The Village Engineer may require curb, gutter, and/or storm sewers based on the natural characteristics of the site and the public health, safety and welfare.
(h) SIDEWALKS: A 36-inch wide portland cement concrete sidewalk shall be built and maintained by the owner or operator providing access from roadways to all recreational areas, common use buildings, and common storage areas.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-106
(i) LIGHTING: Artificial lights shall be maintained during all hours of darkness in all buildings provided for common facilities for occupant's use. The mobile home park, streets, and pedestrian areas shall be lighted from sunset to sunrise. Entrance roads intersecting with adjacent public streets shall be lighted with either public street lights or private entrance lights or a combination of both as required by the Plan Commission.
(j) RECREATIONAL AREAS: All mobile home parks shall have one or more recreational areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. Recreational areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and shall, where the topography permits, be centrally located. The size of such recreational areas shall be based on a ratio of providing a minimum of one and one-half (1½) acres of recreational area for each one-hundred (100) mobile home sites. At least one-half (½) of the recreational area shall be concentrated in one site, and the remaining balance may be distributed throughout the park in several smaller sites. All recreational equipment installed in such area shall be owned and maintained by the owner or operator of the mobile home park at his expense.
(k) LANDSCAPING: The following minimum landscaping requirements shall be maintained in all mobile home parks:
1. Each space shall be properly landscaped with at least two (2) trees. All yards shall be sodded or planted in grass. Trees, grass and landscape materials shall be properly maintained and replaced as needed to conform to the initially approved landscaping.
2. All mobile home parks constructed under this ordinance shall have a greenbelt or buffer strip at least twenty (20) feet wide along all boundaries. This area shall be landscaped with permanent plantings and/or berms to establish a screening effect. Where the adjoining property is also a mobile home park, such screening or buffer strip shall not be required on that side of the property.
3. All areas shall be landscaped and the landscaping shall be shown on a typical mobile home individual site plan, and also shall be shown in concept on the overall master plan.
(l) MOBILE HOME STANDS REQUIRED: All manufactured home installations shall comply with SPS 321.40 and homes manufactured prior to April 1, 2007 shall use the Manufactured Home Installation Manual for Manufactured Homes Produced on or After April 1, 2007 as a guide to installation. (O-2012-2)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-107
(m) TIE DOWNS AND ANCHORS REQUIRED: All manufactured home installations shall comply with SPS 321.40 and homes manufactured prior to April 1, 2007 shall use the Manufactured Home Installation Manual for Manufactured Homes Produced on or After April 1, 2007 as a guide to installation. (O-2012-2)
(n) SKIRTING: All mobile home units shall have skirts around the entire mobile home made of plastic, fiberglass or other comparable materials and shall be of a permanent color, or painted to match the appropriate mobile home so as to enhance the general appearance thereof.
(o) ACCESSORY STORAGE BUILDINGS OR GARAGES: Any accessory storage building or garage in a mobile home park shall comply with other applicable Village codes. Accessory storage buildings shall be anchored.
(p) SERVICE BUILDINGS:
1. Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems.
2. The service buildings shall be well lighted at all times of the day and night, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be constructed of such moisture-proof materials which may be painted woodwork as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit during the period from October 1st to May 1st. The floors of the service buildings shall be of water impervious materials. Washing and drying machines may be installed according to needs of the park.
3. All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance.
(q) FIRE PROTECTION: Service buildings shall be equipped with fire extinguishers and the park with water hydrants of such type, size and number and so located within the park to comply with the North Fond du Lac Water Department rules and all of standard size and fitness of this department and the regulations of the fire department. No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may endanger life or property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time. All municipal codes regulating open fires shall be enforced.
(r) REGISTER OF OWNERS: The manager of a mobile home park shall keep a registration list of mobile home owners available to the Village or its agents for inspection at reasonable times.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-108
(s) INSPECTION AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT: All mobile homes shall comply with State and Village fire, health, building and plumbing regulations. Before a mobile home unit may be occupied, the mobile home owner or licensed selling agent must secure the inspection and approval of the Building Inspector regarding compliance with such regulations including the provisions of this ordinance. An occupancy permit must be issued by the Building Inspector prior to occupancy of the mobile home unit.
(4) Declaration of Restrictions/Restrictive Covenants.
The Village may accept a declaration of restrictions or restrictive covenants filed by the applicant petitioning for rezoning concerning the uses of the proposed parcel to be rezoned establishing lot sizes, setbacks, roadways, recreational areas, location of mobile homes, buildings, structures, and landscaping and other physical features as specified in this ordinance. Such declaration of restrictions or restrictive covenant shall run with the land and shall contain the following requirements:
(a) A subscription clause.
(b) The legal description of the property and master plan.
(c) The names of the persons having an interest in the property who shall also execute the restrictive covenant or declaration of restrictions.
d) The names and addresses of all persons holding a security interest in the property who shall also execute the restrictive covenant or declaration of restrictions.
(e) The declaration of restriction or restrictive covenant shall run with the land and be binding upon the property owners, grantees, successors, heirs or assigns of the property.
(f) Contain the condition that as long as the property is zoned Mobile Home Park District that should buildings or the property be used for other than that specified in the declaration of restriction or restrictive covenant, that any building permit issued by the Village shall be null and void or that the occupancy of such building(s) or use of the property shall be considered to be in violation of the zoning ordinance of the Village.
(g) Such declaration of restrictions or restrictive covenant running with the land shall be recorded in the Register of Deeds office for Fond du Lac County and shall be considered a restrictive covenant running with the land or declaration of restrictions running with the land and shall ensure to the benefit of all abutting and contiguous properties to that of the subject property, as well as the residents of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(5) Detailed Site Plans and Information Required.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-109
After (MH) District zoning has been granted, detailed plans and information covering that portion of the total project which is intended for construction shall be submitted for approval by the Plan Commission prior to the start of construction of the subject mobile home park. The detailed plans and information shall conform substantially to the preliminary plans and to all other conditions required at the time of zoning approval. All required detailed plans and information shall be submitted to the Plan Commission at least ten (10) business days prior to the requested date of approval. The detailed plans and information shall include:
(a) A master plan showing the entire mobile home park area including plan elements as approved by the Plan Commission.
(b) Plans and specifications for:
1. Sanitary sewer service.
2. Water service.
3. Stormwater drainage facilities.
4. Roadway construction.
5. Permanent buildings and support structures.
(c) Operational plans including:
1. Method of garbage and refuse disposal.
2. Grounds maintenance procedures.
3. Staging and timing of construction.
(d) The square footage of each mobile home site shall be depicted on the site plan. Verification of the mobile home site square footage shall be the responsibility of the mobile home park owner.
(e) Other plans and information as required by the Plan Commission.
(6) Management.
(a) In every mobile home park, there shall be located the office of the person in charge of said mobile home park. In instances where the mobile home park is owned by the same persons owning other mobile home parks within the Village, only one (1) office shall be required.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-110
(b) The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park and its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition.
(c) It is the duty of the mobile home park owner or operator, together with any attendants or person in change of a mobile home park, to:
1. Keep a register of all principal occupants of mobile homes to be open at all times to inspection by federal, state and local officials.
2. Maintain the mobile home park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times.
3. At the time of entry into the mobile home park, obtain a signed application form, stating year in which mobile home was new, together with size and make, last prior address and current employer, plus number of and ages of children in family.
4. Inform new residents of the location of the nearest available public tornado shelter(s).
(7) Licenses.
(a) LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or extend any mobile home park within the limits of North Fond du Lac unless he holds a valid license issued by the Village in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration, or extension proposed. All applications for licenses shall contain the following:
1. Name and address of applicant.
2. Location and legal description of the mobile home park.
3. A complete plan of the park in the conformity with the requirements of this ordinance.
4. Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park.
5. Application for initial mobile park license shall be filed with the Village Clerk and, subject to approval, be issued by the permit issuing authority. The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant.
6. An annual renewal of the license shall be obtained as described below.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-111
(b) LICENSE FEES.
1. The annual license fee for each mobile home lot, site or park shall be in accordance with the approved schedule of fees on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
2. A fee shall be charged for transfer of a license.
(c) APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
1. Upon application in writing by a licensee for renewal of a license and upon payment of the annual license fee, and upon review, the issuing authority shall issue a certificate renewing such license for another year.
2. Upon application in writing for transfer of a license and payment of the transfer fee, the issuing authority shall issue a transfer.
(d) REVOCATION OF LICENSES OR PERMITS.
The issuing authority may, following an administrative hearing, revoke any license to maintain and operate a mobile home park when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this ordinance. After such revocation, the license may be re-issued if the circumstances leading to revocation have been remedied and the mobile home park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with this ordinance.
(e) POSTING OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
The license certificate or special permit shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times.
(8) Definitions.
As used herein, the following definitions shall have the terms ascribed to them:
(a) DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A mobile home without inside toilets and bath are prohibited in a mobile home park as defined in this ordinance.
(b) ISSUING AUTHORITY: The person, board or committee who has been authorized to issue respective permits.
(c) LICENSEE: Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this ordinance.
(d) (MH): The abbreviation MH means Mobile Home District.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-112
(e) MOBILE HOME: A manufactured transportable, single family dwelling unit suitable for year-round occupancy and containing water supply, waste disposal and electrical services.
(f) MOBILE HOME LOT OR SITE OR SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation or placement of (1) mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
(g) MOBILE HOME OWNER: The person in whose name the mobile home is titled by the State Department of Transportation.
(h) MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site, plot, parcel or tract of land used or intended to be used for the purpose of providing a location or accommodations for mobile homes and shall include all buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment thereof, whether or not a charge is made for the use of the mobile home park or its facilities. The term "mobile home park" shall not include automobile or mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the sole purpose of inspection for the purposes of sale.
(i) PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a special permit is issued to maintain or operate a mobile home park under the provisions of this ordinance.
(j) PERSON: An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, trust, affiliation or any other type of business association or combination, whether owner, lessee, licensee or their agent, heir or assign.
(k) UNIT: Any mobile home dwelling unit.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-113
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-114
SECTION 21.10 (PUD) PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
(1) Purpose of the Planned Unit Development District.
The Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is established to encourage and promote improved environmental design in the Village by allowing for greater freedom, imagination and flexibility in the development of land while insuring substantial compliance to the basic intent of the zoning ordinance and the general plan for community development. The (PUD) District allows diversification and variation in the relationship of uses, structures, open spaces and heights of structures in developments conceived and implemented as comprehensive and cohesive, unified projects. It is further intended to encourage more rational and economic development in regard to public services and encourage and facilitate preservation of open land.
(2) Types of Planned Unit Developments.
This Section contemplates that there may be residential, commercial, and industrial planned unit developments and also mixed compatible use developments.
(3) Permitted Uses.
Uses permitted in a planned unit development may consist of one or a mixture of land uses clearly designated by type on the approved final development plan. Mixed uses may occur among or within buildings as long as the uses are compatible with each other and with planned and existing uses surrounding the planned unit development. Mixed uses may include any combination of residential, commercial, or agricultural uses planned and developed in an orderly and compatible relationship to one another.
(4) Special Uses.
Any land use not clearly designated by type on the approved final development plan shall be permitted in a (PUD) only upon issuance of a special use permit.
(5) District Standards.
The District Standards shall be as follows:
(a) ACCESS. All land uses shall abut on a public street or have adequate access to a public street by means or a private drive. All streets and drives must tie in effectively with the Village's existing street system and with those arterial and collector streets proposed in its future land use plan.
(b) ARCHITECTURAL STYLE. The architectural style of individual structures shall be compatible with other structures in the planned unit development, with the overall site design and with surrounding land uses.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-115
(c) COMMON OPEN SPACE. Whenever possible, common open space shall be linked to the open space areas of surrounding developments. Common open space shall be of a size, shape, location and usability for its proposed purpose.
(d) DENSITY. Density shall be governed by the standards of the zoning district most similar in function of the proposed use. A residential planned unit development may function to the proposed use. A residential planned unit development may provide up to a 25% increase in the number of units per acre if the planned unit development provides substantially more site amenities than are found in a conventional residential development. The character, use of existing landscape, design variation and environmental concern of a planned unit development shall govern the amount of density increase which may be approved. Where previous zoning exists, density shall be computed based on such zoning. Where no zoning exists or where changes in zoning are proposed, a preliminary zoning request and sketch plan shall be presented.
(e) DETERMINING STANDARDS. Standards for lot area, coverage, setbacks, parking and screening shall be governed by the standards of the zoning district most similar in function to the proposed planned unit development use, as determined by the Plan Commission. Deviation from those standards may be permitted only if such deviation is consistent with the total design of the development, encourages a desirable living environment and is not detrimental to the welfare of the Village.
(f) EXTERIOR BOUNDARY SETBACK. No principal building shall be set back less than 25 feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater, from the exterior of a planned unit development or a public street right-of-way. No commercial or industrial structure shall be nearer than 50 feet to its side or rear property lines where such line abuts a single family use.
(g) PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION. Membership in a property owner's association shall be mandatory for all owners of property within the planned unit development. The property owner's association shall own and maintain all common open space and private interior drives.
(h) MINIMUM PUD DEVELOPMENT AREA. Ten (10) acres of land in single ownership or control. A land use of less than ten (10) acres may qualify if one or more of the following conditions exist.
1. Natural features of the land are such that development under standard zoning regulations would not be appropriate in order to conserve such features;
2. The land is adjacent to or across the street from property which has been developed as a planned unit development and is to be developed in relationship to such prior development; or
4-19-93 Chapter 21-116
3. The planned unit development process is desirable to insure compatibility and careful consideration of the effect of a development on surrounding land uses.
4. Detrimental site features affecting the development potential of a site such as heavily used highways, railroad tracks traversing a property, rock outcroppings, adjacent incompatible land uses or others may also justify consideration of as a planned unit development in order to give the design flexibility needed to deal with site constraints.
(i) DESIGNATED RECREATIONAL AREA. At least ten percent (10%) of the area of the residential portion of a planned unit development shall be designated as common recreational area(s).
(j) SIGNS. In the (PUD) District, signs shall be permitted in accordance with the requirements of the sign regulations of the Village, and such requirements as are made a part of an approved recorded development plan shall be, along with the recorded plan itself, construed to be and enforced as a part of this Ordinance.
(k) OFF-STREET PARKING. In the (PUD) District, off-street parking facilities shall be provided as set forth in an approved recorded precise development plan which shall be, along with the recorded plan itself, construed to be and enforced as part of this Ordinance.
(l) DIVISION OF LAND. Each (PUD) District shall be considered as one (1) tract, lot or parcel, and the legal description must define said planned unit development as a single parcel, lot or tract and be so recorded with the County Register of Deeds.
The subsequent division of any land or lands within a planned unit development for the purpose of change or conveyance of ownership may be accomplished pursuant to the land division/subdivision regulations of the Village when such division is contemplated.
(6) Preliminary Development Plan Application.
Before the Plan Commission may review a preliminary development plan, the plan and an application shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works at least 30 days prior to the Plan Commission meeting.* The preliminary plan shall include the following items:
(a) Existing trees over 6" in trunk diameter measured at two feet above grade, streams, marshes and other predominant natural features;
(b) Phasing schedule stating the geographical phasing and approximate construction timing of the planned unit development or portions thereof;
4-19-93 Chapter 21-117
(c) Preliminary drainage plan;
(d) Preliminary utility plan for all public utilities;
(e) Site plan showing the lot lines, building locations, street system, parking spaces, drives, common open space areas, recreational improvements and structures and proposed park or school sites;
(f) Summary sheet indicating the area of land in each land use, number of units proposed, density of development, percentage of land in usable open space, number of acres of common recreational open space and number of parking spaces provided; and
(g) Vicinity map showing sufficient area surrounding the proposed planned unit development to demonstrate the development's relationship to the adjacent land uses and street system.
* The applicant is strongly encouraged to meet with the Director of Public Works to review a concept sketch plan prior to submitting the preliminary development plan application.
(7) Procedure for Review of a Preliminary Planned Unit Development.
Six (6) copies of an application development plan along with items below shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works which shall transmit copies to other agencies as appropriate.
(a) The application shall include a written explanation of the character and purpose of the proposed planned development including: the type and density of any housing proposed; the nature and purpose of any nonresidential development; proposed method for preserving and maintaining open space, streets and parking areas; and, a general statement of proposed financing for the project.
(b) Each proposal for planned development should be accompanied by a schedule showing the times within which each phase or segment of the planned unit development will be completed. Approval of any planned unit development by the Village Board shall carry with it approval of the time schedule for completion of each phase or segment thereof as contained in the proposal and any changes or amendment thereto. In the event that any portion of such time schedule is not met, the Village Board -- upon written request of the developer for an extension of time, delivered to the Village Board at least twenty (20) days prior to the expiration of the completion date for which such extension is requested -- may, for good cause, extend the said completion date. There shall be no limit upon the number of time extensions which may be requested. Upon failure of the developer to satisfactorily meet any phase or segment of the completion schedule
4-19-93 Chapter 21-118
within twenty (20) days of the expiration date thereof, or within thirty (30) days of denial by the Village Board for extension thereof, the special use permit shall become null and void for all of the tract of land subject to such or any portion thereof, at the discretion of the Village Board.
If final development plan approval is given to a developer and thereafter he wishes to abandon the plan, the developer shall notify the Village in writing, of this action. The Village, at its discretion, may retain a portion of he required security instrument to complete improvements to terminate the development or the phase of development in an orderly manner.
(c) Within 45 days from receipt of an application for a planned unit development the Department of Public Works shall schedule a conference with the developer to jointly review the proposal and consider any modifications or conditions which will be included in a report to the Plan Commission.
(d) Within 45 days from receipt of Department of Public Works report on the proposed development, the Plan Commission shall make a recommendation to the Village Board to approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the proposal.
(e) After receipt of the Plan Commission report the Village Board shall approve conditionally or disapprove the proposed planned unit development. Conditional approval shall be valid for one year and shall be subject to acceptance by the Plan Division of a final plan for all or for a portion of the development. The final plan shall incorporate all condition as and modifications imposed by the Village Board.
(f) Upon approval of final plans a special use permit shall be issued by the Department of Public Works. When construction is completed according to final plans approved by the Department of Public Works and so certified in writing, an Occupancy Permit for such completed portion shall be issued by the Building Inspector.
(g) After an Occupancy Permit has been issued no changes may be made in any part of the completed development except upon procedures set forth in this Section.
(h) If part of the planned unit development involves the subdivision of land into parcels for sale to individual owners, the site plan review required pursuant to this Section shall suffice for Plan Commission review in accordance with Village subdivision regulation and the regulations and the public hearing held by the Village Board shall suffice for a public hearing on the subdivision.
(8) Environmental Review and Design Standards.
In reviewing a proposed planned development the Department of Public Works shall apply the following general standards and the Plan Commission shall recommend
4-19-93 Chapter 21-119
approval of such planned development only when it determined that the said standards have been reasonably satisfied.
(a) The proposal shall demonstrate an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities on the project site, making appropriate provision for the preservation of scenic features and physical amenities of the site and the surrounding areas.
(b) The project shall be planned and developed to harmonize with any existing or proposed development in areas surrounding the project site.
(c) Individual buildings shall be related to each other in design, mass, placement and connection to provide a visually and physically integrated development.
(d) Treatment of the sides and rear of all buildings within the project shall be comparable in amenity and appearance to the treatment given to street frontage of these same buildings.
(e) All buildings shall be arranged so as to be accessible to service and emergency vehicles.
(f) Landscape treatment for open spaces, roads, paths, service and parking areas shall be designed as integral part of a coordinated landscape design for the entire project area.
(g) Primary landscape treatment shall consist of shrubs, ground cover and street trees, and shall combine with appropriate walks and street surfaces to provide an attractive development pattern. Whenever possible, existing trees shall be conserved and integrated into the landscape design plan.
(h) All streets bordering the project area shall be planted at regular intervals with street trees.
(i) There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street parking and loading space, trash removal facilities and outdoor storage areas. All such facilities shall be designed to Village specification.
(j) Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc. shall be of good appearance, easily maintained, and consistent with their function.
(k) Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping, ease of access, and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall site design. To reduce unsightliness and the visual monotony of parking cars such facilities shall be screened from public view.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-120
(l) Any above-grade loading facility should be screened from public view to the extent necessary to reduce unsightliness.
(9) Action by the Village Board on the Preliminary Development Plan Application.
The decision of the Plan Commission shall be reviewed by the Village board for compliance with Subsection (8).
(10) Application for Final Development Plan Approval.
The application for final development plan approval shall include the following items.
(a) Final site plan with all pertinent dimensions shown to the nearest foot;
(b) Final grading, drainage, utility, lighting and landscape plans;
(c) Sign plan specifying design, height, location, size and illumination;
(d) Deed restrictions and instruments dedicating all right-of-way, easements and public lands drafted to the satisfaction of the Village Attorney, insuring the preservation and maintenance of the common open space areas;
(e) By-laws of the proposed property owner's association;
(f) Building elevation drawings, including specifications, except for detached single family dwellings meeting required Residential District standards. This requirement may be waived by the Department of Public Works.
(g) Before a building permit may be issued, the developer shall file with the Village a security instrument (i.e., a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the Village) in an amount equal to 150% of the estimated cost of public utilities and infrastructure, paved parking, landscaping, walkways, recreational equipment and lighting in accordance with final development plans. Such security instrument shall be posted for each phase as it is proposed for development. The estimated cost for termination of each phase shall be retained by the Village until subsequent phases are under construction.
(h) Such other information that may be requested to fully represent the intent of the development plan or to determine if the plan meets the conditions for approval in Subsection (12).
(11) Final Development Plan Approval.
Within sixty (60) days after the final development plan is submitted, the Plan Commission shall make a recommendation to the Village Board on such plan as to its
4-19-93 Chapter 21-121
conformity with the preliminary development plan, fulfillment of all required items and continued compliance with findings required for preliminary development plan approval. Upon receiving the Plan Commission's recommendation, the Village Board shall either grant, grant subject to conditions or deny the final development plan. If approval is granted, a planned unit development special use permit shall be issued to the developer by the Director of Public Works, which permit shall contain any conditions attached by the Village Board.
(12) Basis for Approval of the Final Development Plan.
(a) REQUIREMENTS. The Plan Commission, in making recommendations for approval and the Village Board, in making a determination approving the final development plan for a planned unit development, shall find as follows:
1. That the applicable physical requirements made and provided for in this Section will be met;
2. That the requirements as to public services and facilities made and provided for in this Section will be met.
(b) PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE. The Plan Commission and Village Board, in making their respective recommendation and determination, shall consider the reasonableness of the proposed construction schedule and any staging plan for the physical development of the proposed planned unit development, commencement of the physical development within one (1) year of approval being deemed reasonable.
(c) RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, CONSIDERATIONS. The Plan Commission and Village Board, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed residential planned unit development, shall further consider whether:
1. Such development will create an attractive residential environment of sustained desirability and economic stability, including structures in relation to terrain, consideration of safe pedestrian flow, ready access to recreation space and coordination with overall plans for the community.
2. The total net residential density within the planned unit development will be compatible with the Village master plan, neighborhood plan, or components thereof, and shall be compatible with the density of the district wherein located.
3. Structure types will be generally compatible with other structural types permitted in the underlying basic use district.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-122
4. Provision has been made for the installation of adequate public facilities and the continuing maintenance and operation of such facilities if privately owned.
5. Provision has been made for adequate, continuing fire and police protection.
6. The population density of the development will or will not have an adverse effect upon the community's capacity to provide needed school or other municipal service facilities.
7. Adequate guarantee is provided for permanent preservation of open space areas as shown on the general development plan as approved either by private reservation and maintenance or by dedication to the public.
(d) COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, CONSIDERATIONS. The Plan Commission and Village Board, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed commercial planned unit development, shall further consider whether:
1. The economic practicality of the proposed development can be justified.
2. The proposed development will be served by off-street parking and truck service facilities in accordance with this Ordinance.
3. The proposed development shall be adequately provided with, and shall not impose any undue burden on, public services and facilities such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and storm water drainage and maintenance of public areas.
4. The locations of entrances and exists have been designated to prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient movement of traffic on surrounding streets and that the development will not create any adverse effect upon the general traffic pattern of the surrounding neighborhood.
5. The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting and general site development will result in an attractive and harmonious service area compatible with and not adversely affecting the property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
(e) INDUSTRIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, CONSIDERATIONS. The Plan Commission and Village Board, in making their respective recommendations and determination as to a proposed industrial planned unit development, shall further consider whether:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-123
1. The operational character and physical plant arrangement of buildings will be compatible with the latest in performance standards and industrial development design and will not result in an adverse effect on the property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
2. The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, street maintenance, water sanitary sewer and storm water drainage and maintenance of public areas.
3. The proposed development will include provision for off-street parking and truck services areas in accordance with this Chapter and will adequately serviced by easy-access rail and/or arterial highway facilities.
4. The proposed development is properly related to the total transportation system of the community and will not result in an adverse effect on the safety and efficiency of the public streets.
(f) MIXED USE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, CONSIDERATIONS. The Plan Commission and Village Board, in making their respective recommendation and determination as to a proposed mixed use planned unit development, shall further reconsider whether:
1. The proposed mixture of uses presents a unified composite which is compatible with the zoning district and which, as a total development entity, is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
2. The various types of uses conform to the general requirements as herein before set forth, applicable to projects of such use and character.
3. The proposed development shall be adequately provided with and shall not impose any undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire an police protection, street maintenance, water, sanitary sewer and storm water drainage and maintenance of public areas.
(13) Filing of Final Development Plan.
Upon approval, the Village Clerk shall certify two (2) copies of such plan and have them filed in the Department of Public Works. Such plan shall be drawn to a scale of 40 feet to one inch or larger. The dimensions of such plan shall not exceed three (3) feet by six (6) feet. In case of a large plan, two (2) or more sheets may be required. If so, the sheets shall be numbered.
(14) Official Map Designation.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-124
After approval, the (PUD) District shall be designated on the Village's Official Zoning Map.
(15) Final Development Plan Changes.
Any significant changes in the approved final development plan may be made only after a public hearing by the Plan Commission and approval by the Village Board. No changes in the final development plan may be made unless they are shown by the developer to be required by changes in conditions or circumstances not foreseen at the time of the final plan approval. Any significant changes shall be recorded as amendment to the approved final development plan. Minor changes must be approved by the Director of Public Works.
(16) Termination of Final Development Plan Approval.
If final development plan approval is given to a developer and thereafter he wishes to abandon the plan, the developer shall notify the Village in writing. If the developer fails to commence the development within twelve (12) months or upon a finding by the Plan Commission that there has not been substantial development (as indicated by installation of utilities or completion of five percent of the proposed floor area) within the site area within eighteen (18) months after final development plan approval has been granted, such approval shall be terminated after public hearing by the Plan Commission and upon approval by the Village Board. Such time period may be extended by the Village Board upon written application by the developer for up to, but not to exceed, six (6) months.
(17) Extended Staged Planned Unit Development.
It is recognized that certain planned unit developments may involve construction over an extended period of time. If it is proposed to develop a project during a period exceeding two years, the developer may request concept approval from the Plan Commission and Village Board for the entire project and permission to submit application for preliminary development plan approval on the first stage of the project.
A public hearing shall be required by the Plan Commission for consideration of concept approval as well as for each stage of development in the extended staged planned unit development. Each stage of the planned unit development shall require both preliminary and final development plan approval.
(18) Building Permit Approval.
No building permit shall be issued for a building in a planned unit development until the plans have been reviewed and approved by the Director of Public Works.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-125
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-126
PART "C"
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION 21.11 SPECIAL USE PERMITS
(1) Statement of Purpose - Special
The development and execution of this Section is based upon the division of the Village into zoning districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings, and bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land, are mutually compatible and substantially uniform. However, there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as unrestricted permitted uses in any particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land or public facilities, and of the public need for the particular use of a particular location. Such uses, nevertheless, may be necessary or desirable to be allowed in a particular district provided that due consideration is given to location, development and operation of such uses. Such uses are classified as special uses.
(2) Authority of the Plan Commission and Village Board; Requirements.
(a) The Village Board may, by resolution, authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue a special use permit for either regular or limited conditional use after review, public hearing and advisory recommendation from the Plan Commission, provided that such special use and involved structure(s) are found to be in accordance with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Code and are further found to be not hazardous, harmful, offensive or otherwise adverse to the environment or the value of the neighborhood or the community. In the instance of the granting of a limited special use permit, the Village Board in its findings shall further specify the delimiting reason(s) or factors which resulted in issuing limited rather than regular conditional use. Such Board resolution, and the resulting special use permit, when, for limited conditional use, shall specify the period of time for which effective, if specified, the name of the permittee, the location and legal description of the affected premises. Prior to the granting of a special use permit, the Plan Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented that the standards herein prescribed are being complied with.
(b) Any development within five hundred (500) feet of the existing or proposed rights-of-way of freeways, expressways and within one-half (½) mile of their existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights-of-way shall be specifically reviewed by the highway agency that has jurisdiction over the traffic way. The Plan Commission shall request such review and await the highway agency's recommendation for a period not to exceed twenty (20) days before taking final action.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-127
(c) Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting screens, operation control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access restrictions, increased yards or parking requirements may be required by the Village Board upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this Chapter.
(d) Compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter, such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic, highway access and performance standards shall be required of all conditional uses.
(3) Initiation of Special Use.
Any person, firm, corporation or organization having a freehold interest or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, or an exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable in the land for which a special use permit is sought may file an application to use such land for one (1) or more of the special uses provided for in this Section in the zoning district in which such land is located.
(4) Application for Special Use Permit.
An application for a special use shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Village. The application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the location, size and shape of the lot(s) involved and of any proposed structures, the existing and proposed use of each structure and lot, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed special use shall conform to the standards set forth hereinafter. The Plan Commission may require such other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for an enforcement of this Chapter, including a plan showing contours and soil types; highwater mark and groundwater conditions; bedrock, vegetative cover, specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading, and lagooning; location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, open spaces and landscaping; plans of buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems and arrangements of operations. A non-refundable fee shall be paid at the time of application.
(5) Hearing on Application.
All requests for special use permits shall be to the Plan Commission or the Plan Commission can, on its own motion, apply special uses when applications for rezoning come before it. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the Village Board, on its own motion, from referring the request for a special use permit to the Plan Commission. Upon receipt of the application and statement referred to above, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a special use permit at such time and place as shall be established by such Commission. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of the proceedings shall be preserved in such a manner and according to such procedures as the Plan Commission shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-128
(6) Notice of Hearing on Application.
(a) HEARING. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication of a Class 2 Notice under the Wisconsin Statutes in the official Village newspaper. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such public hearing shall also be sent to the applicant, the Zoning Administrator, members of the Village Board and Plan Commission, and the owners of record as listed in the office of the Village Assessor who are owners of property in whole or in part situated within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the properties affected, said notice to be sent at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such public hearing.
(b) REPORT OF PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission shall report its advisory recommendations to the Village Board within thirty (30) days after a matter has been referred to. If such action has not been reported by the Plan Commission within thirty (30) days, the Village Board can act without such recommendation.
(7) Standards for Special Use Permits.
No application for a special use permit shall be recommended for approval by the Plan Commission or granted by the Village Board unless such Commission and Board shall find all of the following conditions are present:
(a) That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare.
(b) That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use and the proposed use is compatible with the use of adjacent land.
(c) That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
(d) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been or are being provided.
(e) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
(f) That the special use shall, except for yard requirements, conform to all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-129
(g) That effective landscaping and visual screening is provided as may be required herein.
(h) That the proposed use does not violate flood plain regulations governing the site.
(i) That, when applying the above standards to any new construction of a building or an addition to an existing building, the Plan Commission and Board shall bear in mind the statement of purpose for the zoning district such that the proposed building or addition at its location does not defeat the purposes and objective of the zoning district.
(j) That, in addition to passing upon a special use permit, the Plan Commission and Board shall also evaluate the effect of the proposed use upon:
1. The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
2. The prevention and control of water pollution, including sedimentation.
3. Existing topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover on the site.
4. The location of the site with respect to floodplains and floodways of rivers and streams.
5. The erosion potential of the site based upon degree and direction of slope, soil type and vegetative cover.
6. The location of the site with respect to existing or future access roads.
7. The need of the proposed use for a shoreland location.
8. Its compatibility with uses on adjacent land.
9. The amount of liquid waste to be generated and the adequacy of the proposed disposal systems.
10. Any other unusual circumstances not addressed above.
(8) Denial of Application for Special Use Permit.
When an advisory recommendation of denial of a special use application is made, the Plan Commission shall furnish the applicant, in writing when so requested, those standards that are not met and enumerate reasons the Commission has used in determining that each standard was not met. The Plan Commission can also recommend
4-19-93 Chapter 21-130
any special conditions that should be attached before any reapplication would be considered.
(9) Conditions and Guarantees.
The following conditions shall apply to all special use permits:
(a) CONDITIONS. Prior to the granting of any special use, the Plan Commission may review and recommend to the Village Board that it stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as deemed necessary to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified above. In all cases in which special uses are granted, the Board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific enumeration:
1. Landscaping
2. Type of construction
3. Construction commencement and completion dates
4. Sureties
5. Lighting
6. Fencing
7. Operational control
8. Hours of operation
9. Traffic circulation
10. Deed restrictions
11. Access restrictions
12. Setbacks and yards
13. Type of shore cover
14. Specified sewage disposal and water supply systems
4-19-93 Chapter 21-131
15. Planting screens
16. Piers and docks
17. Increased parking
18. Any other requirements necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this Chapter.
(b) SITE REVIEW. In making its recommendation, the Plan Commission shall evaluate each application and may request assistance from any source which can provide technical assistance. The Commission shall review the site, existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and water systems and the proposed operation/use.
(c) ALTERATION OF SPECIAL USE. No alteration of a special use permit shall be permitted unless approved by the Village Board after recommendation from the Plan Commission.
(d) ARCHITECTURAL TREATMENT. Proposed architectural treatment will be in general harmony with surrounding uses and the landscape. To this end, the Village Board may require the use of certain general types of exterior construction materials and/or architectural treatment.
(e) SLOPED SITES; UNSUITABLE SOILS. Where slopes exceed six percent (6%) and/or where a use is proposed to be located on areas indicated as having soils which are unsuitable or marginal for development, on-site soil tests and/or construction plans shall be provided which clearly indicate that the soil conditions are adequate to accommodate the development contemplated and/or that any inherent soil condition or slope problems will be overcome by special construction techniques. Such special construction might include, among other techniques, terracing, retaining walls, oversized foundations and footings, drain tile, etc.
(f) SPECIAL USES TO COMPLY WITH OTHER REQUIREMENTS. Special uses shall comply with all other provisions of this Chapter such as lot width and area, yards, height, parking and loading.
(10) Validity of Special Use Permit.
Where the Village Board has approved or conditionally approved an application for a special use permit, such approval shall become null and void within twelve (12) months of the date of the Board's action unless the use is commenced, construction is underway or the current owner possesses a valid building permit under which construction is commenced within six (6) months of the date of issuance and which shall not be renewed
4-19-93 Chapter 21-132
unless construction has commenced and is being diligently prosecuted. Approximately forty-five (45) days prior to the automatic revocation of such permit, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the holder by certified mail of such revocation. The Board may extend such permit for a period of ninety (90) days for justifiable cause, if application is made to the Village Board at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of said permit.
(11) Complaints Regarding Special Use Permits.
The Village Board shall retain continuing jurisdiction over all special uses for the purpose of resolving complaints against all previously approved special uses. Such authority shall be in addition to the enforcement authority of the Zoning Administrator to order the removal or discontinuance of any unauthorized alterations of an approved special use, and the elimination, removal or discontinuance of any violation of a condition imposed prior to or after approval or violation of any other provision of this Code. Upon written complaint by any citizen or official and after seeking an advisory recommendation from the Plan Commission, the Village Board shall initially determine whether said complaint indicates a reasonable probability that the subject special use is in violation of either one (1) or more of the standards set forth in Subsection (7) above, a condition of approval or other requirement imposed hereunder. Upon reaching a positive initial determination, a hearing shall be held upon notice as provided in Subsection (6) above. Any person may appear at such hearing and testify in person or represented by an agent or attorney. The Village Board may, in order to bring the subject special use into compliance with the standards set forth in Subsection (7) or conditions previously imposed by the Village Board, modify existing conditions upon such use and impose additional reasonable conditions upon the subject special use. In the event that no reasonable modification of such conditional use can be made in order to assure that applicable standards will be met, the Village Board may revoke the subject special use permit and direct the Zoning Administrator and the Village Attorney to seek elimination of the subject use. Following any such hearing, the decision of the Village Board shall be furnished to the current owner of the special use in writing stating the reasons therefore.
(12) Specific Requirements for Certain Land Uses and Activities.
Those land uses or activities set forth in Part "B" of this Ordinance as requiring a special use permit are considered to be sufficiently distinctive in terms of their nature, location and impact on the surrounding area as to warrant special evaluation of each individual case.
In addition to the general requirements for special use permits set forth in Subsection (7) above, other specific requirements shall pertain, as applicable, to the following uses and activities.
(a) HOME OCCUPATIONS.
Permitted when:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-133
1. The home occupation is conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling unit or an attached garage. If such occupation is conducted in an attached garage it cannot displace the enclosed storage of property maintenance and recreational equipment.
2. There are no exterior alterations which change the character thereof as a dwelling and/or exterior evidence of the home occupation other than those signs permitted in the district.
3. No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or equipment related to the operation of the home occupation is visible outside any structure located on the premises.
4. No use creates smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire hazard, environmental hazard, small electrical interference or any other nuisance not normally associated with the average residential use in the district.
5. Only one (1) sign is used to indicate the type of occupation or business and may not be illuminated. The sign may not exceed 200 square inches in size. The appearance and content of the sign shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
6. The use does not involve the use of commercial vehicles for more than occasional delivery of materials to or from the premises.
7. The occupation or activity is conducted by the person or persons residing in the dwelling and not more than one additional person.
8. The space required by the occupation or activity is no greater than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling on the lot or one half of an attached garage.
All other home occupations shall require a special use permit and may be subject to these additional regulations:
1. The Plan Commission may determine the percentage of the property that may be devoted to the occupation.
2. The home occupation may be restricted to a service-oriented business prohibiting the manufacturing of items or products or the sale of times or products on the premises.
3. The types and number of equipment or machinery may be restricted by the Plan Commission.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-134
4. Sale or transfer of the property shall cause the special use permit to be null and void.
(b) HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.
Requirements:
1. Yard setback as per District requirements.
2. Maximum height shall be as per District requirements.
3. A minimum of one (1) parking space for every one (1) dwelling unit plus one (1) space for every two (2) daytime employees. No more than 50 percent of any front yard area shall be used for access drives.
4. Landscaping and site lighting plan to be required as part of site plan review.
(c) COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS; FAMILY CARE HOME.
Requirements: A structure similar to a residential home that has four or less residents will be allowed in residential districts permitting single-family homes. Five to eight residents will be allowed in districts permitting duplexes. Parking must be provided on site for each staff member on shift and at least one visitor parking stall must be provided for each four residents living on site. All parking stalls must be on the property and cannot be street parking or garage parking. All other residential requirements will apply. (O-2003-01)
(d) NURSING HOME.
Requirements:
1. Minimum lot of 40,000 square feet for a home containing beds or other accommodations for 25 or less persons plus 800 square feet of lot area for each bed or accommodation over 25.
2. Adequate off-street parking and provisions for access by service vehicles must be provided. One (1) off-street parking space for each two (2) beds in such home shall be considered a minimum.
(e) GOLF COURSE.
Requirements:
1. No clubhouse or other building shall be located less than 200 feet from the nearest lot line.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-135
2. No course shall be artificially lighted for night play or include a commercially operated miniature golf or commercial driving range if located within 500 feet of a Residential District.
(f) VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL SCHOOLS; COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY.
Requirements:
1. Minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
2. No structure shall be located less than 50 feet from any lot line.
3. No more than 30 percent of any front yard area shall be use for parking and access drives.
4. Night lighting of any parking areas shall not produce glare on adjacent residential lots.
5. A landscaping and lighting plan shall be approved as part of site plan review.
(g) FUNERAL AND UNDERTAKING PARLOR.
Requirements:
1. Minimum lot area of 60,000 sq. ft.
2. No structure shall be located less than 40 feet from any lot line.
3. Structures shall have an exterior compatible with the architecture of the surrounding area.
4. Consideration shall be given to vehicular stacking to insure that adequate provisions are made for procession assembly in the parking lot.
(h) NEW AND USED AUTOMOBILE SALES.
Requirements:
1. Vehicular access to any open sales lot or service garage shall be from an alley or service drive at the rear of the lot.
2. Driveways and parking areas shall be drained and paved.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-136
3. A landscaped area at least (5) feet wide shall be provided along all streets adjacent to any sales or display areas.
4. All such uses locating next to a residential district shall be screened by a landscaped strip which is dense enough and high enough to screen out objectional views.
5. Exterior light sources shall be no more than 18 feet above the ground and shall not produce glare on adjacent properties.
(i) AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.
Requirements:
1. All fuel pump and other outdoor services shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the street property line and forty (40) feet from other property lines.
2. Driveways and curb cuts shall be clearly defined, no wider than twenty-six (26) feet, and located so as not to interfere with traffic at intersections.
3. All such uses locating next to a residential district shall be screened by a landscaped strip which is dense enough and high enough to screen-out outside storage and other objectionable views.
4. Exterior light sources shall be no more than eighteen (18) feet above the ground and shall not produce glare on adjacent properties.
(j) EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT EXCEPT DRIVE-IN.
Requirements:
1. Layout, architectural design and landscaping shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
2. Off-street parking areas shall be paved and drained and not located in required front yards.
3. Exterior and interior lighting arrangements shall not produce glare on adjacent properties.
4. No such establishment shall have an outdoor area where alcohol beverages are served or consumed.
(k) MOTEL AND HOTEL.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-137
Requirements:
1. No building shall be located less than fifty (50) feet from an adjacent Residential or Mobile Home District or residential property line.
2. All required off-street parking spaces shall be landscaped in accordance with an approved landscaping plan.
3. Exterior light sources shall be not more than eighteen (18) feet above the ground and shall not produce glare on adjacent properties.
4. All retail sales, except for the serving of food and beverage on the premises, shall be customarily incidental to the operation of the motel or hotel and such sales areas shall be accessible only from inside the lobby.
(l) BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS.
1. Definitions.
a. "Bed and Breakfast Establishment" means any place of lodging that provides six (6) or fewer rooms for rent for more than ten (10) nights in a twelve (12) month period, is the owner's personal residence, is occupied by the owner at the time of rental and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast.
b. "Agent" shall mean the person designated by the owner as the person in charge of such establishment and whose identity shall be filed in writing with the Village Administrator upon issuance of the permit and updated five (5) days prior to a designated agent taking charge.
2. Regulations.
a. Compliance with State Standards. All bed and breakfast establishments and licensees shall be subject to and comply with Chapter HSS 197, Wis. Adm. Code, relating to bed and breakfast establishments or Wisconsin Administrative Code HSS 195 relating to hotels, motels, and tourist rooming houses.
b. Registry. Each bed and breakfast establishment shall provide a register and require all guests to register their true names and addresses before assigned quarters. The register shall be kept intact and available for inspection by a Village representative for a period of not less than one (1) year.
3. Permit Required.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-138
a. Village Permit Required. In addition to the permit required by Chapters HSS 195 or HSS 197, Wisconsin Administrative Code, before opening for business every bed and breakfast establishment shall obtain a permit from the Zoning Administrator by application made upon a form furnished by said officer and shall obtain a conditional use permit.
4. Off-Street Parking Required. Permits shall be issued only to those establishments that provide a minimum of one (1) improved off-street parking space for each room offered for occupancy. Establishments otherwise qualifying under this Section regulating bed and breakfast establishments shall not be subject to the other requirements of the Zoning Code with respect to traffic, parking and access.
5. On-site Signs. On-site signage shall be limited to a total of twelve (12) square feet and may be lighted in such manner and nature as to not alter or deteriorate the nature of the surrounding neighborhood. Establishments otherwise qualifying under this Section regulating bed and breakfast establishments shall not be subject to the requirements of this Zoning Code with respect to signs.
(m) OUTDOOR AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION FACILITY.
Requirements:
1. Exterior light sources shall be no more than eighteen (18) feet above the ground and shall not produce glare on adjacent properties.
2. Required off-street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen views form adjacent streets and residential property.
(n) PRINTING AND PUBLISHING SHOP.
Requirements: Must demonstrate that adequate space and facilities are provided for the unloading of raw materials and shipping of finished products.
(o) VETERINARY OFFICE AND ANIMAL HOSPITAL.
Requirements:
1. Such facility shall be completely enclosed with no open boarding or exercise facilities.
2. There shall be no outside storage of refuse, feces, or other material and no on-site incineration of refuse.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-139
3. An odor absorbing air filtration system shall be used.
4. Developer shall demonstrate that adequate sound absorption shall be used.
(p) OUTDOOR SALES.
Requirements: No sales area shall be located less than five (5) feet from any property line and such five (5) foot strip shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs and grass in accordance with approved plan.
(q) SALE OF BUILDING MATERIALS.
Requirements: Outdoor storage shall generally be located behind any structure on the property and a ten (10) foot wide, landscaped buffer strip of evergreen trees shall be planted along all property lines adjacent to a residence district.
(r) UTILITY TRANSMISSION LINE AND SUBSTATION.
Requirements:
1. Shall be located so as to cause the least disruption in the neighborhood.
2. Substations shall be attractively landscaped to screen objectionable views form adjacent streets and properties.
3. Transformers are not allowed in front yards.
(s) OFFICES WITH ACCESSORY RESEARCH, TESTING, WAREHOUSING, FABRICATING OR ASSEMBLY.
Requirements:
1. Such accessory activities shall be in the principal office building and occupy not more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of said office building.
2. Operations of such accessory activities shall conform at least with applicable performance standards as are applied to uses in an Industrial District and approved by the Department of Public Works.
(t) DWELLING UNIT WHEN LOCATED IN AN OFFICE BUILDING.
Requirements:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-140
1. Any such dwelling unit shall be an efficiency or one (1) bedroom, except that in those cases where the operator of the office business lives in such dwelling unit, more than one (1) bedroom is permitted.
2. Any such dwelling unit shall have access which is separate from the office use access.
3. The parking requirements of this ordinance for both office use and dwelling use are met.
(u) DWELLING UNIT WHEN LOCATED IN A COMMERCIAL BUILDING.
1. No residential lot area requirements will apply.
2. No ground floor shall be used exclusively for dwelling units, nor shall ground floor dwelling units face a public street.
3. All dwelling units shall conform to all housing, building, heating, electrical and plumbing codes which are presently in effect and apply to new construction.
4. Required fire walls between buildings shall not be altered. If any such required fire wall has been previously altered it shall be brought into compliance.
5. The commercial activity shall not involve the use, storage or sale of large quantities of explosive or highly flammable materials.
6. No dwelling shall be located above a commercial establishment unless the dwelling occupancy, and exits therefrom, are separated from the commercial occupancy by construction having a fire resistance of at least one (1) hour, or unless the commercial occupancy is protected by automatic sprinklers.
7. All dwelling units shall have all required accesses separate from commercial accesses.
8. Off-street parking spaces required in this ordinance shall be provided. If any or all of the required parking cannot be provided on the same lot, the owner of the dwelling units may lease parking in any for-lease parking lot to satisfy the requirements of this ordinance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the dwelling units to provide such leased parking space on a continuing basis and such owner shall provide proof at time of approval that the leased parking area shall always remain available for parking. Failure to maintain the required number of parking spaces shall necessitate the vacation of all living units for which no parking is provided.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-141
(v) MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL.
Requirements: Shall be located on a lot of at least one and one-half (1½) acres.
(w) MINING, QUARRYING OR EXTRACTION OF SAND, GRAVEL, SOIL OR OTHER AGGREGATE.
Requirements:
1. Application shall contain:
a. Plans showing proposed restoration of the area including topography, land area, finished grade, and storm water drainage.
b. A statement indicating the type and source of fill to be used in the restoration program, proposed use of land upon completion of the restoration program, a restoration timetable and an agreement to seed the restored area with grass or other crop until the proposed reuse is accomplished.
2. The Village Board may require a completion bond to assure satisfactory storm water drainage disposal and installation of green cover crop.
(x) LANDFILL.
Requirements:
1. Material used for fill shall be limited to earth, stone, rubble and similar material and shall not contain trees, brush, lumber, garbage or refuse or any type. Maximum size of this material shall be 2´ x 2´ x 2´.
2. Application shall contain:
a. Plans showing the area to be filled, the final elevation and slopes of such landfill, the uses of adjacent parcels, any existing drainageway, wetland and large trees that would be affected by the fill, and the proposed surface drainage and landscaping of the filled area.
b. A statement indicating the reasons for such landfill, the type, amount and source of fill to be used, and the anticipated impact on the surrounding neighborhood while the landfill is in process and after it is completed.
c. A plan for preventing erosion of slopes and final ground surfaces.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-142
d. Plans must be acceptable to the Department of Public Works.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-143
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-144
SECTION 21.12 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
1. General.
(a) Accessory buildings shall be compatible with, and incidental to, the principal building or use and shall not be established prior to establishment of the principal building or use.
(b) When a principal use requires a special use permit (see schedule) an accessory use to such principal use shall also require a special use permit.
(c) Accessory uses shall not include the keeping, propagation or culture of poultry, bees, livestock or other non-household animals whether or not for profit, except on such lots where the pursuit of agriculture is a permitted principal or accessory use.
(d) Accessory buildings shall be classified as attached garages, detached garages or utility buildings. All garages must meet fire separation code per the Wisconsin 1 and 2 family dwelling codes.
(e) The general appearance and construction materials of a garage and/or carport structure shall resemble the residence. The use of metal structures is not allowed. (0-2008-02)
(f) A Garage shall be required for all new one and two family dwelling units. Either a single attached or detached type garage is acceptable. There shall not be more than one detached or attached garage per lot without the Board of Appeals granting permission to build an additional garage. If an attached type is chosen, the garage is part of the principle structure and the requirements of Section 21.12(1)(g)(2) shall apply. If a detached type is constructed the requirements of Section 21.12(l)(g)(1) shall apply. The minimum size requirements are:
District Minimum Size
R-1 Single Family 440 sq. ft. and a minimum of 20 feet wide
R-2 Single Family 440 sq. ft. and a minimum of 20 feet wide
R-3 Single Family 440 sq. ft. and a minimum of 20 feet wide
R-4 Single Family 308 sq. ft. and a minimum of 14 feet wide
R-5 Two Family 308 sq. ft. and a minimum of 14 feet wide (each unit)
(g) Setback and size requirements:
1. Detached garages:
a. Shall not be more than one story or 15 feet in height.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-145
b. Shall not be located less than three (3) feet from the rear or interior side lot line (The wall of the structure to the lot line). The eves may infringe as close as one (1) foot from the lot line as long as the setback is agreed upon with the neighbor and a written agreement is filed with the Building Inspector stating permission is granted.
c. Shall not extend in front of the principal building's setback line except with the Board of Appeals approval
d. The area of the principal structure and the area of the accessory buildings cannot take up more than 35% of the lot area
e. Shall not exceed 720 square feet or not larger than the ground area covered by the dwelling. A garage of up to 864 square feet may be allowed if there are no other accessory storage structures. A garage over 720 square feet eliminates the potential for any additional accessory storage structures in the future.
2. Attached garages:
a. Shall not be higher than the principal building, or 22 feet, whichever is less.
b. Shall comply with the yard requirements applicable to the principle building.
c. The area of the principal structure and the area of the accessory buildings cannot take up more than 35% of the lot area.
d. Shall not exceed 50% of the finished square footage of the principal structure.
3. Utility Buildings:
a. Shall not exceed 144 square feet (12 ft x 12 ft).
b. The area of the principle structure and the accessory buildings cannot take up more than 35% of the lot area.
c. Shall not be more than one utility building per lot without the Board of Appeals granting permission to build an additional building.
d. Shall not be located less than three (3) feet from the rear or side lot line (The wall of the structure to the lot line). The eves may infringe as close as one (1) foot from the lot line as long as the
4-19-93 Chapter 21-146
setback is agreed upon with the neighbor and a written agreement is filed with the Building Inspector stating permission is granted.
(h) The following accessory buildings and uses are permitted and may be obstructions in yards and courts as follows:
F Denotes front yards and side yards adjoining streets
S Denotes interior side yard
R Denotes rear yard
C Denotes open courts
1. Awnings or canopies which project F S R C
not more than 25% of the width or
depth of a yard or not more than
three (3) feet into a court.
2. Arbors or trellises, detached. R C
3. Arbors or trellises, attached. F S R C
4. Air conditioning equipment subject to
the provisions of this Ordinance
a. Residential Districts. F S R
b. Non-Residential Districts R C
5. Balconies and sundecks. F S R C
6. Bay windows projecting not more than three F S R C
(3) feet into a front yard and not more than
two (2) feet into a side yard or court.
7. Chimneys projecting not more than two (2) F S R C feet into a yard or court.
8. Eaves and gutters projecting not more F S R C
than four (4)feet into a front and rear yard
and not more than two(2) feet into a side
yard or court.
9. Fallout shelters, attached or detached. R
10. Fences, open.
a. Non-residential districts.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-147
1. Ten (10) feet maximum height. S R
2. When fences of a height over F S R C
7 ½ feet are permitted, barb wire
may be used at a point on the
fence where such barbed wire is
7 ½ feet above surrounding grade.
In no case shall the barbed wire
increase the height of the fence
beyond the maximum height
permitted, and in no case shall
the barbed wire be placed so that
it overhangs any lot line,
sidewalk, street, or alley.
11. Fences, solid.
a. Non-residential districts.
1. Six (6) feet maximum height F
when used to screen permitted
parking areas as required by this
Ordinance.
2. Ten (10) feet maximum height. S R
3. Ten (10) feet maximum height F S R
when used to screen permitted
open storage areas.
4. When fences of a height over F S R C
7 ½ feet are permitted, barb wire
may be used at a point on the
fence where such barbed wire is
7 ½ feet above surrounding
grade. In no case shall the barbed
wire increase the height of the
fence beyond the maximum
height permitted, and in no case
shall the barbed wire be place so
that it overhangs any lot line,
sidewalk, street, or alley.
12. Fire escapes, open or enclosed, or fire F S R C
towers projecting into a front yard or side
4-19-93 Chapter 21-148
yard adjoining a street not more
than five (5) feet into an interior side
yard or court not more than 3½ feet.
13. Flagpoles. F S R C
14. Garages or carports, detached. S R
15. Growing of farm and garden crops in S R
the open.
16. Lawn furniture, such as benches, sun F S R C
dials, bird baths and similar architectural
features.
17. Open off-street loading spaces. S R
18. Open off-street parking space.
a. For one-family dwelling units F S R
when such space is located no less
than five (5) feet from any street
right-of-way line and two (2) feet
from a side or rear lot line and
driveway thereto is no wider than
20 feet.
b. For two-family and multiple family F S R C
dwelling units when located not less
than five (5) feet from any lot line
and no parking shall be permitted in
any front yard. Driveways to such
parking shall be no wider than 24 feet.
c. For business uses when located no F S R
less than five (5) feet from any lot
line and when the provisions of this
Ordinance have been complied with.
No parking in front yards, except on
unsurfaced portions of the front
yard, shall bepermitted.
19. Ornamental light standards. F S R C
20. Playground and laundry-drying equipment. R C
21. Playhouses and open-sided summer houses. S R C
4-19-93 Chapter 21-149
22. Sheds and storage buildings for garden R
equipment and household items
accessory to the pursuit of agriculture.
23. Solar energy equipment. S R C
24. Sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental F S R C
features of the principal building, projecting
not more than 18 inches into a yard or court.
25. Steps, open - necessary for access to and F S R C
from the dwelling or an accessory building,
steps as access to the lot from the street,
and in gardens or terraces, provided there
are no more than eight (8) steps for access
to and from a principal or accessory building.
26. Swimming pools, private – when R
conforming also with other codes or
ordinances.
27. Television aerial and antenna when not in S R C
a yard facing a public street.
28. Temporary buildings and fences for F S R C
construction purposes for a period not to
exceed such construction and in accordance
with plans approved by the Building
Inspector.
29. Terraces, patios and outdoor fireplaces. S R
30. Tennis courts, private. R
31. Windmills as an alternative source of S R
energy when in compliance with
applicable performance standards and
when located so that, in the event of
collapse, they will not fall on an adjacent
property or public right-of-way or open
space. [See sound level standards in
Section 21.12 (3)(c)].
4-19-93 Chapter 21-150
(i) Accessory buildings and uses not included in the listing as set forth above or specifically permitted by other provisions of this Ordinance shall not be permitted in required yards and courts.
(2) Satellite Earth Station (Satellite Dish).
(a) PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity whatsoever shall construct a satellite dish without a permit, nor shall construction commence before a permit is issued pursuant to this Chapter.
(b) APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
The owner, or occupant with written permission of the owner, of any lot, premises or parcel of land within the Village of North Fond du Lac, who desires to construct a satellite dish on said lot, premises or land parcel, must first obtain a permit to do so from the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall issue such permit provided the applicant submits a written application on forms provided and approved by the building inspector and pays the required permit fee.
(c) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SATELLITE DISHES.
1. No satellite dish shall exceed eight (8) feet in diameter.
2. All satellite dishes shall comply with the side and rear lot line dimensions and setback requirements for accessory structures as specified in the zoning district where the satellite dish is located.
3. All satellite dishes shall comply with the height requirements specified in the zoning district where the satellite dish is located.
4. In any zoning district, satellite dishes that are less than three (3) feet in diameter can be located anywhere on a lot, except in any front yard or in the side yard that abuts the street of a residential corner lot, or can be located on any principal or accessory building.
5. Within residential and office/institutional zoning districts, dishes that are in excess of three (3) feet in diameter shall only be located in rear yards or on the roof of a detached garage, so long as the height of the detached garage and the dish is equal to or less than the height of the principal building.
6. Dishes in excess of three (3) feet in diameter that are located in business and industrial zoning districts may be erected in rear yards only or on the roof of any principal or accessory buildings.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-151
7. No advertising or graphic designs that exceed three (3) inches in height are permitted on satellite dishes in any zoning district.
8. No satellite dish shall be linked, physically or electronically, to a receiver which is not located on the same lot, premises or parcel of land as the satellite dish.
9. All satellite dishes must be bonded to a grounding wire.
10. All satellite dishes shall be designed and erected so as to reduce the visual impact from surrounding properties and streets and shall be screened from view by shrub plantings or fences.
(d) TEMPORARY PLACEMENT OF SATELLITE DISHES.
The owner or occupant, with written permission from the owner, of any lot, premises or parcel of land within the Village who desires to place a satellite dish on said lot, premises, or land parcel, on a temporary basis for the purpose of testing whether or not to install a satellite dish on a permanent basis may do so without obtaining a permit under this section. Such temporary placement shall be limited, however, to a maximum period of ten (10) days in any calendar year.
Any satellite dish temporarily erected shall conform to the setback, side and rear lot line requirements specified in the zoning district wherein located. No sign or other advertisement shall be placed on or near the satellite dish unless the sign complies with applicable zoning laws.
(e) APPEALS.
In the event that a usable signal cannot be obtained by locating a satellite dish in locations permitted by this code, the Board of Appeals may grant a variance to allow the placement of a satellite dish in any location except a front yard.
(f) PENALTY.
Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall forfeit not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00. Each day of violation shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(3) Central Air-Conditioning Equipment.
(a) PURPOSE AND INTENT.
It shall be the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate and broaden the location of central air-conditioning units in residential zoning districts and to provide a
4-19-93 Chapter 21-152
flexible framework which can be easily followed. With the growing concern over noise levels, this Ordinance provides explicit guidelines whereby homes with central air-conditioning units and those neighboring without such units will not provide unilateral annoyances.
(b) DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE IN THIS SECTION.
SOLID BARRIER: Any obstruction of dense material and composition.
SOUND LEVEL METER: Shall meet the requirements of the current American National Standard S1.4 for General Purpose Sound Level Meter.
(c) MEASUREMENT OF SOUND.
1. Sound levels of outdoor air-conditioning units shall not exceed 65 dB at the evaluation point at the property line.
a. Evaluation point shall be a point five (5) feet above the grade level at the property line and no closer than three (3) feet to any wall.
b. Where a building wall is contiguous to the property line, the evaluation point shall be outside of the nearest window to the unit location, not more than three (3) feet from any other surface.
c. A minimum of three readings shall be taken at two (2) minute intervals. The sound level shall be the average of these readings. Sound level shall be measured with an approved sound level meter.
2. Where such equipment exceeds the above sound level with the equipment in operation, additional measurements shall be taken with the equipment not operating.
a. If the difference between the equipment operating and not operating is greater than five (5) decibels, appropriate modifications shall be made.
b. Modifications may include a solid barrier of dense shrubbery or a solid fence to be located between the equipment and the evaluation point. Barriers shall be twice the length of the equipment and at least five (5) feet in height.
c. Where the decibel rating is above 65 dB at three (3) feet, the minimum setback shall be increased in accordance with the calculations outlined in paragraph 3 below.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-153
3. A minimum setback of three (3) feet shall be required where such equipment is calculated to produce 65 decibels or less of sound. Calculation shall be made in accordance with the Calculation Form for Application of Sound Rated Outdoor Unitary Equipment published by the Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute, 1815 N. Fort Myer Drive, Arlington, VA 22209, (c) 1971.
(d) PLACEMENT IN YARDS.
Air-conditioning equipment shall be a permitted obstruction in yards and courts, subject to calculations and conditions as follows:
1. Front Yards - Such units shall be completely screened from view of the street by a dense hedge, and placed in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Side Yards - Such units shall be completely screened from view of the street by a dense hedge or other solid barrier, and placed in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
3. Rear Yards and Open Courts - Such units shall be placed in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(e) PERMIT REQUIRED.
No central air-conditioning unit shall be erected until a permit has been issued by the Building Inspector.
(4) Outside Storage - General.
No manure, rubbish, inoperable vehicles, salvage material or miscellaneous refuse may be stored within any residential district when the same may be construed as a menace to the public health or safety or may be held to have a depressing influence upon property values in the area. Junk shall be placed in properly zoned junkyards only.
(5) Outside Storage of Firewood.
(a) No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned property, except that firewood may be temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of its delivery.
(b) Firewood should be raised off the ground and neatly stacked not closer than one (1) foot to any lot line and not higher than five (5) feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. Fences as used in this Section shall not include hedges and other vegetation.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-154
(c) All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be disposed of within seven (7) days and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises.
(d) Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
(e) Not more than ten percent (10%) of the side or rear yard may be used for storage of firewood at any given time.
(f) Firewood may not be stored in any area determined to lie within the boundaries of a designated floodplain.
(6) Fences and Hedges.
(a) DEFINITIONS. These definitions are identical to the definitions listed in Chapter 21, Part “E”. These definitions listed below are provided here to give quick access to the most commonly used definitions for this section. If additional definitions are needed to clarify a particular situation, refer to Chapter 21, Part “E”.
1. FENCES: For the purpose of this Section, a "fence" is herein defined as an enclosed barrier consisting of vegetation, wood, stone, metal or similar material intended to prevent ingress or egress. No fence shall be constructed of unsightly or dangerous materials, which would constitute a nuisance.
2. VEGETATION BARRIER: For the purposes of this Section, a planting, shrub, or hedge intended to limit ingress or egress.
3. LOT LINE, FRONT: The boundary of a lot, which abuts a street line. On a corner lot, the front lot line would be determined by using the official village address map. The address assigned would designate the front lot line of the property.
4. LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line and in the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
5. LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-155
6. FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including gates, for each one foot wide segment extending over the entire length and height of the fence, 50 percent of the surface area is open spaces which afford a direct view- through the fence.
7. FENCE, CLOSED: Any fence that does not meet the criteria to be defined open.
8. VISION TRIANGLE: At all street intersections where there is no traffic light control, no fence, wall, parking, vegetation, hedge, planting, or structure shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between the height of two and one-half (2 %) feet and ten (10) feet above the grade of the sidewalk adjacent to the intersecting streets in the area bonded by the street lines of such corner lots and line joining the points along said street lines twenty (20) feet from the point of intersection.
(b) FENCE CATEGORIES. Fences shall be categorized into two (2) classifications:
1. BOUNDARY FENCE: A fence placed on or within two (2) feet of property lines of adjacent properties.
2. NUISANCE PREVENTION FENCE: A fence constructed to prevent an area from being utilized by animals, human beings, or vehicular traffic. Examples: Fences erected around gardens, fences located in front yards of corner lots to prevent corner cutting.
(c) PERMITS REQUIRED.
1. No fence, except for plantings, shall hereafter be built, enlarged or altered within the village unless the owner or his agent first obtains a permit from the Building/Zoning Inspector. A sketch or design of the proposed fence shall be submitted to the Building/Zoning Inspector for approval before construction begins. The Building/Zoning Inspector may allow a fence to be moved from one location on a lot (tax parcel) to another location on the same lot (tax parcel) without a permit being required.
2. No permit is required for vegetation barriers. The vegetation barriers must be installed according to the appropriate zoning classification and fence category. The vegetation barrier must be classified as open or closed based on the desired full growth of the plants. In most cases, the vegetation barrier will be classified as closed.
3. No repairs or replacements exceeding ten percent (10%) of existing nonconforming fences shall be made without obtaining a permit.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-156
(d) GENERAL PROVISIONS. Fence, stone walls, or similar structures anchored to the ground shall be considered permanent structures and subject to the following:
1. Shall be placed a minimum of two (2) feet off the side and rear lot lines for maintenance reasons. Exception One: Fences located adjacent to street right-of-ways may be placed on the lot line. The street must be improved for this to apply. Exception Two: If the adjoining property owners file a joint permit application, a fence may be placed on the lot line. If the joint application is filed, the adjoining property owners are both responsible for maintaining the fence.
2. Shall have the finished or decorative side of the fence face the adjoining property.
3. Shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
4. Shall be safe to all by passers.
5. Shall not be electric.
6. Shall not be made of barbed wire. Exception: Barbed wire is allowed in nonresidential districts for specified purposes as defined in this code. The Building/Zoning Inspector must approve its use and may require a written statement from the owner to document the need for it.
7. Anytime a fence is located in the vision triangle, the fence cannot exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) feet in height above the grade of the intersection of street centerline adjacent thereto.
8. Construction hazards require temporary fences. Examples of construction hazards are open basement excavations & open ditches.
9. Electronic dog fences must comply with this chapter as well as Chapter 14.05(1)(9)(d). (O-2012-3)
(e) PERMITTED OPEN FENCES (RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS)
1. Front Yard
a. Corner lots - If the fence is not located in the vision triangle, the maximum height of the fence is four (4) feet.
b. Non-Corner lots - The maximum height of the fence is four (4) feet.
2. Rear Yard
4-19-93 Chapter 21-157
a. Corner lots - If the fence is not located in the vision triangle, the maximum height of the fence is six (6) feet.
b. Non-Corner lots - The maximum height of the fence is six (6) feet.
3. Side Yard(s)
a. Corner lots - If the fence is not located in the vision triangle, the maximum height of the fence is six (6) feet. Exception: The fence cannot exceed four (4) feet in height in the established front yard setback area.
b. Non-Corner lots - The maximum height of the fence is six (6) feet. The fence cannot exceed four (4) feet in height in the established front yard setback area.
(f) PERMITTED CLOSED FENCES (RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS)
1. Front Yard - No closed fence of any type is allowed.
2. Rear Yard
a. Corner lots - If the fence is not located in the vision triangle, the maximum height of the fence is six (6) feet.
b. Non-Corner lots - The maximum height of the fence is six (6) feet.
3. Side Yard(s)
a. Corner lots - If the fence is not located in the vision triangle, the maximum height of the fence is six (6) feet. Exception: In cases where a first floor of a home is elevated more than 30 inches above the ground elevation adjacent to the home as determined by the Building/Zoning Inspector, an additional two feet may be added to the six (6) feet fence to provide privacy. The Building/Zoning Inspector may require the property owner requesting the additional two (2) feet of fence to provide elevations as needed. No closed fence will be allowed in the established front yard setback area.
b. Non-Corner lots - The maximum height of the fence is six (6) feet. Exception: In cases where a fist floor of a home is elevated more than 30 inches above the ground elevation adjacent to the home as determined by the Building/Zoning Inspector, an additional two feet may be added to the six (6) feet fence to provide privacy. The Building/Zoning Inspector may require the property owner requesting the additional two (2) feet of fence to provide elevations
4-19-93 Chapter 21-158
as needed. No closed fence will be allowed in the established front yard setback area.
(g) PERMITTED NUISANCE FENCES. The owner placing this type of fence cannot use single strands of rope, cable, clothesline or anything similar unless it is marked properly. All single strands, including chain links, must be at least ½ inch in diameter. To be considered marked properly, the installer of the fence must use colored streamers or something similar connected at four (4) foot intervals and must be visible at night. The fence must be safe to all by passers. Bare wire is prohibited. All nuisance fences must meet this code regardless of the date the fence was constructed.
(h) VEGETATION BARRIERS.
1. Must meet all requirements of the fence ordinance, unless otherwise stated in a subsection.
2. Shall not be able to grow to a height and width that causes by passers to be unable to utilize the full width of the sidewalk.
(i) TEMPORARY FENCES. Fences erected for the purpose of keeping people away from construction hazards, preventing snow drifts in unwanted areas, or for any other reasonable use as defined by the Building/Zoning Inspector shall meet all requirements set for in this chapter. No permit is needed for a temporary fence and temporary fences shall not be erected for more than forty-five (45) days in a year unless approved by the Building/Zoning Inspector. The Village of North Fond du Lac does require any contractor or property owner that digs a hole three (3) feet or deeper to fence it in after twenty-one (21) days of being open. The only alternative to fencing the excavation after the hole is open for twenty-one (21) days is to slope the sides of the hole to a one to pitch. For basement excavations, the hole is considered open until the hole is backfilled and decking material is placed on the foundation. The Village of North Fond du Lac will give the property owner who has the excavation open for more than twenty-one (21) days one notice to fence it in. The notice will give the property owner twenty-four (24) hours to get a fence in place. If the twenty-four (24) hours expires and the hole is not fenced, the Village will fence it and charge the cost of labor and a fence rental fee. Failure to pay the charges will result in the charges being placed on the taxes as a special assessment.
(7) Swimming Pools.
(a) SCOPE. This Section shall apply to all new, remodeled, altered and relocated private swimming pools in the Village, except that the protective enclosure requirements shall be retroactive to all existing swimming pools. Decorative pools and pools used for animals will be treated in the same manner as pools used for human use.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-159
(b) DEFINITION. A private or residential swimming pool is an outdoor structure containing a body of water in a receptacle or other container having a depth of water at any point greater than one (1) foot located above or below the surface of the ground elevation, used or intended to be used by the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his family, and by friends invited to use it, and includes all structural facilities, appliances and appurtenances, equipment and other items used and intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of a private or residential swimming pool.
(c) EXEMPT POOLS. Storable swimming or wading pools intended for human use that are constructed in such a way that disassembly and reassembly can be done readily and meet all of the following criteria are exempt from the provisions of 21.12(7):
1. A maximum dimension of fifteen (15) feet.
2. A maximum wall height of eighteen (18) inches.
3. Have less than twelve (12) inches of water in it.
(d) PERMIT REQUIRED. A permit is required and shall be obtained prior to the installation, alteration, or addition of a private swimming pool. The application for a swimming pool permit shall be accompanied (as a minimum) by the following information:
1. The dimensions (size and shape) of the lot and the swimming pool (size and shape).
2. A scaled plot plan including all buildings, structures, fences, or easements.
3. A sketch of over head and underground power lines, gas service, cable services, water service, and sewer service.
4. Any proposed underground electrical branch circuits. All electrical codes and ordinance must be followed.
5. Any plumbing required to serve the swimming pool. All plumbing codes and ordinances must be followed.
6. Drainage method of the swimming pool.
(e) CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably imposed by the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector shall not issue a permit for construction as provided for in Subsection (d), unless the following construction requirements are observed:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-160
1. All materials and methods used in the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvements and pool installation shall be in accord with all state regulations and code and with any and all Ordinances of the Village now in effect or hereafter enacted.
2. All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable Village ordinances and State building codes. Every private or residential swimming pool shall be provided with a suitable draining method and, in no case, shall waters from any pool be drained into the sanitary sewer system or onto lands of other property owners adjacent to that on which the pool is located.
3. All electrical installations, including lighting and heating but not limited thereto, which are provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a private swimming pool shall be in conformance with the state laws and Village ordinances regulating electrical installations.
(f) SETBACKS AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
1. Private swimming pools shall be erected or constructed on rear or side lots only and only on a lot occupied by a principal building. No swimming pool shall be erected or constructed on an otherwise vacant lot. A lot shall not be considered vacant if the owner owns the contiguous lot and said lot is occupied by a principal building.
2. The swimming pool and any pool accessory building structure and any pool equipment or structure shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total lot area of the lot on which it is located. No part of the swimming pool, pool accessory structure or pool equipment or structure shall be closure than ten (10) feet to any side lot line or rear lot line or closer to the street than the front setback line of the main building.
(g) FENCES.
1. All private residential swimming pools not excluded under section (7)(c) of this ordinance and less than forty-eight (48) inches above grade, whether in-ground or above-ground types, shall be enclosed with an adequate and secure fence at least forty-eight (48) inches high above adjoining grade to prevent straying into the pool area. Fence requirements as set forth in Section 21.12(6) shall apply. Required fences shall be constructed to prohibit the passage of a six (6) inch sphere between fence members. Any gate installed shall be provided with self-closing and self-latching devices which shall be on the inside of the gate at least thirty (30) inches above ground level. Pool covers shall be fixed securely in place at all times when the pool is not supervised by a responsible person.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-161
SUBSTITUTES FOR FENCING: A pool dome or pool top fencing attached to the pool to extend at least forty-eight (48) inches above the ground.
2. Above grade pools with walls that are at least forty-eight (48) inches in height high at all points around said pool or have platforms and railings that are forty-eight (48) inches or more in height above grade are not required to be enclosed as provided in 7(g)1, but the ladders and stairways providing access to said pool shall be adequately secured to prevent entry whenever the pool is not in use.
(h) COMPLIANCE. All swimming pools existing prior to January 1, 2001 that meet the previous ordinance’s 42 inch wall height requirement (Measured at the top of wall to ground adjacent to the swimming pool), will not be required to meet the new fence requirements. If a swimming pool was purchased prior to January 1, 2001 it also may be grandfathered. (O-2001-10)
(i) DRAINING AND APPROVAL THEREOF. No private swimming pool shall be constructed so as to allow water to drain into any sanitary sewer or septic tank nor to overflow upon or cause damage to any adjoining property. Provisions may be made for draining the contents of any swimming pool into a storm sewer, but such installation shall be subject to prior approval by the Plumbing Inspector. In all cases where a private swimming pool is to be constructed on premises served by a private sewage disposal system, approval of the State Board of Health shall be necessary before the construction of any such pool may commence.
(j) FILTER SYSTEM REQUIRED. All private swimming pools within the meaning of this Chapter must have, in connection therewith, some filtration system to assure proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof.
(k) DIRT BOTTOMS PROHIBITED. All swimming pools of a permanent nature shall have the sides and bottom of a smooth finish, and no sand or dirt bottom shall be permitted.
(l) LIGHTING. Any area lighting for swimming pools shall be shielded to prevent the lighting of neighboring properties.
(m) WATER CLARITY. The swimming pool must be maintained and the water must be clear enough that someone on the surface of the water will be able to see bottom of the pool.
(8) Antennas and Towers.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-162
Antennas and towers may be installed, erected and maintained within all zoning districts pursuant to the provisions of this section. Unless allowed as a principal land use in a zoning district, the use of such equipment shall be incidental to the permitted land use.
(a) PURPOSE. It is the intent of this ordinance to strike a balance between the federal interest in promoting amateur operations and the legitimate interest of the Village of North Fond du Lac in regulating local zoning; to permit antennas and towers without creating adverse aesthetic impacts, particularly in residential neighborhoods, by specifying the number, location, and size of antennas and towers; to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community through the issuance of a building permit to assure installations as recommended by the antenna and/or tower manufacturer; to preserve the rights of property owners by confining appurtenant equipment within the boundaries of the property on which the antenna and/or tower is located; to protect the integrity of public utility installations by prohibiting the installation of appurtenant equipment within easements so reserved for the public benefit.
(b) DEFINITION OF ANTENNA. Any system of wires, poles, rods or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, which system is external to or attached to the exterior of any building. Antennas shall include devices having active elements extending in any direction, and directional beam-type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna.
(c) PERMIT REQUIRED. No radio or television antenna or tower shall be installed unless a permit therefore is first obtained by the owner or his agent from the Building Inspector. The owner shall provide a drawing(s) which illustrates the proposed method of installation, the manufacturer's specifications (if any), and a site plan which depicts the location of the proposed antenna and/or antenna tower, any existing antenna or tower, property lines and all buildings. The permit fee shall be based on the value of the proposed installation, except that no additional fee shall be charged if the installation of the antenna or tower is done in conjunction with the construction of a new structure and completed prior to occupancy of the structure. If construction of the antenna or tower is not completed prior to occupancy, a separate permit is required.
Existing antennas and towers may be taken down for repair or replacement ( if the new system complies with the regulations of this ordinance) if re-installation is completed within 60 days. A permit shall be required for the re-installation but no fee shall be charged for the permit.
(d) EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION. Antennas and antenna towers shall be installed pursuant to the manufacturer's specifications. The combined wind load area of an antenna and tower shall not exceed the manufacturer's recommendations.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-163
1. Residential Zoning Districts:
a. Number of Antennas and Antenna Towers
(1) Single Family Residence: One roof mounted antenna per building and one antenna tower per lot.
(2) Two Family Residence: One roof mounted antenna per building and one antenna tower per dwelling unit.
(3) All other dwellings: One roof mounted antenna and one antenna tower per building.
b. Height Restrictions.
(1) Roof mounted antenna: Maximum 30 feet, measured from the highest peak of the roof.
(2) Antenna tower: Maximum 70 feet, measured from finished grade. Antenna height is not restricted.
c. Antenna Tower Siting. Antenna towers may be erected only within a side or rear yard.
2. All Other Zoning Districts:
The installation of antennas and antenna towers shall be in accord with applicable development regulations set forth in this ordinance for such zoning districts.
(e) APPURTENANT EQUIPMENT.
1. No part of an antenna array shall extend beyond any property boundary.
2. Buried radials shall not encroach into a utility easement.
3. Guy wires shall not be anchored within a front yard and shall be installed in such a manner as to protect the public safety and to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from public streets.
(f) PROHIBITED SIGNS OR DEVICES. The attachment to an antenna or antenna tower of any flag, decorative or commercial sign, streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or waving, fluttering or revolving device is prohibited. This regulation does not include weather devices nor stationary seasonal decorations which are displayed for less than 45 days.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-164
(g) VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS. A permit for any proposed antenna or antenna tower not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance may be granted with the approval of the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 21.19 of the Zoning Code. When considering a permit, the Board of Appeals shall strike a balance between the federal interest in promoting amateur operations as stated by the Federal Communications Commission in its declaratory ruling entitled PRB-1 and the legitimate interest of the Village in regulating local zoning and strive to make a reasonable accommodation between those two interests. The Board of Appeals shall also explore alternatives to a blanket denial of a permit by means of seeking a compromise, whenever possible, with the amateur operator and the local zoning authority. The Board of Appeals shall deny a request for a variance or special exception only in cases where it makes a specific finding that this ordinance constitutes the minimum practicable regulation necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and to avoid creating adverse aesthetic impacts on the neighborhood.
(h) EXISTING ANTENNAS AND TOWERS GRANDFATHERED. All antenna and tower systems that exist at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall be considered to be "grandfathered in" and therefore not subject to the regulations of this ordinance. Such existing systems may be taken down for repair if set up again within a sixty (60) day period, but may not be replaced by a similar non-complying system without approval of the Board of Appeals. A permit shall be required for the re-installation but no fee shall be charged for the permit.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-165
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-166
SECTION 21.13 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY, PARKING, AND LOADING
(1) Vision Clearance Triangle.
(a) At all street intersections where there is no traffic light control, no fence, wall, parking, vegetation, hedge, planting or structure shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between a height of two and one-half (2½) feet and ten (10) feet above the grade of the sidewalk adjacent to the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining the points along said street lines twenty (20) feet from the point of intersection.
(b) Allowable installations within the vision clearance triangle are: utility and street light poles when no safer alternative is available; trees with growth characteristics which develop no significant foliage which will obstruct view in the clearance area; official signs and signals; signs in accordance with Section 21.14; and on street parking when traffic controls exist which permit decreased sight lines.
(2) Highway Access.
(a) No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed right-of-way of expressways, nor to any controlled access arterial street without permission of the highway agency that has access control jurisdiction. No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed right-of-way of freeways, interstate highways and their interchanges or turning lanes nor to intersecting or interchanging streets within 1,500 feet of the most remote end of the taper of the turning lanes (such as exit and entrance ramps). No driveway openings shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of the intersection of an arterial street right-of-way line.
(b) Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping or other topographic barriers shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified streets or highways.
(c) Temporary access to the above right-of-way may be granted by the Zoning Administrator after review and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary, revocable and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months.
(3) General Parking and Loading Regulations.
(a) SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. The off-street parking and off-street loading provisions of this Ordinance shall apply as follows:
4-19-93 Chapter 21-167
1. Accessory off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of this Section of all buildings and structures. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Section, as it may be amended, and provided that construction is begun within six (6) months of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading facilities in the amounts required for the issuance of said building permit may be provided in lieu of any additional amounts that may be required by this Section.
2. When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement, such additional parking and loading facilities as required by this Section shall also be provided.
3. Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use which requires more off-street parking or loading than would have previously been required, additional parking and loading shall be provided in an amount equal to the difference between the uses.
4. Except as provided in Subsection 3 above, if a building or structure was erected prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the event the floor area of the building or structure is increased and then only to the extent required by such added floor area.
(b) EXISTING PARKING FACILITIES. Off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance, and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions of this Section.
(c) PERMISSIVE PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking and loading facilities to serve any use of the land or buildings, provided that all regulations herein governing the design and operation of such facilities are observed.
(d) DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION. When a building or use, which is nonconforming in terms of the parking and loading requirements of this Section, is destroyed or damaged by any cause, restoration or reconstruction of such building or use shall include sufficient off-street parking and loading to bring it into compliance. The Board of Appeals may waive this provision entirely or reduce the parking and loading requirements as appropriate.
(e) CONTROL OF OFF-SITE PARKING FACILITIES. Where all or part of required parking facilities are to be provided on private land, other than the lot on which is located the building or use to be served, the Zoning Administrator shall
4-19-93 Chapter 21-168
approve the use of such off-site parking only when written assurance is made that the said private off-site parking will continue to be available to the building or use it is intended to serve.
(4) Off-Street Parking.
(a) REQUIRED SPACES. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for land uses or activities permitted by this Ordinance shall be as set forth in Schedule 21.13 which Schedule is hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance. Notwithstanding the above, in the (B-1) District off-street parking space shall not be required, except for buildings containing dwelling units or lodging rooms hereafter erected, enlarged or structurally altered or converted.
(b) USE. Off-street parking facilities provided in accordance with the requirements of Schedule 21.13 shall be used solely for the parking of automobiles of patrons, occupants or employees.
(c) EXEMPTION. When application of the provisions of Schedule 21.13 results in a requirement of three (3) or less spaces on a single lot in (B-1) Districts, such parking spaces need not be provided if approved by the Board of Appeals. However, where two (2) or more uses are located on a single lot only one of these uses shall be eligible for the above exemption. This parking exemption shall not apply to dwelling units in commercial zones.
(d) COMBINED FACILITIES. Off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be combined if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use and provided that all regulations governing such location of the side parking spaces, in relation to the use served, are adhered to. Further, no parking spaces or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Appeals.
(e) AREA AND ACCESS. Each required off-street parking space shall have a size of not less than 9 x 18 feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley. Up to 25 percent of the required parking spaces may be sized for small cars with a size of 8 x 16. Off-street parking shall include handicapped parking spaces per state code.
(f) YARDS. Off-street parking space, open to the sky, may be located in a yard except that:
1. In residential districts, drives shall be no wider than 20 feet in single-family districts and 24 feet in multi-family districts. No parking shall be permitted in any front yard.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-169
2. In a (B-1) District no parking shall be permitted in any required front yard but access drives in a front yard are permitted.
3. In a (B-1) District no parking shall be permitted closer than five (5) feet from any street right-of-way line.
(g) DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
1. Drainage. All parking lots must be constructed in accordance with an approved drainage plan.
2. Screening and Landscaping. Off-street parking areas shall be screened on all sides except when a side of rear yard abuts another parking lot. Screening shall consist of a dense hedge not less than five (5) feet high, planted in a buffer strip a minimum of five (5) feet wide. When a side or rear yard abuts another parking lot the five (5) strip shall contain trees a maximum of 40 feet apart. Any parking area accommodating more than 60 vehicles shall provide landscape islands containing trees and shrubs at the beginning and end of each row. Any double row having more than 50 cars or single row having more than 25 cars shall be broken up by a planting island containing two (2) trees for a double row or one (1) tree for a single row. Islands shall be the approximate size of a parking stall per tree, curbed or railroad tied, and trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper.
3. Wheelstops. Wheelstops of masonry, steel, or timber, or similar stopping device shall be used to prevent vehicles from parking closer to a street line than permitted by this Ordinance.
4. Lighting. Illumination of an off-street parking area shall be 0.5 watts per SF maximum and arranged so as not to reflect direct rays of light into adjacent residential districts and streets.
5. Repair and Service. No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in any required off-street parking area. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any off-street parking area or facility unless such operation has been designed to be part of said area or facility and the site plan has been approved by the Department Public Works.
(h) LOCATION. All required off-street parking spaces in Residential Districts shall be located on the same lot as the building or use to be served. In other districts required off-street parking spaces may be provided in a private or public parking facility located within 500 feet walking distance from the building or use they are intended to serve.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-170
(i) EXTENSION INTO ADJACENT DISTRICTS. Other provisions of this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, a commercial parking area located in a (B-1) or (B-2) District may extend into an adjacent Residential District by a distance of 300 feet if a plan for such extension is approved by special use permit. The periphery of such extension shall be heavily landscaped to provide visual screening from the Residential District.
(5) Off-Street Loading.
There shall be provided off-street loading berths not less than the minimum requirements specified in this Section in connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or enlarged, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles.
(a) LOCATION. All required off-street loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the use to be served, and no portion of the vehicle shall project into a street or alley. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located less than 25 feet from the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets, nor shall it be located in a required front yard or side yard adjoining a street.
(b) SIZE. Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, a required off-street loading berth shall be at least ten (10) feet in width by at least 65 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen (15) feet.
(c) ACCESS. Each required off-street loading berth shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements and shall be subject to approval of the Director of Public Works.
(d) SURFACING. After January 1, 1996, all open off-street loading berths that have entrances and/or exits from an improved street shall be improved with a compacted base and asphaltic or concrete surface which complies with Wisconsin Highway Department standards and recommendations for the anticipated traffic classification subject to approval by the Director of Public Works.
(e) REPAIR AND SERVICE. No storage nor motor vehicle repair/service work of any kind shall be permitted within any required loading berth area.
(f) SPACE ALLOCATION. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof.
(g) SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-171
1. The minimum number of off-street loading spaces required for non-residential uses in all but Industrial Districts shall be: One (1) loading space for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) additional loading space for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or major fraction thereof.
2. The minimum number and size of off-street loading spaces in manufacturing districts shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
Floor Area of Required Minimum Minimum Vertical
Establishments Number Size Clearance
5,000 to 25,000 1 10’ x 35’ 12 feet
25,000 to 50,000 2 10’ x 35’ ea. 12 feet
50,000 to 100,000 3 12’ x 50’ ea. 15 feet
100,000 to 150,000 4 12’ x 65’ ea. 15 feet
For each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, or major fraction thereof over 150,000, one additional loading space shall be provided. Such additional loading space shall be at least 12 feet in width by 65 feet in length, and have a vertical clearance of not less than 15 feet.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-172
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-173
(6) Schedule 21.13 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Land Use or Activity
* Spaces
Required
1. Dwelling, one and two family: for each dwelling unit.
2.0
2. Dwelling, town house; for each dwelling unit.
2.0
3. Dwelling, multiple family: for each dwelling unit
2.0 **
4. Boarding and rooming house, apartment hotel: for each structure.
1.0
5. Hotel and motel: for each room or suite.
Plus: for each lodging room, or suite, and each dwelling unit.
1.0
1.0
6. School, auditorium, church: for each 5 seats or for each 90 lineal inches of seating space in the main auditorium for assembly hall.
1.0
7. Colleges, junior colleges, universities: for each 3 students based on the design capacity of the institution.
1.0
8. *Gymnasium, grandstand, meeting hall and similar places of public assembly: for each 5 seats or 90 lineal inches of seating space. (See note a)
1.0
9. Hospital: for each bed.
1.1
10. Library: for each 500 square feet of gross floor area.
1.0
11. Museum, art gallery and similar uses: for each 500 square feet of gross floor area.
1.0
12. Nursing home and similar type of establishment: for each 5 beds, 2 lodging accommodations, and each full-time employee.
1.0
13. Private club and lodge: for each such structure and each 5 seats based on the design seating capacity of the main meeting room.
1.0
14. School - commercial or trade, music, dance or business: for each two employees and for each 7 students based on the design capacity of the facility.
1.0
15. School - high: for each faculty member and each 4 students based on the design capacity of the facility.
1.0
*When totals indicate that a partial space is required, a full space shall be provided.
**Enclosed garages that are not included as part of the basic apartment rent will not count toward the required spaces.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-174
Land Use or Activity
Spaces
Required
16. School - nursery, elementary, or junior high: for each faculty member and each full-time, non-faculty employee.
1.0
17. Bowling alley: for each lane plus: for any ancillary uses such as restaurants.
7.0
18. Health salon, swimming pool, skating rink, dance hall: for each 3 persons based on maximum design capacity of the facility and for each employee.
1.0
19. Park, recreation area, community center: for each employee and spaces to serve the public as determined by the Plan Commission.
.5
20. *Car wash: for each employee. (See note b)
.75
21. Automobile service station: for each pumping island and for each service stall.
1.0
22. Bank: for each 300 square feet of gross floor area.
1.0
23. Beauty parlor: for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.
1.0
24. Office: for each 300 square feet of gross floor area.
1.0
25. Restaurant, bar, night club: for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.
1.0
26. Furniture and appliance sales and repair: for each 400 square feet of gross floor area and one per employee.
1.0
27. Motor vehicle sales: for each 400 square feet of gross floor area.
1.0
28. Medical and dental clinic: for each 50 square feet of gross floor area in any waiting or reception room.
Plus for each treatment room, examination room and doctor's office.
1.0
1.5
29. Manufacturing, fabricating, cleaning, testing, assembling, repairing or servicing establishments: For each 800 square feet of gross floor area or for each two employees, whichever is greater.
1.0
30. Theater: for each 4 seats, up to 400 seats and for each 6 seats over 400.
1.0
31. *Theater (drive-in): (see note c)
0
32. Funeral Parlor: for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.
1.0
33. Warehouse, storage, wholesale, and mail order establishment: for each establishment.
Plus for each 1,500 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area over 4,500 square feet, or for each two employees, whichever is greater.
4.0
1.0
4-19-93 Chapter 21-175
Land Use or Activity
Spaces
Required
34. Public utility and public service: for each employee.
.5
35. All other business and commercial establishments: for each 150 square feet of gross floor area.
1.0
36. *Other uses: (see note d)
1.0
(7) Remarks for Schedule 21.13
(a) When facilities for public assembly are accessory to a school, and when approved by the Plan Commission, the required number or parking spaces may be reduced by the number of spaces provided, as required herein for the applicable school.
(b) In addition to the required parking spaces, reservoir standing space to accommodate automobiles waiting to be washed shall be provided in an amount equal to five (5) times the number of automobiles undergoing some phase of laundering at the same time.
c) Reservoir standing space at the theater entrance shall be provided equal to ten percent (10%) of the vehicle capacity of the theater.
(d) Parking spaces for other permitted uses not listed above shall be provided in accordance with requirements designated by the Plan Commission and in the case of special uses, as recommended by the Plan Commission and required by the Village Board.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-176
Section 21.14 Sign Regulations.
(1) PURPOSE.
The intent of this ordinance is to acknowledge that the reasonable display of signs is appropriate as a public service and necessary to the conduct of competitive commerce and industry. Provisions of the ordinance are intended to establish minimum standards which regulate the design, erection and display of signs based on land use, public safety, neighborhood values and aesthetic quality.
(2) GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(a) Permit Required. No sign shall be erected, replaced, relocated or structurally modified unless a permit therefor is first obtained by the owner or his agent from the Building Inspector. However, as specified in Section 21.14(3). of this ordinance, a permit shall not be required for real estate signs, construction and subdivision development signs, building nameplates, window signs, flags, community event and political signs.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of this Section 21.14 shall not apply to signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any function of government, or required by law, including public or quasi-public signs which are intended to welcome visitors to the Village of North Fond du Lac or advertise the Village, provided that such signs are designed, erected and maintained in a manner so as to be compatible with the surrounding development.
(c) Number of Signs. The total number of signs permitted on any lot shall be as set forth in Column 2 of Schedule 21.14-A.
(d) Sign Area.
1. Maximum permitted size of signs shall be as set forth in Columns 3 and 4 of Schedule 21.14-A.
2. When more than one sign of any type (ground, wall, projecting) is permitted, the aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed the maximum gross surface area as specified in Columns 3 and 4 of Schedule 21.14-A.
3. Ground signs and wall signs: Sign area shall be calculated as the surface area within the sign frame or cabinet, inclusive of all accessory pictorial matter, ornamentation, corporate logos and changeable copy devices.
4. Individual letters and/or pictorial matter: Sign area shall be calculated as the surface area defined by the smallest rectangle to encompass advertising or identification text and/or pictorial matter or devices not to exceed total square feet allowed in Schedule 21.14-A.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-177
5. Double-faced and multiple-sided signs: Sign area shall include the surface area of only one sign face, where the surface area is the same on each face.
(e) Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured to the top of the sign, inclusive of all ornamental, architectural or structural elements, as set forth in Column 6 of Schedule 21.14-A.
(f) Sign Projections.
1. All Signs: A sign shall not extend beyond a property line. A sign shall not encroach into and/or over the public right-of-way except as may be approved by the Plan Commission.
2. Projecting Signs: A projecting sign shall be not less than 8 feet above the ground and shall not extend above the highest point of the building wall.
3. Wall Signs, Individual Letters and Pictorial Matter: Signage shall not extend above a building wall except where integrated into the building design as a structural element or architectural feature.
(g) Painted Signs. Signs shall not be painted on the exterior wall of any building. Existing painted wall signs shall not be repainted and shall be removed upon a change of building occupant or as new signage is installed.
(h) Illumination. An illuminated sign or lighting device shall not employ flashing, rotating or moving light. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be situated to direct or beam light onto adjacent residential land or onto a public right-of-way, waterway or air corridor, or premises adjacent to any of these, so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a nuisance or traffic hazard.
(i) Vision Clearance Triangle. Ground signs within the vision triangle shall include not more than two posts or standards 8 inches or less in diameter. The minimum clearance for all signs (ground, wall, projecting) shall be not less than 8 feet above the grade of the intersection of the street centerlines and shall be situated so as not to obscure the vision of motorists approaching the street intersection.
(j) Roof Signs. Roof signs shall not be permitted in any zoning district.
(k) Off-Premises Advertising Sign.
1. U.S. Highway 41. Off-site signs shall be restricted to the Special Highway 41 Sign district, pursuant to the provisions of Section 21.14(5). of this ordinance. The plan commission will review all off premise sign requests before the Building Inspector will issue a permit. The plan commission will require a colored sketch of the sign, a detailed site plan,
4-19-93 Chapter 21-178
and may require other information as needed. The plan commission will adopt sign review criteria periodically to ensure the off - premise signs fit well with the adjacent properties.
2. U.S. Highway 175 (Prospect Avenue). Off-site signs shall be restricted to the U.S. Highway 175 Sign district, pursuant to the provisions of Section 21.14(5). of this ordinance. The plan commission will review all off premise sign requests before the Building Inspector will issue a permit. The plan commission will require a colored sketch of the sign, a detailed site plan, and may require other information as needed. The plan commission will adopt sign review criteria periodically to ensure the off - premise signs fit well with the adjacent properties.
(l) Removal. In any district all signs and/or sign structures must be removed when the business or activity identified or advertised by such signs has not been conducted for a period of 6 months or more, or when a sign structure remains unused for a period of 6 months or more. The owner or lessee of the premises on which said signs and/or sign structures are located shall accomplish removal within 60 days from the date of mailing of a notice by the Building Inspector. If not removed within the said period, such signs may be removed by the Village at the owner's expense.
(3) SPECIAL SIGNS AND DEVICES.
(a) Real Estate. One sale or lease sign per street frontage is permitted for a property. Signs shall not exceed 6 square feet in size for properties in residential zones and 32 square feet in all other zones. Signing shall be located entirely on the property to which it relates and shall not encroach into and/or over a public right-of-way.
(b) Construction. Three signs to identify a project and list pertinent information about the project shall be permitted, to be removed upon completion of construction. Aggregate sign area shall not exceed 96 square feet. All signs shall be located entirely on the property to which they relate and shall not encroach into and/or over a public right-of-way.
(c) Subdivision Development. Two signs to advertise a new subdivision or residential development shall be permitted, the aggregate area of which shall not exceed 64 square feet. Signs shall be removed within two years following the first occupancy within the development. All signs shall be located entirely on the property to which they relate and shall not encroach into and/or over a public right-of-way.
(d) Subdivision Identification. A subdivision of more than 20 lots, or an identified neighborhood, may erect one permanent sign to identify the development or area. The sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and shall be placed in a landscaped area situated at least 5 feet from a lot line.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-179
(e) Building Identification. Nameplates to denote the name and address of occupants of the premises shall not exceed 168 square inches in area per tenant or resident space.
(f) Directional and Instructional. Signs to provide information such as "entrance", "exit", "parking", etc. may be utilized provided that signage is located entirely on the property to which it relates, with no encroachment into and/or over a public right-of-way. A maximum of four signs are permitted, each not to exceed 3 square feet in area, 4 feet in height and not more than 30 percent of the sign area dedicated to advertise a business, logo or project.
(g) Memorial Plaques. A building name and construction date may be cut into a masonry surface or permanently affixed to an exterior wall when said sign is constructed of bronze or a noncombustible material. Memorial signs shall not exceed 4 square feet in area.
(h) Marquees. Permitted when accessory to a hotel, theater, restaurant or transportation terminal. A marquee structure shall be set back at least 24 inches from the vertical line of any curb face and maintain a minimum height of 10 feet. Plan Commission approval is required for encroachment into and/or over a public right-of-way.
(i) Awnings. Signs area for lettering and/or pictorial matter affixed to the facade of an awning to advertise or identify a place of business shall constitute a wall sign and shall comply with the provisions of Section 21.14(2) of this ordinance. Such sign area shall be charged to the total area permitted for a use. Where awning signage is limited to one line of non-illuminated lettering on the awning fascia and a logo on the awning facade, such sign area shall not be charged to the total permitted for a use.
(j) Freestanding Canopy. One business name and one logo may be situated within the fascia area of a canopy structure. Such signage shall be limited to canopy facades which face a public right-of-way and shall not exceed fifty percent of the fascia to which the signs are affixed. Canopy signage shall not be charged to the allowable sign area of a use.
(k) Window Signs. Signs attached to or painted on window surfaces shall not exceed more than twenty-five percent of the window area. No window signs shall be affixed to the outside surface of any window.
(l) Special Community Events and Political Signs. Temporary signs and banners and sign devices may be erected for a period not to exceed 40 days, upon consent of the property owner or occupant of the premises where such signing is placed. No sign shall encroach into and/or over a public right-of-way. Signage shall not be attached to fences, trees, traffic signs, directional signs or utility poles.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-180
Temporary signs shall not be illuminated or situated so as to obstruct or impair vision or traffic, or in any manner create a nuisance, hazard or disturbance to the health and welfare of the general public. The temporary signs and banners and sign devices must be removed within 72 hours after the event.
(m) Grand Opening Displays. To advertise the opening of a new business, outdoor advertising devices may be utilized on the property where the business is located. An outdoor display shall be permitted for one 15-day period, upon issuance of a permit from the Building Inspector. An outdoor display may include two of the following elements: streamers, pennants, one banner, one portable sign, one inflatable or 3-dimensional product sign. Advertising devices shall not be mounted on a roof or attached to fences, trees, traffic signs, directional signs or utility poles. No part of a display shall encroach into and/or over the public right-of-way or be situated so as to obstruct or impair vision or traffic, or in any manner create a nuisance, hazard or disturbance to the health and welfare of the general public.
(n) Banners, Pennants, Streamers, Inflatables, Portable Signs. To advertise a special sale or event for a business, a temporary outdoor display may be utilized on the property where the business is located. An outdoor display shall be permitted quarterly for a 15-day period, upon issuance of a permit from the Building Inspector. An outdoor display may include two of the following elements: streamers, pennants, one banner, one portable sign, one inflatable or 3-dimensional product sign. Advertising devices shall not be mounted on a roof or attached to fences, trees, traffic signs, directional signs or utility poles. No part of a display shall encroach into and/or over the public right-of-way or be situated so as to obstruct or impair vision or traffic, or in any manner create a nuisance, hazard or disturbance to the health and welfare of the general public.
(o) Commercial Flags. Decorative flags to advertise or identify a business are permitted on the property where the business is situated when pole-mounted on a building wall, or affixed to a freestanding flag pole or privately owned light pole. Flags shall be maintained in good condition. No part of a flag display shall encroach into and/or over the public right-of-way or be situated so as to obstruct or impair vision or traffic.
(p) Electronic Message Center. A permanent sign whose informational content can be changed or altered by electronic means to denote time, day, date, temperature, public service information, or to display commercial messages that pertain to on-site products or services for a business. An electronic message center shall be allowed to contain a static graphic display which does not change with the message. The changing sign message shall consist of letters and numerals only. The minimum interval between copy changes shall be not less than 2 seconds. Electronic Message Centers shall be allowed as an accessory use to allowable signage as permitted by Section 21.14-A. Electronic Message Centers shall be permitted in residential districts only upon Village Board approval of a Special
4-19-93 Chapter 21-181
Use Permit.(Ord. 2005-02)
(4) PROHIBITED SIGNS.
Prohibited in the Village of North Fond du Lac are signs which:
(a) Exhibit or convey statements, words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature.
(b) Display advertising matter which is untruthful.
(c) Employ visible moving parts or any portion of which moves, or gives the illusion of motion.
(d) Emit audible sound, odor or visible matter.
(e) Imitate or resemble an official traffic sign or signal, or bear the words "Stop", "Go Slow", "Caution", "Danger", or similar commands.
(f) Billboards are not permitted in any district. Existing billboards shall be treated as nonconforming structures. (O-2009-06)
(5) SPECIAL SIGN DISTRICT.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish special regulations for signs related to land uses along U.S. Highway 41 and U.S. Highway 175 (Prospect Avenue). The provisions of this district reflect special requirements of non-local traffic, a characteristic which makes this corridor unique and different from all other areas in the city.
(b) Boundaries. To be included under the special provisions of this section is all commercially zoned land within 1,000 feet either side of the center line of U.S. Highway 41 and within a circle with a radius of 1,500 feet centered upon the U.S. 41 interchange or overhead. The U.S. 175 (Prospect Avenue) Sign District boundary is from the Lincoln Street right of way south 900 feet and 75 feet either side of the centerline of U.S. Highway 175 (Prospect Avenue).
(c) Sign Height.
1. Properties not included in interchange zones, located in an area 500 feet either side of the center line of U.S. 41: 35 feet.
2. Properties not included in interchange zones, located in an area 1,000 feet either side of the center line of U.S. 41: 45 feet.
3. Properties included in interchange zones: 55 feet.
4. Properties included in the U.S. Highway 175 (Prospect Avenue): 20 feet
4-19-93 Chapter 21-182
(d) Sign Area.
1. Ground signs: Freestanding signs shall be allowed on lots which have at least 100 feet of frontage. One square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of lot frontage is permitted, with a maximum sign area not to exceed 200 square feet. Exception: The Highway 175 (Prospect Avenue) Sign District will have to meet all ground sign requirements specified in Schedule 21.14-A for B-1 Zoned Districts.
2. Wall signs: The size and number of signs permitted on any lot shall be as set forth in Column 3 Schedule 21.14-A.
(6) CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
(a) Construction Standards.
1. Ground signs shall be self supporting and permanently attached to a foundation. For signs over 8 feet in height, foundations shall be installed below the frost line.
2. No sign shall be suspended by chains or other devices that will allow the sign to swing due to wind action. Signs shall be anchored to prevent any lateral movement that could cause wear on supporting members.
3. Ground signs and projecting signs shall be installed to withstand wind loads of at least 30 pounds per square foot of the largest exposed surface.
(b) Maintenance.
1. All signs shall be kept clean, in good order and repair, and maintained in a safe condition so as not to be detrimental to the public health or safety.
2. In the event the Building Inspector determines that any sign regulated by this Section 21.14 is unsafe or is a hazard to the public, the owner of the sign and the owner of the premises upon which the sign is erected shall be served notice to remove or repair the said sign. Removal or repair shall be accomplished within 14 days from the mailing date of the Building Inspector's notice. If not removed or repaired by the owner within the said 14 day period, such signs may be removed by the Village at the owner's expense.
The Building Inspector may cause any sign which is a source of immediate peril to person or property to be removed summarily and without notice. If not removed by the owner, such sign may be removed by the Village at the owner's expense.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-183
(7) REVOCATION.
In the event of a violation of any of the foregoing provisions, the Building Inspector shall give written notice specifying the violation to the named owner of the sign and the named owner of the premises on which the sign is located. The sign shall thereupon be brought into conformance by the owner or removed within 30 days from the mailing date of said notice. In the event the violation is not corrected within said 30 day period, the sign shall be removed by the owner or by the Village at the owner's expense.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-184
(8) SCHEDULE 21.14-A DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Dis-
trict
Use
Allowable Signage
Total Number
of Signs
Permitted
on any lot
Maximum Gross Surface Area Permitted (In Square Feet)
Projecting Sign
Ground Sign
Lighting Permitted
Wall and/or Projecting Sign
Ground Sign
Maximum Projection From Wall
Height
Minimum Setback
Yes
No
Max.
Min.a
From Front Line
From
Side Line
All
Dis-
tricts
Home Occupation
1 ground sign OR 1 wall sign OR 1 projecting sign per lot.
1 square foot
1 square foot
18"
5'
5'
5'
X
Educational and Institutional
1 ground sign OR 1 wall sign OR 1 projecting sign facing each street.
0.1 per lineal foot of the longest street lot line with a TOTAL maximum of 50 SF.
0.1 per lineal foot of the longest street lot line with a TOTAL maximum of 40 SF.
36"
10'
5'
5'
X
Private Parking Lot
1 ground sign OR 1 wall sign OR 1 projecting sign facing each street.
0.1 per lineal foot of the longest street line with a TOTAL maximum of 25 SF.
0.1 per lineal foot of the longest lot line with a TOTAL maximum of 25 SF.
40"
20'
8'
5'
5'
X
Non-conforming land use
1 wall sign.
0.5 per lineal foot of main building facade with a TOTAL maximum of 25 SF.
Not permitted.
X
R-6,
MH
Multiple Family Dwelling -- Mobile Home Park
1 ground sign PLUS: 1 wall sign.
15 square feet
0.5 per dwelling unit with a TOTAL maximum of 25 SF.
10'
10'
10'
X
B-1 BP
Business
wall signs PLUS: 1 projecting sign for each tenant space.
0.5 per lineal foot of main building facade with a TOTAL maximum of 25 SF per tenant space. On the side street side of a corner lot or on a side adjacent to a parking lot, wall signs shall be allowed at 0.5 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building facade, but shall in no case exceed the square footage allowed on the main building facade.
1.0 per lineal foot of main building façade with a maximum of 75 SF. For lots with a frontage of 150 feet or more, a maximum of 120 square feet.
See Section 21.14(5).
40"
20’
8’
5’
5’
X
O
Business
1 projecting sign OR wall sign for each tenant space PLUS: 1 ground sign.
0.5 per lineal foot of main building facade with a TOTAL maximum of 50 SF per tenant space. On the side street side of a corner lot or on a side adjacent to a parking lot, wall signs shall be allowed at 0.5 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building facade, but shall in no case exceed the square footage allowed on the main building facade.
0.5 per lineal foot of main building facade with a maximum of 25 SF.
18"
20'
8'
5'
5'
X
B-2
Business
Wall signs and ground sign.
2.0 per lineal foot of main building facade. On the side street side of a corner lot or on a side adjacent to a parking lot, wall signs shall be allowed at 2.0 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building facade, but shall in no case exceed the square footage allowed on the main building facade.
See Section 21.14(5).
See Section 21.14(5)
See Section 21.14(5)
See Section 21.14(5) 8’
See Section 21.14(5)
5’
See Section 21.14(5)
5’
X
4-19-93 Chapter 21-185
(8) SCHEDULE 21.14-A DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIGNS.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Dis-
trict
Use
Allowable Signage
Total Number
of Signs
Permitted
on any lot
Maximum Gross Surface Area Permitted (In Square Feet)
Projecting Sign
Ground Sign
Lighting Permitted
Wall and/or Projecting Sign
Ground Sign
Maximum Projection From Wall
Height
Minimum Setback
Yes
No
Max.
Min.a
From Front Line
From
Side Line
I1, I2
Industrial
2 ground signs ;wall signs or projecting facing each street
1.0 per lineal foot of main building façade. On the side street side of a corner lot or on a side adjacent to a parking lot, wall signs shall be allowed at 1.0 sq. ft. per linear foot of building façade, but shall in no case exceed the square footage allowed on the main building façade.
1.0 per lineal foot of the longest street with a TOTAL maximum of 150 SF
40”
20’
8’
10’
10’
X
Special Highway 41
District
1 ground sign for each lot PLUS: wall signs.
1.0 per lineal foot of main building facade. On the side street of a corner lot or on a side adjacent to a parking lot, wall signs shall be allowed at 1.0 sq. ft. per lineal foot of the building facade, but shall in no case exceed the square footage allowed on the main building facade.
See Section 21.14(5).
See Section 21.14(5)
a. Minimum height to bottom of sign within the vision triangle the bottom of all signs must be a minimum of 8' above ground. Outside of the vision triangle there shall be no height minimum except that any ground sign located within ten feet (10') of a driveway shall have a clearance of eight feet (8') above ground.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-186
SECTION 21.15 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS
(1) Intent.
It is the intent of this Section to use performance standards for the regulation of industrial uses to facilitate a more objective and equitable basis for control and to insure that the community is adequately protected from potential hazardous and nuisance-like effects.
(2) Noise.
No operation or activity shall transmit any noise exceeding 85 dB from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and 75 dB from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. beyond the property line. The following noises are exempt from the regulations:
(a) Noises not directly under the control of the property owner.
(b) Noises from temporary construction or maintenance activities during daylight hours.
(c) Noises from emergency, safety or warning devices.
(3) Vibration.
(a) No operation or activity shall transmit any physical vibration that is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property line of the source. Vibration perception threshold means the minimum ground- or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
(b) Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user and vibrations from temporary construction or maintenance activities shall be exempt from the above standard.
(4) External Lighting.
No operation or activity shall produce any intense glare or lighting with the source directly visible beyond the boundary of an Industrial District.
(5) Odor.
No operation or activity shall emit any substance or combination of substances in such quantities that create an objectionable odor as defined in Chapter NR 154.18, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(6) Particulate Emissions.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-187
No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air form any direct or portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Chapter NR 154.11, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(7) Visible Emissions.
No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Chapter NR 154.11(6), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(8) Hazardous Pollutants.
No operation or activity shall emit any hazardous substances in such a quantity, concentration or duration as to be injurious to human health or property, and all emissions of hazardous substances shall not exceed the limitations established in Chapter NR 154.19, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-188
SECTION 21.16 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
(1) Intent.
The regulations of this Section are intended to provide controls over nonconforming uses, buildings, and structures, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses may be continued or shall be discontinued when the nonconforming use ceases by discontinuance or abandonment, in accordance with the authority granted by Wisconsin Statutes. Nonconforming uses located within the (S)-Shoreland District shall be regulated by the applicable sections of 62.231 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Authority to Continue Existing Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses.
Any nonconforming building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, at the time of annexation to the Village of the property on which located, or of any subsequent amendment thereto, may be continued only in accordance with the following regulations:
(a) REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS.
Ordinary repairs, maintenance and interior alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure provided that the provisions of this Section are complied with. Ordinary repairs and maintenance shall be determined by the Building Inspector and shall include painting, repair of roof or steps, residing, landscaping and similar activities up to 50% of equalized full value.
(b) ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS.
1. Except as otherwise set forth in this Section a nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such nonconforming building or structure is made to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located or a variance has been granted by the Board of Appeals.
2. A building or structure which is a permitted use but is nonconforming as to lot size, setback, coverage, height, or parking requirements, may be added to or enlarged provided that any such addition complies with yard, height and parking requirements of this Ordinance.
3. An attached or detached garage may be constructed on a lot which contains a nonconforming dwelling unit provided that such garage complies with the height and yard requirements for the district in which it is located.
(3) Moving Nonconforming Building or Structure.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-189
No nonconforming building or structure may be moved in whole or in part to any other location unless every portion of such building or structure and the use thereof is designed and used or intended for a use permitted in the district to which it is moved and there is conformance with all other regulations of such district.
(4) Restoration Of Damaged Nonconforming Buildings or Structures.
A nonconforming building or structure which is partially destroyed to not more than 50% of equalized value or damaged by any cause may be rebuilt or restored with the same, or less, floor area and cubic content and with the same, or an improved, general site layout as that of the original structure. Board of Appeals approval of reconstruction or restoration plans shall be required and the Board may impose conditions on such approval if such conditions would improve an otherwise bad situation and bring the nonconforming building or structure more in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located.
Application for Board of Appeals approval for reconstruction or restoration shall be made within three (3) months from the date of damage or destruction and work commenced within six (6) months, and completed within 18 months, from the date of Board of Appeals approval. Failure to meet these time limits shall terminate the nonconforming use except that a six (6) month extension to any of the time limits may be granted by the Board of Appeals.
(5) Discontinuance of Use of Nonconforming Building or Structure.
When use of a nonconforming building or structure has been discontinued or abandoned for a period of 12 consecutive months it shall not thereafter be reestablished, occupied or used except for a use which conforms to the regulations in which it is located. One six (6) month extension to the time limit may be granted by the Board of Appeals.
(6) Change of Use in Nonconforming Building or Structure.
The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which the buidling or structure is located, or to another nonconforming use when authorized by the Board of Appeals, and the nonconforming use of a part of such a building may be extended to the remaining parts of the building.
(7) Nonconforming Use of Land.
The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of land, may be continued subject to the following provisions:
(a) Such nonconforming use of land and incidental accessory buildings or structures thereon shall not be expanded, extended, or enlarged to another lot or beyond the
4-19-93 Chapter 21-190
area it occupies on the effective date of this Ordinance, or any applicable amendment thereto, except that a residential accessory building or structure may be enlarged, expanded or rebuilt on a larger area if, after such expansion, extension or enlargement, the accessory building structure clearly remains accessory to the principle use of the land and is approved by the Board of Appeals.
(b) If such a nonconforming use of land is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(c) A nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without variance granted by the Board of Appeals.
(8) Signs and Billboards.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section to the contrary, no nonconforming advertising sign or identification sign shall be replaced or restored, if damaged or destroyed by any cause greater than 50% of equalized value except in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-191
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-192
PART "D"
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 21.17 GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM
(1) Intent. This Chapter contemplates an administrative and enforcement officer entitled the "Zoning Administrator" or "Building Inspector" to administer and enforce the same. In this Chapter, the two titles are used interchangeably. Certain considerations, particularly with regard to granting of permitted special uses, planned unit development conditional uses, changes in zoning districts and zoning map, and amending the text of this Zoning Chapter require review and recommendation by the Plan Commission and ultimate action by the Village Board. A Board of Appeals is also provided for to assure proper administration of the Chapter and to avoid arbitrariness.
(2) Zoning Administrator.
The Village Board shall designate a Village official to serve as the Zoning Administrator and as the administrative enforcement officer for the provisions of this Chapter. The duty of the Zoning Administrator shall be to interpret and administer this Chapter and to issue, after on-site inspection, all permits required by this Chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall further:
(a) Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions.
(b) Record the lowest floor elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered or improved in the floodland districts.
(c) Establish that all necessary permits that are required for floodland uses by state and federal law have been secured.
(d) Inspect all structures, lands and waters as often as necessary to assure compliance with this Chapter.
(e) Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of structures, lands and waters, give notice of all violations of this Chapter to the owner, resident, agent or occupant of the premises and report uncorrected violations to the Village Administrator in a manner specified by him.
(f) Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until he has inspected and approved such use or erection.
(g) Issue stop, cease, and desist orders requiring the correction of all conditions found to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance. Such written orders shall be
4-19-93 Chapter 21-193
served personally or by certified mail upon persons deemed by the Building Inspector to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any persons to violate any such order issued by the Building Inspector.
(h) Revoke by order, any building permit approved under a misstatement of fact or contrary to the law or provision of this ordinance.
(i) Maintain permanent and current records of the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, applications, processing and decisions for all amendments, special uses, variations, and appeals, and designate on the Zoning District Map each amendment and special use granted by the Village Board.
(j) Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all matters arising out of this Ordinance.
(k) Receive, file, and forward to the Board of Appeals all applications for variance, special exceptions, or other matters on which the Board of Appeals is required to act under this Ordinance.
(l) Forward to the Village Clerk all applications initially filed with the Building Inspector for special uses, amendments, and other matters under this Ordinance upon which the Village Board is required to act and forward to the Plan Commission copies of such applications upon which it is required to submit reports and recommendations thereto to the Village Board.
(m) Forward to the Police Department all matters that require law enforcement or citation actions.
(n) Permits that authorize "reasonable accommodations" for a handicapped person. The zoning administrator will use a zoning permit which may or may not have conditions that waives specified zoning ordinance requirements, if the zoning administrator determines that both of the following conditions have been met. (O-2010-08)
1. The requested accommodation (i.e., the requested waiver of zoning restrictions), or another less-extensive accommodation is necessary to afford handicapped or disabled persons equal housing opportunity or equal access to public accommodations and the minimum accommodations that will give the handicapped or disabled persons adequate relief.
2. The accommodation will not unreasonably undermine the basic purposes the zoning ordinance seeks to achieve.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-194
(3) Role of Specific Village Officials in Zoning Administration.
(a) PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the Village to the Village Board, other public officials and other interested organizations and citizens. In general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this Chapter, its functions are primarily recommendatory to the Village Board pursuant to guidelines set forth in this Chapter as to various matters and, always, being mindful of the intent and purposes of this Chapter. Recommendations shall be in writing. A recording thereof in the Commission's minutes shall constitute the required written recommendation. The Commission may, in arriving at its recommendation, on occasion of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing.
(b) VILLAGE BOARD. The Village Board, the governing body of the Village, subject to recommendations by the Plan Commission and the holding of public hearings by said Board, has authority to make changes and amendments in zoning districts, the zoning map and supplementary floodland zoning map and to amend the text of this Chapter. The Village Board may delegate to the Plan Commission the responsibility to hold some or all public hearings as required under this Chapter.
(c) BOARD OF APPEALS. A Board of Appeals is established to provide an appeal procedure for persons who deem themselves aggrieved by decisions of administrative officers in enforcement of this Chapter. See Section 21.19 of this Chapter for additional provisions.
(4) Certification of Compliance.
(a) CERTIFICATION REQUIRED. Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land or permit as required by building codes for the erection, enlargement or structural alteration of a building or structure shall be issued by an officer, department, or employee of the Village unless the applications for such permit has been examined by the Zoning Administrator, indicating that the application complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any building permit or occupancy permit, issued for an application that is in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be null and void.
(b) EXISTING USES. Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of the adoption of this Chapter, certifying, after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of this Chapter.
(c) NONCONFORMING USES.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-195
1. No nonconforming use shall be maintained, renewed or changed until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Certificates of compliance for the continued occupancy of nonconforming uses existing at the time of the passage of this Chapter shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator and the certificate shall state that the use is a nonconforming one and does not conform with the provisions of this Chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner(s) of the property being used as nonconforming use.
(5) Plan Review and Approval.
(a) BUILDING PERMITS.
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to an appropriate scale, showing the shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of buildings and accessory buildings existing and proposed and the lines within which the building or structure shall be erected or altered, the existing and intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of dwelling units or lodging rooms the building is designed to accommodate, and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans have been approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
Any land use activity, approval of which is contingent upon site plan approval, shall comply with the requirements of this Section unless contrary provisions related to specific uses are set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may not issue a building permit for the construction, establishment or expansion of such land use activity until a final site plan has been approved by the Public Works Department.
1. Preliminary Site Plan Requirements.
Prior to the submission of a final site plan the applicant shall prepare a preliminary plan and meet with the Department of Public Works to consider preliminary features of the site and the proposed development. Such preliminary plans shall include the proposed general layout, the location of existing land uses, structures, parking and access, both on the immediate property and on all abutting properties, proposed parking and landscaping proposals. In preparation of such plan all applicable ordinances and official plans, maps and regulations of the Village and the State of Wisconsin shall be consulted.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-196
2. Final Site Plan Requirements.
Five copies of the final site plan shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works for review. Unless waived by the Department of Public Works the final site plan shall be prepared by a licensed architect or civil engineer, a practicing land planner or a practicing designer.
Unless otherwise determined by the Plan Commission, such final plan shall contain the following information:
a. Name, location, owner and designer of the proposed development.
b. Location sketch of site in the Village.
c. Location of the site and building situation in relation to all abutting properties and buildings, including the means of ingress and egress to such properties and any screening or buffers on such properties.
d. Date, north arrow and graphic scale (not less than 1 inch equals 50 feet).
e. Location of all property lines, existing streets, existing easements and utilities, including dimensions of same.
f. Present zoning.
g. Proposed utility system including easements.
h. Any features proposed in the official map not existing, such as increased right-of-way, open space, etc.
i. Floodable area included in the 100-year flood mapping.
j. Proposed driveway, parking spaces and building layout including scaled dimensions between buildings.
k. Indication of drainage system for entire property including drainage flow diagram. This should include the proposed grading of the property with building and lot elevations noted in U.S.G.S. datum.
l. Acreage within the site and proposed square footage of buildings.
m. Landscape treatment including screening of parking areas and existing features to be retained.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-197
n. Architectural drawings and sketches which illustrate the design and character of the proposed structure(s) and indicating building material to be used.
o. Erosion control plan.
p. Any other information required by the Department of Public Works to illustrate the proposal.
3. Plan Approval. (O-2012-4)
a. One and Two Family Homes
(1) The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for reviewing and approving the site and drainage plans for all one (1), and two (2) family homes. The Department of Public Works will also seek input from the Village Police, Fire, and EMS Departments or from public utilities as appropriate in the review of these plans.
(2) The Department of Public Works shall have ten (10) days for review and approval of the final site plan.
b. All Other Developments
(1) The Site Plan Review Committee shall be responsible for reviewing and approving residential developments of three (3) or more units and all office, commercial, industrial, or institutional projects.
(2) The Site Plan Review Committee shall be comprised of the following people:
Director of Public Works
Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator
Police Chief
Fire Chief/EMS Director
4. Standards for Plan Approval.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-198
In the exercise of authority under this Section the Department of Public Works shall determine that the following requirements are met:
a. Conformance to the Zoning Ordinance and Official Map with attention to density and any proposed rights-of-way. Proposed rights-of-way should be provided for and proper district setback regulations applied from such proposed right-of-way.
b. Ingress and egress to the property, off-street parking areas and proposed structures thereon with reference to automotive and pedestrian safety, traffic flow and control, provision of services, and access in case of fire or emergency. Special consideration shall be given to consolidation of access whenever possible on major traffic arteries.
c. Manner of drainage of the property, if applicable, with reference to the effect of provisions for drainage on adjacent properties and the consequences of such drainage on overall Village drainage capacities. Special attention shall be given to the 100-year flooding level and compliance with drainage and grade provisions for same.
d. Utilities with reference to hook-in locations.
e. When applicable, recreation and open space with attention to the size, suitability, development and continued maintenance of the area and the impact on any adjacent living areas.
f. Landscaping of site with attention to screening of parking areas and the provision of street trees. Location, size and species of all plant material shall be specified and approved.
g. General nature of the development with attention to the design features and appearance of the development so that it will be compatible and harmonious with properties in the general area and will not be so at variance with other developments in the general area as to cause substantial depreciation in property values or aesthetic quality.
h. Any special requirements unique to a particular site or development which may be identified by the Plan Commission through discussion of the preliminary site plan.
5. Effect on Municipal Services.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-199
Before granting any site approval, the Plan Commission may, besides obtaining advice from consultants, secure such advice as may be deemed necessary from the Village Engineer or other municipal officials, with special attention to the effect of such approval upon existing municipal services and utilities. Should additional facilities be needed, the Plan Commission shall forward its recommendations to the Village Board and shall not issue final approval until the Village Board has entered into an agreement with the applicant regarding the development of such facilities.
(6) Occupancy Permit.
(a) Any land, vacant on the effective date of this Ordinance, and any building, structure, or addition or major alteration thereto, constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be used or occupied until an occupancy permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. No new use shall be made of any land, building, or structure until an occupancy permit has been issued.
(b) Every application for a building permit shall also be deemed to be an application for an occupancy permit. Every application for an occupancy permit for a new use of land or existing building or structure where no zoning certificate is required shall be made to the Zoning Administrator.
(c) An occupancy permit shall be issued only after the Zoning Administrator has inspected the premises and finds:
1. It is to be in compliance with all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located; and
2. That the use of building or structure is in conformance with the plans and specifications for which the zoning certificate was issued.
(d) Every occupancy permit shall be dated, shall state that the use or occupancy complies with the provisions of this Ordinance and shall be signed by the Zoning Administrator.
(e) The occupancy permit shall be issued, or written notice shall be given to the applicant specifying the reasons why a conditional or permanent certificate cannot be issued, not later than seven (7) days after the Zoning Administrator is notified in writing that the building or premises is ready for occupancy.
(f) Conditional Occupancy Permit.
1. A conditional occupancy permit may be issued if, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, an unavoidable situation exists that would cause undue hardship to a homeowner. At the time a conditional permit is
4-19-93 Chapter 21-200
issued, a compliance date will be set for completion of each remaining requirement.
2. As a condition of approval and issuance of a conditional permit, the Village may require the applicant to execute a waiver of special assessments to guarantee a good faith completion of the permit conditions. This waiver would allow the Village to levy special assessments and/or special charges without notice and hearing if the Village is required to complete the required improvements and the homeowner refuses to pay the costs incurred.
The cost of work performed by Village staff or other authorized agents plus interest and administrative charges at a rate approved by the Village Board shall be billed to the homeowner. In the event a homeowner fails to pay the amount due, the Village Clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment or special charge against the property pursuant to section 66.60(18), Wisconsin Statues.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-201
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-202
SECTION 21.18 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
(1) General.
A special exception is a use or structure that may not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a district but which if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to neighborhood would promote the public health, safety, welfare, comfort, convenience or the general welfare. Such uses or structures may be permissible in a zoning district as a special exception if specific provision for such special exception is made in the district. A special exception shall not be issued for any other use or structure.
(2) Procedure.
All applications for a special exception shall be considered first by the Plan Commission. The application should include material necessary to demonstrate that the grant of a special exception will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of these zoning regulations, will not be injurious to the neighborhood or adjacent properties, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. Such material may include but is not limited to: information required for a building permit under this ordinance; findings required under (4) below; site plans; and special studies.
(3) Public Hearing.
Upon the filing of an application for a special exception, the Plan Commission shall notify the Village Board of such application and shall fix a reasonable time (not more than sixty days from the filing date) for a public hearing. A Class 2 notice pursuant to Chapter 985 Wisconsin Statutes shall be published in the official newspaper of the Village specifying the date, time and place of hearing and the matters to come before the Plan Commission. Notice shall also be mailed to the parties at interest, as determined by the Plan Commission.
(4) Findings.
Before any special exception shall be recommended for approval, the Plan Commission shall make findings that the granting of a special exception will not adversely affect the public interest and certify that the specific requirements governing the individual special exception, if any, have been met by the applicant. No special exception shall be recommended for approval unless the Plan Commission shall find:
(a) That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special exception use or structure will not be detrimental or injurious to the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties or properties in the immediate vicinity.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-203
(b) That the special exception is compatible with the adjacent existing uses and structures or uses and structures likely to develop which are permitted in the district.
(c) That adequate public facilities and services are available to the development.
(d) That adequate measures are taken to provide for drainage.
(e) That ingress and egress to the property is provided in such a manner as to minimize traffic hazards and congestion.
(f) That adequate parking and loading areas are provided.
(5) Conditions and Safeguards.
In addition to the conditions and requirements specified in this ordinance, the Plan Commission may recommend appropriate additional conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary to insure the proposed use or structure will secure the objectives of this ordinance and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance.
(6) Plan Commission Recommendation.
The Plan Commission may recommend to the Village Board to approve, disapprove or approve subject to stipulated conditions and safeguards a request for a special exception. If the Plan Commission shall recommend disapproval of a special exception, it shall state fully in its record its reasons for doing so. Such reasons shall take into account the factors stated in Subsection 4 above, or such of them as may be applicable to the action of disapproval, and the particular regulations relating to the special exception requested, if any. The report and recommendations of the Plan Commission shall be advisory only and shall not be binding on the Village Board.
(7) Village Board Approval.
The Village Board shall act on the Plan Commission recommendation at its next regularly scheduled meeting. No public notice and hearing is required for the Village Board action on the recommendation and request, but the matter shall be handled in a public session as part of a previously prepared agenda. All matters relating to Village Board consideration of a request for a special exception and Plan Commission recommendation shall be a public record and require formal action of the Village Board.
(8) Fees.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-204
Any application for a special exception shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by the Village to compensate it for the costs of publication of notices and other expenses. No action shall be taken until such fee has been paid.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-205
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-206
SECTION 21.19 BOARD OF APPEALS
(1) Establishment of Board.
In order that the objectives of this ordinance may be more fully and equitably achieved and a means for interpretation provided, there is established a Board of Appeals for the Village of North Fond du Lac.
(2) Membership and Terms of Office.
(a) BOARD MEMBERS. The Board of Appeals shall have five (5) citizen members of recognized experience and qualifications. The President shall designate one of the members as chairman. Members shall be removable by the Village President for cause upon written charges and after a public hearing. A secretary, who does not have to be a Board of Appeals member, shall be appointed by the Board of Appeals. (O-2004-03)
(b) ALTERNATE MEMBER. The Village President shall appoint two (2) alternate members, for staggered terms of three years, to the Board of Appeals. The alternates shall act, with full power, only when a member of the Board of Appeals is absent or disqualifies himself from a vote due to a conflict of interest. The provisions for removing members shall also apply to the removal of the alternate. (O-2004-03)
(c) TERMS. The citizen members of the Board of Appeals shall be nominated by the Village President and confirmed by the Village Board. Effective May 1, 2004, the terms of office shall be staggered for three (3) years commencing the first Monday in May in the year of appointment. (O-2004-03)
(d) VACANCIES. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of members whose terms become vacant.
(3) Procedures, Meetings, Records and Decisions.
(a) PROCEDURES. The Board of Appeals shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 62.23(7) of the Wisconsin Statutes, this zoning ordinance, and rules and procedures adopted by the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have power to adopt rules and regulations for its own government consistent with law and with the provisions of this or of any other ordinance of the Village.
(b) Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board of Appeals may determine. Such Chairman, or in his absence the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-207
(c) All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be public. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the action of the Board of Appeals and the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board of Appeals and shall be a public record.
(d) The presence of four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. The Board of Appeals shall act by motion. The concurring vote of four (4) members of such Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, decision of determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to effect any variation of this Ordinance. (O-2004-3)
(e) The Board of Appeals may call on other Village departments for assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such other departments to render such assistance to the Board of Appeals as may be reasonably required.
(f) All variances granted by the Board of Appeals shall be valid for a period of six (6)months from the date of the meeting at which such action was taken. If no building permit is applied for within such six (6) month period, the action of the Board of Appeals shall be null and void, and a new variance or special use permit must be granted under the normal procedures outlined in this section. A six (6) month extension may be granted by the Board of Appeals upon submission of a written request setting forth the facts which require an extension.
(4) Jurisdiction.
In addition to these powers enumerated elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances, the Board of Appeals shall have jurisdiction in the following matters:
(a) ERRORS. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, or other administrative official in the enforcement of the Zoning Code or any ordinance adopted under Sections 61.35, 62.23, 62.231 (wetlands), 87.30 or 144.26 (flood plains) or Chapter 91 (farmland preservation), Wis. Stats.
(b) VARIANCES. To hear and grant appeals for variances as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owning to practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit and purposes of this Chapter shall be observed and the public safety, welfare and justice secured.
(c) INTERPRETATIONS. To hear and decide application for interpretations of the zoning regulations and the boundaries of the zoning districts after the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-208
(d) SUBSTITUTIONS. To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses provided no structural alterations are to be made and the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation. When ever the Board permits such a substitution, the use may not thereafter be changed without application.
(e) UNCLASSIFIED USES. To hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified uses provided that such uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district and the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation.
(f) TEMPORARY USES. To hear and grant applications for temporary uses, in any district provided that such uses are of a temporary nature, do not involve the erection of a substantial structure and are compatible with the neighboring uses and the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation. The permit shall be temporary, revocable, subject to any condition required by the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be issued for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months. Compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter shall be required.
(5) General Powers.
In exercising its jurisdiction in matters described under Subsection (4), the Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
(6) Application Procedures.
(a) PROCEDURES. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the Village affected by any zoning-related decision of an administrative official within thirty (30) days of the decision involved by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on the appeal and give public notice thereof as well as due notice to parties in interest, and shall decide the same within a reasonable time.
(b) PRELIMINARY REVIEW. The secretary of the Board of Appeals shall as promptly as possible inform the Board of Appeals concerning the appeal, and the Board of Appeals may either discuss the matter with the applicant if the applicant desires or proceed directly to order public notice of hearing. If the applicant elects to withdraw the appeal any time before final determination is made by the
4-19-93 Chapter 21-209
Board of Appeals, this fact shall be noted on the application with the signature of the applicant attesting withdrawal. Copies of the withdrawn application shall be returned to the secretary for the files of the Board of Appeals, to the Zoning Administrator and to the applicant. If the appeal is not withdrawn, the Board of Appeals may request the applicant to provide such additional information as may be needed to determine the case and shall instruct the secretary to proceed with public notice of a hearing on the case.
(c) AMENDMENTS. Amendments of an appeal by the applicant may be permitted at any time prior to or during the public hearing, provided that no such amendment shall be such as to make the case different from its description in the notice of public hearing. If the amendment is requested by the applicant after public notice of the hearing has been given, and such amendment is at variance with the information set forth in public notice, the applicant shall pay an additional fee to cover the cost of amending the public notice. If the amended notice can be published within the time frame specified for the public hearing, the hearing on the amended appeal may be held on that date, otherwise the chairman shall announce that the hearing originally scheduled on the case will be deferred to a future meeting, before which appropriate public notice will be given, and will state the reasons for the deferral.
(d) FEES. Any application for an appeal or variance shall be accompanied by the current established fee to compensate the village for publication of notices and other expenses. No action shall be taken until such fees have been paid.
(e) RECONSIDERATION.
1. Resubmission. No appeal or application which has been dismissed or denied shall be considered again without material alteration or revision within one (1) year of the Board's decision, except pursuant to court order or by motion to reconsider made by a member voting with the majority or as provided below.
2. Rehearing. No rehearing shall be held except upon the affirmative vote of four (4) or more members of the Board upon finding that substantial, new evidence is submitted which could not reasonable have been presented at the previous hearing. Requests for rehearing shall be in writing, shall state the reasons for the request, and shall be accompanied by necessary data and diagrams. Rehearings shall be subject to the same notice requirements as original hearings.
(7) Appeals from Administrative Decisions.
(a) POWERS. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, or other administrative official
4-19-93 Chapter 21-210
in the enforcement of this ordinance. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official, and may issue or direct the issue of a permit.
(8) Appeals for a Variance.
(a) POWERS. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to grant a variance by varying the strict application of any requirement or this ordinance where the strict application of such requirements would result in practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship depriving the owner of reasonable use of land or buildings.
(b) REQUIREMENTS FOR A VARIANCE. In general, the power to authorize a variance from the requirements of the ordinance shall be sparingly exercised and only under peculiar and exceptional circumstances. No variance shall be granted for actions which require an amendment to this ordinance. Variances shall only be granted when the Board finds that:
1. The variance is not contrary to the public interest and that such a variance will be in general harmony with the purposes and intent of this ordinance.
2. The variance will not permit the establishment of a use which is not permitted in the district and will not be unduly detrimental to adjoining properties and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
3. Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and there is no practical way for the applicant to accomplish the intended objective by observing bulk requirements specified in this ordinance (yard size, frontage, coverage, building height, etc.).
4. The literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of a right commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district.
5. The hardship is not shared generally by other land or buildings in the area.
6. The hardship results from the strict application of this ordinance and is not the result of self-created or self-imposed circumstances.
(c) PROHIBITED VARIANCES. The Board of Appeals shall not grant use variances in floodplain or wetland and conservancy districts. In all other districts, no use variance shall be granted unless the applicant has first petitioned for a zoning amendment or a special use permit, if applicable, and upon a showing that
4-19-93 Chapter 21-211
no lawful and feasible use of the subject property can be made in the absence of such variance. Any use variance granted shall be limited to the specific use described in the Board's decision and shall not permit variances in yard, area or other requirements of the district in which located.
(d) DOCUMENTATION OF DECISION. In every case where a variance from these regulations has been granted by the Board of Appeals, the minutes of the Board shall affirmatively show that an "unnecessary hardship" or "practical difficulty" exists and the records of the Board shall clearly show in what particular and specific respect an "unnecessary hardship" or "practical difficulty" would be created by the literal application of such regulations.
Variances or conditions imposed in any permit shall be stated in the decision or order embodying the Board's decision and shall also be set forth in the building, special use or occupancy permit issued under that order by the Zoning Administrator. A permit shall be valid only as long as the conditions upon which it is granted are observed. Whenever the board grants an application or appeal affecting the use of any premises, such authorization shall be deemed revoked unless the owner, occupant or his agent shall, upon request, file with the Board Secretary a written report certifying that all conditions or limitations imposed by the Board have been conformed to and maintained. Variances, substitutions or conditional use permits approved by the Board shall expire six (6) months after issuance if the performance of work is required and substantial work has not commenced.
(9) Appeals for Interpretations.
The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide applications for interpretations of the zoning regulations and the boundaries of the zoning districts after the Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation.
(10) Public Hearings.
(a) TIME PERIOD. Upon filing with the Board of Appeals an application for an appeal or variance, the Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time (not more than sixty (60) days from the filing date) for public hearing.
(b) NOTICE OF HEARING. A Class 2 notice pursuant to Chapter 985, Wisconsin Statutes, shall be published in the official newspaper of the Village specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and matters to come before the Board of Appeals. Notices shall also be mailed to the parties at interest, as determined by the Board of Appeals.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-212
(11) Appeal of Board of Appeals Decisions.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the board of Appeals may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the offices of the Board of Appeals.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-213
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-214
SECTION 21.20 AMENDMENTS
(1) Power of Amendments.
The Village Board may from time to time on its own motion or on petition, amend, supplement, or change this ordinance, including the Official Zoning Map.
(2) Initiation.
Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board or any member thereof, the Plan Commission, Board of Appeals, or any person, firm, corporation, or organization.
(3) Procedures.
The Village Board shall refer every proposed amendment to the Plan Commission for report and recommendation. If the Village board does not receive a report and recommendation from the Plan commission within sixty (60) days of submitting the proposed amendment, the Village Board may proceed with the necessary hearing.
(4) Public Hearing and Notice.
No amendment of this ordinance shall become effective until a public hearing is held before the Village Board where parties in interest and citizens shall have the opportunity to be heard. A Class 2 notice in accordance with Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be published in the official newspaper of the Village once during each of the two weeks prior to such hearing. At least ten (10) days before the public hearing, a written notice of such hearing shall also be given to the Clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any lands included in the proposed amendment. Failure to give such notice shall not invalidate such amendment.
(5) Final Approval.
An amendment shall become effective upon a majority vote of the members of the Village Board voting on the proposed change. However, in case of a protest against such amendment, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more of the land included in such proposed amendment or by owners of 20 percent or more of the area immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or by owners of 20 percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such amendment shall not become effective except by a favorable vote of three-fourths of the members of the Village Board voting on the proposal.
No amendment concerning the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood Plain District shall become effective until also being approved by the Department of Natural Resources, the Federal Insurance Administration and, in the case of district boundary amendments, until an official letter of the boundary change has been issued by the Federal Insurance Administration.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-215
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-216
SECTION 21.21 ENFORCEMENT, REMEDIES, PENALTIES
(1) Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce this ordinance.
(2) Remedies.
In the event any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained; or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation or this ordinance, the appropriate authorities of the Village, or any adjacent or neighboring property owners who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
(3) Razing, Removal, Demolition Orders.
Pursuant to Wisconsin State Statute Section 66.05(1) thru (10) is hereby adopted by reference.
(4) Penalties.
Whenever a person shall have been notified in writing by the Zoning Administrator that he is in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, such person shall commence correction of all violations within seven (7) days after notice, and shall correct all violations within thirty (30) days after notice. If corrections are not commenced within seven (7) days of written notice or not corrected within thirty (30) days of written notice, each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Any person, firm, corporation, or organization which violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the provisions of the ordinance, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof by imprisonment in the County Jail until such fine and costs are paid but not to exceed thirty (30) days.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-217
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-218
PART "E"
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 21.22 DEFINITIONS
(1) Application.
In the construction of this Ordinance, the rules and definitions contained in this Section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(2) Rules.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural number the singular number. The word "building" shall include the word "structure". The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is permissive.
(3) Definitions.
ABUTS, ABUTTING: Having a common property line or district line.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A subordinate building or a portion of a main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building, and which is located on the same lot as the main building.
ACCESSORY USE: See USE, ACCESSORY.
ADJACENT: To lie near or close to; in the neighborhood or vicinity of.
ADJOINING: Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near or adjacent.
AGRICULTURE: The growing of crops, plants, vines, trees or shrubs for commercial sale and accessory uses customarily incidental to such activities. (Also see GARDEN.)
AIR RIGHTS EASEMENT: A negotiable right to use the air space extending upward from a lot, building, body of water or right-of-way.
ALLEY: A public right-of-way, with a width of not more than 24 feet, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. A street shall not be considered an alley.
ALTERATION: A change in size, shape, or use of a building or structure. (See also STRUCTURAL ALTERATION.)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-219
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation, or treatment of domestic animals.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, must always be included for each apartment.
AREA, LAND: The term "land area", when referring to a required area per dwelling unit, means "net land area", the area exclusive of public rights-of-way and other public open space.
ARTERIAL STREET: A public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for large volume or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall include freeways and expressways as well as arterial streets, highways and parkways.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing more than two (2) motor vehicles, using production-line methods.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A building or portion thereof or premises used for offering for sale at retail to the public of fuels, lubricating oil, grease, tires, batteries and accessories for motor vehicles, where repair service is incidental. When such dispensing, sale or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises are classified as a public garage. Automobile service stations do not include open sales lots.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: See SALVAGE YARD.
AWNING: A roof-like mechanism, retractable in operation, which projects from the wall of a building.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than half of its floor to clear-ceiling height below grade. When a basement is used for storage, parking, or other facilities for the common use of occupants of the rest of the building, it shall not be counted as a story in determining building height. (See also CELLAR.)
BED & BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of lodging that provides six (6) or fewer rooms for rent for more than ten (10) nights in a twelve (12) month period, is the owner's personal residence, is occupied by the owner at the time of rental and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast.
BILLBOARD: See SIGN, ADVERTISING.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, or other lines of demarcation. A block may be located in part beyond the boundary lines of the corporate limits of the Village.
BOARDING HOUSE: See ROOMING HOUSE.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-220
BUFFER STRIP, BUFFERING: A strip of land, generally adjacent to a property line, in which a screen of plantings is installed. Such screen shall be planted with deciduous or evergreen trees and shrubs in any combination deemed appropriate which is dense enough and high enough to be a visual buffer between properties.
BUILDABLE LOT AREA: That portion of a lot remaining when all required yard space has been excluded.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery or materials. When a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each part shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: See ACCESSORY BUILDING.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other buildings or structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance and exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard rood, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: See PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located at the place where it is, or where it is intended to be temporarily placed or affixed.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the lot line at a distance parallel to it, regulated by the yard requirements set up in this Code.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setback of buildings or structures, and the location of same with respect to one another, and includes the following: (a) size and height of buildings; (b) location of exterior walls; (c) floor area ratio; (d) open space allocated to buildings; and (e) lot area and lot width.
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment, or enterprise which occupies time, attention, labor, and materials; or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered.
CARPORT: A roofed automobile shelter, with two or more open sides.
CELLAR: A space having more than one-half of its floor to clear-ceiling height below average finished grade. A cellar is not counted as a story in determining building height. For purposes of
4-19-93 Chapter 21-221
this Ordinance, a dwelling unit designed to be partially underground shall not be considered as a cellar space. (See also BASEMENT.)
CHANNEL: Those floodlands normally occupied by a stream of water under average annual high-water flow conditions while confined within generally well-established banks.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A building or portion thereof, the principal use of which is for offices of physicians or dentists, or both, for examination and treatment of persons on an outpatient basis.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bonafide members and whose facilities are restricted to members and their guests. Food and alcoholic beverages may be served on its premises, provided they are secondary and incidental to the principal use.
CLUSTER HOUSING: Development of one-family dwellings on lots which are smaller than would customarily be permitted by this Ordinance; where the density of development is no greater than would otherwise be permitted by conventional lot regulations; and where residual land produced by the smaller lot size is used for common recreation and open space.
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENT: The following facilities licensed or operated or permitted under the authority of the Wisconsin State Statutes: Child welfare agencies under Section 48.60, group foster homes for children under Section 48.02(7m) and community-based residential facilities under Section 50.01, but does not include day care centers, nursing homes, general hospitals, special hospitals, prisons and jails. The establishment of a community living arrangement shall be in conformance with applicable Sections of the Wisconsin State Statutes, including Sections 46.03(22), 69.97(15), 62.23(7)(i) and 62.23(7a), and amendments thereto, the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and the provisions of this Ordinance.
CONFORMING BUILDING: A building which: (a) is designed or intended for a permitted or special use as allowed in the district in which it is located; and, (b) complies with all the regulations of this comprehensive amendment or of any amendment thereof governing bulk of the district in which said building or structure is located.
CONSERVATION STANDARDS: Guidelines and specifications for soil and water conservation practices and management enumerated in the Technical Guide, prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service for Outagamie and Calumet Counties, adopted by the County Soil and Water Conservation District Supervisors, and containing suitable alternatives for the use and treatment of land based upon its capabilities from which the landowner selects that alternative which best meets his needs in developing his soil and water conservation.
CONTIGUOUS: In actual contact.
CONTROLLED ACCESS ARTERIAL STREET: The condition in which the right of owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons to access, light, air or view in connection with an arterial street is fully or partially controlled by public authority.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-222
DAY CARE FACILITY: A licensed facility for the care and supervision of children for less than 24 hours a day.
DAY CARE HOME: A licensed facility for the care and supervision of up to eight (8) children for less than 24 hours a day in any one family dwelling in a residential district.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to construction of or additions or substantial improvements to buildings, other structures, or accessory uses, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or disposition of materials.
DISTRICT, BASIC: A part or parts of the Village for which the regulations of this Chapter governing the use and location of land and building are uniform.
DISTRICT, OVERLAY: Overlay districts, also referred to herein as regulatory areas, provide for the possibility of superimposing certain additional requirements upon a basin zoning district without disturbing the requirements of the basic district. In the instance of conflicting requirements, the more strict of the conflicting requirements shall apply.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment or part thereof in which are provided facilities for serving patrons sitting in automobiles on the premises.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed, used or intended to be used exclusively for residential purposes, including efficiency, duplex, one-family, two-family, multiple family, mobile home, and town house dwelling units but not including trailers or lodging rooms in hotels, motels, or lodging houses.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms, located in a dwelling, which are arranged, used or designed to be used as living quarters for one family only. A dwelling unit shall include an independent entrance and individual bathroom and kitchen facilities permanently installed to serve only the family occupying such unit.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing only one (1) dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling containing only two (2) dwelling units side by side and joined by a party wall or one above the other, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY: A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units including rental apartments and cooperative and condominium ownership arrangements, with the number of families in residence not to exceed the number of dwelling units provided.
DWELLING, TOWN HOUSE: A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units, each of which has one (1) or two (2) side walls in common with side walls of adjoining dwelling units, and are party or lot line walls. May provide rental or sales housing.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-223
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY: A dwelling unit consisting of one principle room, an individual bath, kitchen facilities and an independent entrance and not exceeding 375 square feet in net floor area, exclusive of halls and entryways.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME: A prebuilt, one-family dwelling designed and constructed to accommodate a single family, located in a mobile home park, and having the following additional characteristics:
(a)Manufactured as a relocatable dwelling unit for year-round occupancy and for installation on a mobile home stand on a foundation with or without a basement;
(b)Designed to be transported on its own chassis and connected to utilities after placement on a stand or foundation;
(c)Designed to be installed as a complete single-wide or double-wide unit with only incidental unpacking, expanding and assembling needed.
DWELLING, MODULAR: A prebuilt, one-family dwelling which is manufactured in two or more sections for transport to a site for final assembly on a foundation or basement, but does not have a chassis or its own wheels. A modular home is not a mobile home for purposes of this Ordinance.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received for the transmission system and is delivered to the distribution system only.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the transmission system and, generally, to the local distribution system.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Services provided by public and private utilities, necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage, and communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not including buildings.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: A place of business carrying on a business operation, the ownership or management of which is separate and distinct from any other place of business located on the same or other lot.
EXTRA-TERRITORIAL AREA: Any unincorporated area within 1.5 miles of the corporate limits of the Village. [See Wisconsin Statutes 62.23 (7a)]
4-19-93 Chapter 21-224
FALLOUT SHELTER: An accessory building and use which incorporate the fundamentals for fallout protection-shielding mass, ventilation, and space to live, and
which is constructed of such materials, in such a manner, as to afford to the occupants substantial protection from radioactive fallout. Such shelter may also be a part of the principal building.
FAMILY: Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage or legal adoption, and including domestic servants living together in a dwelling unit. For purposes of this Ordinance family also includes not more than two (2) roomers, boarders, or permanent guests (whether or not gratuitous) in addition to related individuals and domestics. A group of not more than four (4) unrelated individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit shall also constitute a family.
FARMING -- GENERAL: General farming shall include floriculture, forest and game management, orchards, raising of grain, grass, mint and seedcrops, raising of fruits, nuts and berries, sod farming and vegetable farming. General farming includes the operating of such an area for one (1) or more of the above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce, provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities.
FARMSTEAD: A single-family residential structure located on a parcel of land, which primary land use is associated with agriculture.
FENCE: A structure which is a barrier and used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence including gates which as, for each one foot wide segment extending over the entire length and height of the fence, 50 percent of the surface area is open spaces which afford a direct view through the fence.
FENCE, SOLID: A fence, including gates, which conceals from view from adjoining properties, streets, or alleys, activities conducted behind it.
FLOOD-CREST ELEVATION: The elevation of the highest flood level as designated by the Village Engineer.
FLOODPLAIN AREA: That continuous area adjacent to a stream or stream bed, or any storm water retention area and its tributaries, whose elevation is equal to or lower than the floodcrest elevation including also land less than ten (10) acres in area having an elevation higher that flood-crest elevation and which is surrounded by land in a floodplain area, or land, less than five (5) acres in area having an elevation equal to or higher than flood-crest elevation and bordered on three (3) sides by land in a floodplain area.
FLOOR AREA: (for determining Floor Area Ratio) The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including also the basement floor of a building, measured form the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the center lines of walls separating two buildings. Floor area shall also include the horizontal areas on each floor devoted to: (a) elevator shafts and stairwells; (b)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-225
mechanical equipment, except if located on the roof, when either open or enclosed - i.e. bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers; (c) habitable attic space as permitted by the Building Code; (d) interior balconies and mezzanines; (e) enclosed porches; and (f) accessory uses.
The floor area of structures used for bulk storage of materials - i.e. grain elevators, petroleum tanks, etc. shall be determined on the basis of the height of such structures with those being one floor for each ten (10) feet of structural height. If such structure measures less than ten (10) feet but not less than five (5) feet over such floor heights intervals, it shall be construed to have an additional floor.
The horizontal area in each floor of a building devoted to off-street parking and off-street loading facilities and the horizontal area of a cellar floor shall not be included in the floor area.
FLOOR AREA: (for determining Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of the building, excluding areas used for accessory off-street parking facilities and the horizontal areas of the basement and cellar floors that are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the entire building. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior of the walls.
FLOOR AREA: (for determining Percentage of Lot Covered) The total ground floor area of principal and accessory buildings which is under a roof or enclosed by a solid fence greater than five (5) feet high. Terraces, patios, porches and steps not under a roof or so enclosed shall not be included in floor area calculations. An awning, trellis, or other open overhead structure shall not be considered a roof insofar as this definition is concerned.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor area ratio as designated for appropriate districts, when multiplied by the lot area in square feet, shall determine the maximum permissible floor area for the building or buildings on the lot in such district.
FOSTER FAMILY HOME: The primary domicile of a foster parent which is four (4) or fewer foster children and which is licensed under Section 48.62 of the Wisconsin Statutes and amendments thereto.
FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck or railroad freight cars is assembled or stored for routing in intra-state or inter-state shipment by motor trucks or railroad freight cars.
FRONTAGE: All the property butting on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets or all of the property abutting on one (1) side of a street between an intersection street and the dead end of a street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE, DETACHED: A building, not attached to a dwelling, designed and used for the storage of vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the dwelling to which it is accessory. Not more than one such vehicle may be a commercial vehicle of not more than 1½ ton capacity.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-226
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, or repairing motor vehicles. Hiring, selling or storing of motor vehicles may be included.
GARAGE, STORAGE, OR OFF-STREET PARKING: A building or portion thereof designed or used or land used exclusively for storage of motor vehicles, and in which motor fuels and oils are not sold, and motor vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
GARDEN: Growing of fruit, vegetables and flowers which are not to be sold commercially.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED: The established grade of the street or sidewalk is as prescribed by the Village.
GRADE, FINISHED: The required elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjoining the exterior walls of a building and at all portions of a parcel as shown on the approved grading/drainage plan.
GROOMING SHOP: A commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed, except that no animals shall be kept, boarded, etc., overnight.
GROSS DENSITY: The ratio between total number of dwelling units on a lot and total lot area in acres, the area to include all the land within the lot boundaries including any private roads, recreation areas and drainageways.
GROUP FOSTER HOME: Any facility operated by a person required to be licensed by the State of Wisconsin under State Statute Section 48.62 for the care and maintenance of five (5) to eight (8) foster children.
GUEST, PERMANENT: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a lodging house, rooming house, boarding house, hotel, apartment hotel or motel accommodation as his domicile and place of permanent residence.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful business, occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, or on a residential lot containing a dwelling or lot for residential purposes and which is not detrimental to the residential character of the lot on which said home occupation is located or of the surrounding neighborhood.
HOTEL: A multiple story establishment containing lodging rooms, for occupancy by transient guests which provides customary hotel services and usually contains meeting rooms, dining facilities and small retail shops.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation wholly for public or semi-public use.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-227
JUNK: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or use din conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. Junk includes, but is not limited to, vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, brush, wood and lumber.
JUNKYARD: See SALVAGE YARD.
KENNEL: An establishment wherein any person engaged in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs.
LABORATORY: See RESEARCH LABORATORY.
LAND FILLING: The placing and compacting of dirt and rubble in any area that requires filling so as to be usable for a permitted land use activity. A special permit for a land filling operation must be obtained from the Village Board. The normal placement and grading of fill around the foundation of a structure or placement of less than one foot of topsoil for lawns and landscaping areas around a structure is not considered to be landfill as used in this Ordinance.
LAUNDERETTE: A business that provides coin-operated self-service type washing, drying, dry-cleaning, and ironing facilities, providing that no pick-up or delivery service is maintained.
LOADING SPACE: A space within the principal building or on the same lot as the principle building providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and with access to a street or alley.
LODGING HOUSE: A building originally built for use as a one or two-family dwelling, all or a portion of which contain lodging rooms which are available to accommodate persons who are not members of the keeper's family. Facilities are available for providing lodging or meals or both for compensation for at least three (3) but not more than ten (10) persons.
LODGING ROOM: A room or suite of rooms rented as sleeping and living quarters, with or without an individual bathroom but without cooking facilities.
LOT: A parcel of land which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developed as a parcel to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "lot" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by lot line.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection or adjacent to a curving street where the interior angle is less than 120 degrees.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot that is not a corner lot.
LOT, SUBSTANDARD: A parcel of land held in separate ownership having frontage on a public street, or other approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a
4-19-93 Chapter 21-228
principal building or structure, together with accessory buildings and uses, having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street parking areas or other open space provisions of this Code as pertaining to the district wherein located.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a frontage on two (2) more or less parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. Both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT COVERAGE: The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings or structures. (See FLOOR AREA, for determining percentage of lot covered.)
LOT DEPTH: The mean distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That boundary of a lot which abuts a street line. On a corner lot, the lot line having the shortest length abutting a street line shall be the front lot line.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A lot line which does not abut a street.
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line and in the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which as been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Fond du Lac County, Wisconsin prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured along the front yard setback line.
MAIN BUILDING FACADE: That portion of a building or structure which is parallel or nearly parallel to the abutting street. For buildings which front on two or more streets the main building facade shall contain the main entrance to such building.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A prefabricated home bearing either the "UDC" sticker signifying manufacturing compliance with the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code or a "HUD" sticker signifying compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act. The following restrictions will also apply to manufactured homes.
(a)The structure shall be of "double wide" construction and placed on an approved foundation.
(b)Exterior finishes and appearances shall be similar to and generally indistinguishable from a typical stick-built one-family dwelling.
(c)Lots shall be in individual ownership and not rented.
(d)A manufactured home bearing a "HUD" sticker may only be located in a (R-8) residential district.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-229
MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment, the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing or resting of materials, goods, or products.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building.
MOBILE HOME: See DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site, plot, parcel or tract of land used or intended to be used for the purpose of providing a location or accommodations for mobile homes and shall include all buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment thereof, whether or not a charge is made for the use of the mobile home park or its facilities. The term "mobile home park" shall not include automobile or mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the sole purpose of inspection for the purposes of sale.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A land subdivision, as defined by Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes and any Village Land Division Ordinance, with lots intended for the placement of individual mobile home units. Individual homesites are in separate ownership as opposed to the rental arrangements in mobile home parks.
MODULAR UNIT: A modular unit is a factor fabricated transportable building unit designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure to be used for residential, commercial, educational or industrial purposes.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of attached or detached lodging rooms with separate bathrooms and separate entrances, and where more than 50 percent of the lodging rooms are occupied or designed for occupancy by transient.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck.
MULTIPLE FAMILY: See DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of any permitted occupation therein.
NO-ACCESS STRIP: A strip of land within and along a rear lot line of a through lot adjoining a street which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or property deed as land over which motor vehicular travel shall not be permitted.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any lawfully established use of a building or of land existing prior to, and at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and which does not comply with the permitted use provisions of this Ordinance as they apply to the district in which such building or land is located.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-230
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL: A material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
NURSERY SCHOOL: A licensed facility for the care and supervision of nine (9) or more children for less than 24 hours a day in a one family dwelling, church, school, hospital or similar building.
NURSING HOME: A home for aged, chronically ill, care of children, infirm, or incurable persons, or a place of rest for those persons suffering bodily disorders, in which three (3) or more persons, not members of any family residing on the premises, are received and provided with food, shelter and care, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases, or mental illness.
OFFICIAL MAP: The Official Map of the Village of North Fond du Lac.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, or renting merchandise stored or displayed out-of-doors prior to sale. Such merchandise includes automobiles, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats or similar commodities.
OPEN SPACE: That part of the lot area not used for buildings, parking, or service. Open space may include lawns, trees, shrubbery, garden areas, footpaths, play areas, pools, water courses, wooded areas and paved surfaces used as access drives but not used for vehicular parking of any kind. See also PERMANENT OPEN SPACE.
PARKING LOT: A structure or premises containing five (5) or more parking spaces open to the public.
PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed in a building or unenclosed, reserved for the off-street parking of one motor vehicle and which is accessible to and from a street or alley.
PARTIES IN INTEREST: Includes all abutting property owners, all property owners within one hundred (100) feet, and all property owners of opposite frontages.
PARTY WALL: A common wall which extends from its footing below grade to, or through, the roof and divides buildings.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criteria established to control smoke and particulate matter, noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosion hazards, glare or heat, or radiation hazards generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERMANENT OPEN SPACE: A compact and contiguous land area that is designated on the Official Map for educational, religious, recreational, and other institutional uses or such land which is not so designated but which is recommended for designation by the Plan Commission
4-19-93 Chapter 21-231
and approved by the Village Board at or before the time of approval of the subdivision or planned development.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A building or facility where personal services are available, for profit, including such services are dry cleaning, laundromat, barber shop, beauty parlor, health spa, or tailor.
PET SHOP: Any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise, except for a licensed kennel, which buys, sells, or boards any species of animal.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Plan Commission of the Village of North Fond du Lac, Wisconsin.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land in single ownership or controlled by a partnership, corporation or cooperative group, which is developed as a unit for residential purposes, or with a mix of residential and nonresidential buildings, with all required roadways, parking and loading areas, accessory buildings, open spaces and other site amenities. A planned unit development shall involve a detailed plan review and approval in accordance with standards and procedures as set forth in this Ordinance.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A non-accessory building in which the principal use permitted on the lot is conducted.
PUBLIC AIRPORT: Any airport which complies with the definition contained in Section 114.013(3), Wisconsin Statutes, or any airport which serves or offers to serve common carriers engaged in air transport.
QUARRY, SAND PIT, GRAVEL PIT, TOPSOIL STRIPPING: A lot or land or part thereof, used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel, topsoil and similar material as an industrial or commercial operation, and exclusive of the process of excavation and grading in preparation for the construction of a duly authorized building, park or highway.
RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land containing railroad tracks and customary auxiliary facilities for train operations. For the purposes of this Ordinance a "railroad right-of-way" does not include land used or intended to be used for siding tracks, freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, car yards or classification yards.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESERVOIR STANDING SPACES: Those off-street parking spaces allocated for temporary standing of automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular establishment.
RETAIL: The sale of goods or merchandise in small quantities to the consumer.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-232
ROADWAY: That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for the travel of motor vehicles.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where meals, or lodging and meals, are furnished for compensation for persons that are not members of the resident family.
SALVAGE YARD: An open area of land and any accessory building or structure thereon which are used primarily for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing, disassembling, or handling waste or scrap materials, including vehicles, machinery and equipment not in operable condition or parts thereof, and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "salvage yard" does not include an establishment, located in the appropriate manufacturing district, engaged exclusively in processing of scrap iron or other metals to be sold only to establishments engaged in manufacturing of steel or metal alloys.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A method of disposing of refuse by spreading and covering such refuse with earth to a depth of two (2) feet on the top surface and one (1) foot on the sides of the bank, which sides shall have a least 1:2 slope.
SETBACK: The minimum distance between a street line and the nearest wall of a building or side of a structure facing such street line.
SIGN: A name, identification, illustration, description, display or device, or anything else, illuminated or not, which is affixed to a building or sign structure and which directs attention to, promotes or identifies a product, place, name, activity, person, institution or type of business. For purposes of removal, signs shall also include sign structures.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: Any sign portraying information which promotes or directs attention to a person, place, business, product, service, entertainment or other activity not related to a use on the lot on which such sign is located. A billboard or off-premises sign.
SIGN, AREA: As set forth in Section 21.14 of this Ordinance.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE UNIT: Any sign whose message may be changed by electronic process, including such messages as copy, art, graphic, time, date, temperature, weather, or information concerning civic, charitable or the advertising or products or services for sale on the premises. This also includes traveling or segmented message displays.
SIGN, FLASHING: An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained constant or stationary in intensity or color at all times when such sign is in use. Time-temperature signs are not flashing signs as considered in this Ordinance.
SIGN, GROUND AND/OR POLE: Any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. (Also referred to as "Free Standing Sign.")
4-19-93 Chapter 21-233
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: Any sign portraying information which promotes or directs attention to a person, place, business, product, service, entertainment or other activity located on the same lot where the sign is installed and maintained.
SIGN, MOVABLE: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign extending more than twelve (12) inches, but less than five (5) feet from the face of a wall or building.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected on, against or above a roof and extending above the highest point of the roof. If the sign does not extend above the highest point of the roof, and is single faced, it is considered a wall sign.
SIGN, STRUCTURE: Any structure or material which supports, has supported or is intended to support or help maintain a sign in a stationary position, including any decorative covers or roofs or embellishments extending above such sign.
SIGN, WALL: A single faced sign which is affixed to the wall of any building or structure and projects in a plane parallel to such wall by 12 inches or less.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign installed inside a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises.
STORAGE, OUTDOOR: Land outside any building or roofed area and used for the keeping of goods, supplies, raw material or finished products.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION: Written authority to deviate from the requirements for this Ordinance, except the use of land or a building, as set forth and authorized by Section 21.18 of this Ordinance.
SPECIAL USE: See USE, SPECIAL.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. The floor of a story may have split levels provided that there are not more than five (5) feet difference in elevation between the different levels of the floor. A mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story when it covers over one-third the area of the floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more. See also BASEMENT and CELLAR.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than three (3) feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker of his family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-234
STREET: Any right-of-way in excess of 24 feet in width containing a roadway which affords the primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. When such right-of-way is not an existing or dedicated public "street", it shall be not less than 40 feet in width, unless otherwise herein regulated. An alley or driveway shall not be considered a street.
STREET FRONTAGE: Property fronting on one side of street between two intersecting streets or along one side of a dead-end street between an intersecting street and the end of the cul-de-sac.
STREET LINE: The street right-of-way line separating the street from abutting property.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on, above or below the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, backstops for tennis courts and pergolas.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair or replacement as may be required for the safety of the building as determined by the Building Inspector.
TAVERN: An establishment where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises but not including restaurants where the principal business is the serving of food.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: A movable structure not designed for human occupancy nor for the protection of goods or chattels and not forming an enclosure, such as billboards.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided for no more than 12 transient paying guests.
TRAILER, BOAT or CARGO: A vehicle designed exclusively for the transportation of one boat or less than 10 foot beam and 30 foot length or, if used for the hauling of cargo, not over 70 sq. ft. in cargo floor area.
TRAILER, BUSINESS: Any vehicle or portable structure constructed for use as an accessory building or structure in the conduct of business, trade, or occupation, and which may be used as a conveyance on streets and highways, by its own or other motive power.
TRAILER, CAMPING: A trailer designed and constructed for temporary dwelling purposes which does not contain built-in sanitary facilities and has a gross floor area of less than 130 square feet.
TRAILER, TRAVEL: A trailer designed and constructed for temporary dwelling purposes which may contain cooking, sanitary and electrical facilities, and has a gross floor area of 130 square feet or more, but less than 220 square feet. A recreation vehicle.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-235
USABLE OPEN SPACE: Space suitable for recreation, gardens, or household service activities, such as clothes drying. Such space must be at least 75 percent open to the sky, free of automobile traffic, parking, and undue hazards, and readily accessible by all those for whom it is intended.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and including any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of the Village. Land use or activity.
USE, ACCESSORY: A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a premises or building and located on the same premises as the principal use or building.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any building or land that conforms with all of the regulations of this Ordinance or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all of the codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto, for the building or land that is being examined.
USE, NONCONFORMING: See NONCONFORMING USE.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and applicable performance standards of this Ordinance for the district in which such use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The dominant use of land or buildings as permitted by this Ordinance and as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
USE, SPECIAL: A use which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in any particular district or districts. After due process in accordance with the provisions of Section 21.11 of this Ordinance, a permit for such "special use" may be granted by the Village Board.
UTILITY: A public service for the provision of energy such as electricity, natural gas or heating oil. Utility shall include high voltage or high capacity transmission lines, whether above or below grade, substations and distribution lines, whether above or below grade.
VARIANCE: Written authority to deviate from any of the use requirements of this Ordinance as set forth and authorized by Section 21.19 of this Ordinance. See also SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
VEHICLE, MOTOR: Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer, or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine for dispensing merchandise or services designed to be operated by the customer.
VILLAGE: The Village of North Fond du Lac, Wisconsin.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-236
VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE: On corner lots and on the right-of-way within the vision clearance triangle, it shall be unlawful to install, to set out, to park or maintain, or to allow such installation, setting out, parking or maintenance of any structures, vehicles, signs, hedges, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstruction of view between 2½ feet and 10 feet above the grade of the intersection of street centerline adjacent thereto. Allowable installations within the vision clearance area: utility and street light poles when no safer alternative location is available; trees, saplings or plant species with growth habits which develop no significant foliage which will obstruct view in the clearance area; official signs and signals; signs in accordance with Section 21.14; and on street parking when traffic controls exist which permit decreased sight lines.
WETLANDS: Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
YARD: An open area on a lot which is open to the sky and unoccupied except as may otherwise be provided in this Ordinance.
YARD, INTERIOR, SIDE: A side yard which adjoins the side yard of another lot or an alley separating such side yard from the side yard of another lot.
YARD LINE: An imaginary line on a lot which is parallel to the lot line along which a required yard extends and which is not nearer to said lot line than the required yard width or depth as set forth in this Ordinance.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the entire width of a lot between the front line (street line) and the front yard line.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear yard line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along the side lot line and bounded by the front yard, the rear yard and the side yard line.
ZERO LOT LINE: The concept whereby two (2) respective dwelling units within a building shall be on separate and abutting lots and shall meet on the common property line between them, thereby having zero space between said units.
ZONING DISTRICTS: The districts into which the Village has been divided for zoning regulations as set forth on the Zoning District Map.
ZONING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator to certify that the use of lands, structures, air and waters subject to this Chapter are or shall be used in accordance with the provisions of said Chapter.
4-19-93 Chapter 21-237
(for future use)
4-19-93 Chapter 21-238
HISTORY OF MODIFICATIONS
1999-04 Annexing (Braun Parcel)
1999-05 Annexing (parcels 2 and 3 of conservancy strip)
1999-09 Creating 21.071 Business Park (BP)
1999-10 Annexation (Pinto)
1999-11 Annexation (Riegert)
1999-13 Annexation (Pinto Parcel II)
1999-14 Annexation (Sieger)
1999-15 Annexation (Schneider)
1999-19 Amend 21.03(4) rezone R-7 to R-3 (Willis Et. al.)
2000-03 Annexing (MLG)
2000-06 Annexing (Westwood-Willis Addition parcel)
2000-07 Amend schedule 21-07A land uses. 2-7-00
2000-13 Annexing (Fenske Parcel)
2000-16 Annexing (Dee Parcel- N7529 Van Dyne Road)
2000-17 Annexing (Streetar- W6659 Winnebago St)
2000-20 Annexing (Willis Annexation)
2000-22 Annexing (portion of Westwood Ave).
2000-23 Repeal 21.05(2)(f) and recreate. Amend 21.12(1)(e and f).
2000-27 Amend 21.03(a) rezone R-6 to BP(MLG).
2001-01 Amend 21.12 Fencing 2-5-01
2001-04 Annexing (N7548, N7556, N7560, N7566) 4-2-01
2001-05 Annexing (Rebeusberg) 4-16-01
2001-10 Amend 21.12(7)h Swimming pools 6-4-01
2002-13 Sign ordinance 21.14, recre 21.07(3)g, rem 21.071(4) & 21.06(4) 10-7-02
2002-16 Annexation Athletic Fields School 12-2-02
2002-18 Annexation Tatro Development 11-18-02
2003-01 Amend 21.11(12)c Family Care Homes 1-6-03
2003-02 Annexation Village Owned Property 2-3-03
2004-03 Board of Appeals composition. 21.19 6-7-04
2004-04 Annexation N7717 Minnesota Ave (1716 Minnesota) 7-19-04
2004-05 Rezone 406 Winnebago St R-3 to R-6 8-16-04
2004-06 Rezone Blackbird Addition lots R-3 to R-6 10-4-04
2004-07 Rezone Northgate Estates BP to R-6 10-4-04
2004-08 Rezone 1716 Minnesota Ave R-7 to R-4 10-4-04
2005-01 Annexation N7430 Van Dyne Road 2-7-05
2005-02 Electronic message centers 21.14(C)16 2-7-05
2005-06 Rezone 925 Prospect Ave R-7 to R-3 4-18-05
2006-01 Annexation Braun 1-16-06
2006-04 Rezone Braun parcels to R-3 and R-5 3-6-06
2006-06 Comprehensive Plan amendment Future Land Use Map 5-15-06
2006-17 Annexation (Hopp) 12-4-06
2006-18 Rezone (Blackbird Addition lots 2-10, 14, 15) to R-5 12-4-06
2006-20 Rezone 389 Winnebago Street to B-2 12-4-06
2006-21 Rezone School Athletic Field 12-18-06
4-19-93 Chapter 21-239
2007-02 Annexation (N7775 Minnesota Avenue) 11-5-7
2008-01 Rezone 1824 Minnesota Ave R-7 to R-4 1-7-08
2008-02 Amend 21.12(1) to create (e) garage and carport appearance 1-7-08
2008-05 Annexation Winnebago project-Zabel 7-7-08
2009-06 Amend 21.14(D)6 Prohibited Signs 8-17-09
2010-03 Annexation for well house Creek Vu Dr 4-5-10
2010-07 Amend 21.12 Accessory Uses and Structures 12-6-10
2010-08 Amend 21.17 General Administrative system 12-6-10
2011-01 Rezone 1100 Prospect Ave R-3 to O 5-7-11
2011-02 Rezone 632 Florida Ave R-3 to R-5 5-7-11
2011-04 Annexing (N7452 Sunset Circle) 5-16-11
2012-02 Recreate 21.09(3)(l)and (m) Mobile Home General Provisions 4-2-12
2012-03 Recreate 21.12(6)(d)(9) Fences and Hedges General Provisions 4-2-12
2012-04 Recreate 21.17(5)(b)(3) Plan Approval 4-2-12
2012-05 Rezone 8 Lake Shore Dr. parcels R-7 to I-1 5-7-12
2012-06 Rezone 6 Lake Shore Dr. parcels R-7 to O 5-7-12
2012-07 Rezone 710-712 Lake Shore Dr. from I-1 to O 5-7-12
2014-01 Rezone 1 and 3 Winnebago St. from R-4 to I-1 3-3-14
2014-02 Amend 21.04 Shoreland Zoning 6-2-14
2015-01 Create 21.05(2)g Residential Light Pollution 9-8-15
2016-02 Rezone a parcel adj. 3 Winnebago Cardinal from R-4 to I-1 2-15-16
2018-02 Rezone 502 Prospect Ave Blacksmoke two parcels I-1 to B-1 2-19-18
rev. 1-19-15

-1
Chapter 22
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
22.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF FACT, STATEMENT
OF PURPOSE, TITLE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) Statutory Authorization
(2) Finding of Fact
(3) Statement of Purpose
(4) Title
(5) General Provisions2
(a) Areas to be Regulated
(b) Official Maps and Revisions
(c) Establishment of Districts
(d) Locating Floodplain Boundaries
(e) Removal of Lands from Floodplain
(f) Compliance
(g) Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated
(h) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
(i) Interpretation
(j) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
(k) Severability
(l) Annexed Areas for Cities/Villages
(m) General Development Standards
22.02 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN
(1) Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analyses
(2) Watercourse Alterations
(3) Chapter 30, 31, Wis. Stats., Development
(4) Public or Private Campgrounds
22.03 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
(1) Applicability
(2) Permitted Uses
(3) Standards for Development
(4) Prohibited Uses
22.04 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
(1) Applicability
(2) Permitted Uses
(3) Standards for Development
22.05 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP)
(1) Applicability
(2) Permitted Uses
(3) Standards for Development
(4) Determining Floodway/Floodfringe Limits
22.06 NONCONFORMING USES
(1) General
(2) Floodway Areas
(3) Floodfringe Areas
22.07 ADMINISTRATION
(1) Zoning Administrator
(2) Zoning Agency
(3) Board of Adjustment/Appeals
(4) To Review Appeals of Permit Denials
(5) Floodproofing
(6) Public Information
22.08 AMENDMENTS
(1) General
(2) Procedures
22.09 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
22.10 DEFINITIONS
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 2
22.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE, TITLE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in ss. 61.35 and 62.23, for villages and cities; 59.69, 59.692, and 59.694 for counties; and the requirements in s. 87.30, Stats.
(2) FINDING OF FACT
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base.
(3) STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
This ordinance is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
(a) Protect life, health and property;
(b) Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(c) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers;
(d) Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(f) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
(g) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
(g) Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and
(h) Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
(4) TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for North Fond du Lac, Wisconsin.
(5) GENERAL PROVISIONS
(a) AREAS TO BE REGULATED
This ordinance regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base flood.
Note: Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study. Regional flood elevations may be derived from other studies. Areas covered by the base flood are identified as A-Zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(b) OFFICIAL MAPS & REVISIONS
The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as floodplains or A-Zones on the maps listed below and the revisions in the North Fond du Lac Floodplain Appendix. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective. No changes to regional flood
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 3
elevations (RFE's) on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator, North Fond du Lac. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
OFFICIAL MAPS : Based on the Fond du Lac County Insurance Study (FIS), dated November 4, 2009, volume number 55039CV000a.
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers55039C0259F, 55039C0267F, 55039C0278F, and 55039C0286F dated November 4, 2009; with corresponding profiles based on the FIS.
(c) ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows:
(1) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters.
(2) The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway.
(3) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been or may be
covered by floodwater during the regional flood.
(d) LOCATING FLOODPLAIN BOUNDARIES
Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in paragraphs (a) or (b) below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to s. 8.0. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to s. 7.3(3) and the criteria in (a) and (b) below.
(1) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(2) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the map scale, visual on-site inspection and any information provided by the Department.
Note: Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must also approve any map amendment pursuant to s. 8.1 (6).
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 4
(e) REMOVAL OF LANDS FROM FLOODPLAIN
Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to s. 8.0.
Note: This procedure does not remove the requirements for the mandatory purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to request a Letter of Map Change (LOMC).
(f) COMPLIANCE
Any development or use within the areas regulated by this ordinance shall be in compliance with the terms of this ordinance, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
(g) MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if s. 13.48(13), Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when s. 30.2022, Stats. applies.
(h) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
(1) This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under ss. 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties; s. 62.23 for cities; s. 61.35 for villages; or s. 87.30, Stats., which relate to floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(2) This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
(i) INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this ordinance, required by ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the date of the most
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 5
recent text amendment to this ordinance.
(j) WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The flood protection standards in this ordinance are based on engineering experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. Nor does this ordinance create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this ordinance.
(k) SEVERABILITY
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
(l) ANNEXED AREAS FOR CITIES AND VILLAGES
The Fond du Lac County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of the floodway.
(m) GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 6
home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this ordinance.
22.02 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
(1) HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC ANALYSES
(a) Except as allowed in par. (c) below, no floodplain development shall:
(1) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional flood height; or
(2) Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost, which equals or exceeds 0.01 foot.
(b) The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or increase regional flood heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of sub. (3) are met.
(c) Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be permitted if amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with s. 8.0.
Note: This section refers to obstructions or increases in base flood elevations as shown on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
(2) WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS
No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the zoning administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or scientific data in accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to revise the FIRM, risk premium rates and floodplain management regulations as required.
(3) CHAPTER 30, 31, WIS. STATS., DEVELOPMENT
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, BFE's established in the FIS, or other data from the officially adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 7
are made according to s. 8.0.
(4) PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions:
(a) The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services.
(b) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator.
(c) The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground is such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants.
(d) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation.
(e) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated - by the officials identified in sub. (4) - to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state Department of Health Services. and all other applicable regulations.
(f) Only camping units are allowed.
(g) The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours.
(h) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section.
(i) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this section.
(j) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either s. 3.0 or s. 4.0 for the floodplain district in which the structure is located.
(k) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued.
(l) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
22.03 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 8
(1) APPLICABILITY
This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to s. 5.4.
(2) PERMITTED USES
The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if
- they are not prohibited by any other ordinance;
- they meet the standards in s. 3.3 and 3.4; and
- all permits or certificates have been issued according to s. 7.1:
(a) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
(b) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
(c) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of s. 3.3(4).
(d) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that comply with ss. 3.3
and 3.4.
(e) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with s. 3.3(4).
(f) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with chs. 30 and 31, Stats.
(g) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with s. 3.3(3).
(3) STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENTS IN FLOODWAY AREAS
(a) GENERAL
(1) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with s. 2.0 and have a low flood damage potential.
(2) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal according to s. 2.1:
1. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or
2. An analysis calculating the effects of this
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 9
proposal on regional flood height.
(3) The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will increase flood elevations upstream or downstream 0.01 foot or more, based on the data submitted for par. (b) above.
(b) STRUCTURES
Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(1) The structure is not designed for human habitation and does not have a high flood damage potential.
(2) It must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
(3) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or flood proofed to or above the regional flood elevation;
(4) It must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood; and
(c) PUBLIC UTILITIES, STREETS AND BRIDGES
Public utilities, streets and bridges
may be allowed by permit, if:
(1) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and
(2) Construction meets the development standards of s. 2.1.
(d) FILLS OR DEPOSITION OF MATERIALS
Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if:
(1) The requirements of s. 2.1 are met;
(2) No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is issued by the Department pursuant to ch. 30, Stats., and a permit pursuant to s. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this section are met;
(a) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(b) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
(4) PROHIBITED USES
All uses not listed as permitted uses in s. 3.2 are prohibited, including the following uses:
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 10
(a) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
(b) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life;
(c) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
(d) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code;
(e) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(f) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(g) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under s. NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
(h) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
22.04 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
(1) APPLICABILITY
This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to s. 5.4.
(2) PERMITTED USES
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the standards in s. 4.3 are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in s. 7.1 have been issued.
(3) STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODFRINGE AREAS
S. 2.1 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use requested.
(a) RESIDENTIAL USES
Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved into the floodfringe area, shall meet or exceed the following standards;
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway, shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 11
flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The Department may authorize other floodproofing measures if the elevations of existing streets or sewer lines makes compliance with the fill standards impractical;
(2) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation;
(3) Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in par. (d).
(4) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with par. (c) impractical, the municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements where access roads are at or below the regional flood elevation, if:
1. The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or
2. The municipality has a natural disaster plan approved by Wisconsin Emergency Management and the Department.
(b) ACCESSORY STRUCTURES OR USES
(1) Except as provided in par.(b), an accessory structure which is not connected to a principal structure may be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
(2) An accessory structure which is not connected to the principal structure and which is less than 600 square feet in size and valued at less than $10,000 may be constructed with its lowest floor no more than two feet below the regional flood elevation if it is subject to flood velocities of no more than two feet per second and it meets all of the provisions of Sections 3.3 (2) (a),(b),(c) and (d) and 4.3 (6) below.
(c) COMMERCIAL USES
Any commercial structure which is
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 12
erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall meet the requirements of s. 4.3(1). Subject to the requirements of s. 4.3(5), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
(d) MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL USES
Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe area shall be protected to the flood protection elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other flood proofing measures in s. 7.5. Subject to the requirements of sub. (6), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
(e) STORAGE OF MATERIALS
Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with s. 7.5. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during flooding.
(f) PUBLIC UTILITIES, STREETS AND BRIDGES
All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and
(1) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction of and substantial improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if they are floodproofed in compliance with s. 7.5 to the flood protection elevation;
(2) Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation.
(g) SEWAGE SYSTEMS
All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, pursuant to s. 7.5, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code.
(h) WELLS
All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to s. 7.5, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(i) SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITES
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 13
Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas.
(j) DEPOSITION OF MATERIALS
Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this ordinance.
(k) MANUFACTURED HOMES
(1) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities.
(2) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
1. have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and
2. be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood
(3) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in s. 4.3(1).
(l) MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in s. 4.3 (11)(b) and (c). A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
22.05 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP)
(1) APPLICABILITY
The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which flood profiles are not available or where flood profiles are available but floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and floodfringe districts shall be delineated when adequate data is available.
(2) PERMITTED USES
Pursuant to s. 5.4, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe area.
Those uses permitted in floodway (s. 3.2) and floodfringe areas (s. 4.2) are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of s. 5.3,
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 14
provided that all permits or certificates required under s. 7.1 have been issued.
(3) STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
S. 3.0 applies to floodway areas, s. 4.0 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this ordinance applies to either district.
(4) DETERMINING FLOODWAY AND FLOODFRINGE LIMITS
Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall:
(a) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and flood proofing measures;
(b) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries:
(1) A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all historic high water information;
(2) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
(3) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream;
(4) Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities.
(c) Transmit one copy of the information described in pars. (1) and (2) to the Department Regional office along with a written request for technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data. Where the provisions of s. 7.1(2)(c) apply, the applicant shall provide all
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 15
required information and computations to delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood elevations.
22.06 NONCONFORMING USES
(1) GENERAL
(a) APPLICABILITY
If these standards conform with s. 59.69(10), Stats., for counties or s. 62.23(7)(h), Stats., for cities and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this ordinance or any amendment thereto.
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may continue subject to the following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this ordinance. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered an extension, modification or addition; these include painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not include any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this ordinance;
(c) The municipality shall keep
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 16
a record which lists all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications represent;
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would exceed equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with s. 4.3(1). The costs of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50% provisions of this paragraph;
(e) 1. Except as provided in subd. 2., if any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the structure’s present equalized assessed value.
2. For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building may be permitted in order to restore it after the nonflood disaster, provided that the nonconforming building will meet all of the minimum requirements under 44 CFR Part 60, or under the regulations promulgated thereunder.
(f) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the alteration will comply with s. 3.3 (1), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with s. 7.5 are used.
6.2 FLOODWAY AREAS
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 17
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such modification or addition:
(a) Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements;
(b) Meets the requirements of s. 6.1;
(c) Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
(d) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to s. 7.5, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation;
(e) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following shall apply:
1. The enclosed area shall be designed to allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be
no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade;
2. The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant material;
3. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
4. The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
(32) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code.
(43) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 18
ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
6.3 FLOODFRINGE AREAS
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with the standards for that particular use in s. 4.3, except where s. 6.3(2) is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of par. (1) would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the Board of Adjustment/Appeals, using the procedures established in s. 7.3, may grant a variance from those provisions of par. (1) for modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
(c) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
(d) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
(e) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(f) The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in s. 4.3(5).
(3) If neither the provisions of par. (1) or (2) above can be met, one addition to an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use may be allowed in the floodfringe, if the addition:
(a) Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit or variance;
(b) Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and
(c) In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the building, does not equal or exceed 50% of the present equalized assessed value of the building.
(4) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code.
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 19
(5) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this ordinance and ch. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
7.0 ADMINISTRATION
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under ss. 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), Stats., these officials shall also administer this ordinance.
7.1 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
(1) The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this ordinance and shall have the following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications.
(b) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this ordinance,
and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate.
(bmc) Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
(cd) Keep records of all official actions such as:
1. All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
2. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations for floodplain development;
3. Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
4. All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures.
(de) Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional office:
1. Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments;
2. Copies of any case-by-case
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 20
analyses, and any other information required by the Department including an annual summary of the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken.
3. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related correspondence concerning the assessments.
(f) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this ordinance to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the Department Regional office.
(g) Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA Regional office.
(2) LAND USE PERMIT
A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development or any repair or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall include:
(a) GENERAL IFORMATION
1. Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor;
2. Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a modification;
(b) SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
1. Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
2. Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting navigable waterways;
3. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and street center lines;
4. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water supply systems;
5. Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
6. Location of
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 21
floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the official floodplain zoning maps;
7. The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill using vertical datum from the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD); National Geodetic and Vertical Datum (NGVD);
8. Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not the requirements of s. 3.0 or 4.0 are met; and
9. Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge according to s. 2.1. This may include any of the information noted in s. 3.3(1).
(c) DATA REQUIREMENTS TO ANALYZE DEVELOPMENTS
1. The applicant shall provide all survey data and computations required to show the effects of the project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain storage, for all subdivision proposals, as "subdivision" is defined in s. 236, Stats., and other proposed developments exceeding 5 acres in area or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000. The applicant shall provide:
a. An analysis of the effect of the development on the regional flood profile, velocity of flow and floodplain storage capacity;
b. A map showing location and details of vehicular access to lands outside the
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 22
floodplain; and
c. A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will be minimized.
The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural development, landscaping, access and road development, utilities, and other pertinent items, but need not include land costs.
(d) EXPIRATION
All permits issued under the authority of this ordinance shall expire 180 days after issuance.
(3) CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this ordinance;
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a permit;
(c) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days after written notification that the permitted work is completed;
(d) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that floodproofing measures meet the requirements of s. 7.5.
(4) OTHER PERMITS
The applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under s. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344.
7.2 ZONING AGENCY
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 23
(1) The North Fond du Lac Plan Commission shall:
(a) oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and
(b) review and advise the Governing body on all proposed amendments to this ordinance, maps and text.
(2) This zoning agency shall not
(a) grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the Board of Adjustment/Appeals; or
(b) amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the Governing body.
7.3 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT/APPEALS
The Board of Adjustment/Appeals, created under s. 59.694, Stats., for counties or s. 62.23(7)(e), Stats., for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this ordinance. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator may not be the secretary of the Board.
(1) POWERS AND DUTIES
The Board of Adjustment/Appeals shall:
(a) Appeals - Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
(b) Boundary Disputes - Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map.
(c) Variances - Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance standards.
(2) APPEALS TO THE BOARD
(a) Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter appealed.
(b) NOTICE AND HEARING
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 24
FOR APPEALS INCLUDING VARIANCES
1. Notice - The board shall:
a. Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
b. Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
c. Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the Department Regional office at least 10 days in advance of the hearing.
2. Hearing - Any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall:
a. Resolve boundary disputes according to s. 7.3(3).
b. Decide variance applications according to s. 7.3(4).
c. Decide appeals of permit denials according to s. 7.4.
(c) DECISION: The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall:
1. Be made within a reasonable time;
2. Be sent to the Department Regional office within 10 days of the decision;
3. Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the Board;
4. State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's decision;
5. Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 25
application;
6. Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board proceedings.
(3) BOUNDARY DISPUTES
The following procedure shall be used by the Board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries:
(a) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined.
(b) In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the Board.
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map amendment according to s. 8.0.
(4) VARIANCE
(a) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this ordinance if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
1. Literal enforcement of the ordinance provisions will cause unnecessary hardship;
2. The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended;
3. The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
4. The variance is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance in s. 1.3.
(b) In addition to the criteria in par. (a), to qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met:
1. The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 26
elevation;
2. Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE;
3. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the ordinance.
(c) A variance shall not:
1. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district.
2. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss.
3. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
4. Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area.
5. Allow actions without the amendments to this ordinance or map(s) required in s. 8.1.
6. Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure.
(d) When a floodplain variance is granted the Board shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase flood insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record.
7.4 TO REVIEW APPEALS OF PERMIT DENIALS
(1) The Zoning Agency (s. 7.2) or Board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include:
(a) Permit application data listed in s. 7.1(2).
(b) Floodway/floodfringe determination data in s. 5.4.
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 27
(c) Data listed in s. 3.3(1)(b) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the zoning administrator.
(d) Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the Board with the appeal.
(2) For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall:
(a) Follow the procedures of s. 7.3;
(b) Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
(c) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
(3) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Board shall:
(a) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners.
(b) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot provided no other reasons for denial exist.
7.5 FLOODPROOFING
(1) No permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation.
(2) Floodproofing measures shall be designed to:
(a) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional flood factors;
(b) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(c) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; and
(d) Insure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood protection elevation, and the interior remains completely dry during flooding without human intervention.
(2) Floodproofing measures could include:
(a) Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or
(b) Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation.
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 28
(c) Placing essential utilities above the flood protection elevation.
(d) Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve foundation wall and basement floor pressures.
(e) Constructing water supply wells and waster treatment systems to prevent the entry of flood waters.
(f) Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity flow basement drains.
7.6 PUBLIC INFORMATION
(1) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed.
(3) All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is in.
8.0 AMENDMENTS
8.1 GENERAL
The governing body may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this ordinance in the manner provided by law. Actions which require an amendment include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Any change to the official floodplain zoning map, including the floodway line or boundary of any floodplain area.
(2) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain zoning maps.
(3) Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain.
(4) Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more.
(c) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by s. NR 116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality.
(d) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
Note: Consult the FEMA web site - www.fema.gov - for the map change fee schedule.
8.2 PROCEDURES
Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party according to the provisions of s. 62.23, Stats., for cities and villages, or 59.69, Stats., for counties. Such petitions shall include all necessary data required by ss. 5.4 and 7.1(2).
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 29
(1) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the Department Regional office for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of s. 62.23, Stats., for cities and villages or s. 59.69, Stats., for counties.
(2) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the Department.
(3) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body.
(4) For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the zoning agency or board shall consider data submitted by the Department, the zoning administrator's visual on-site inspections and other available information. (See s. 1.5(4).)
9.0 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than $ 5.00 and not more than $500.00, together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to s. 87.30, Stats.
10.0 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this ordinance shall have their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary.
1) "A ZONES" - Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area.
2) "ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE" - A facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building.
3) "BASE FLOOD" - Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 30
FIRM.
4) "BASEMENT" - Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
5) "BUILDING" - See STRUCTURE.
6) "BULKHEAD LINE" - A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the Department pursuant to s. 30.11, Stats., and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this ordinance.
7) "CAMPGROUND" - Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 4 or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area.
8) "CAMPING UNIT" - Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or other mobile recreational vehicle.
9) "CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE" - A certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance.
10) "CHANNEL" – A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
11) "CRAWLWAYS" OR "CRAWL SPACE" - An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in
height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
12) “DECK” – An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
13) "DEPARTMENT" - The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
14) "DEVELOPMENT" - Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
15) "DRYLAND ACCESS" - A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
16) "ENCROACHMENT" - Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or development in the floodway.
17) "EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION" - A parcel of
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 31
land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of this ordinance. At a minimum, this would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads
18) "EXPANSION TO EXISTING MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK" - The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring if concrete pads.
19) "FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA)" - The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
20) "FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP" (FIRM) - A map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
21) "FLOOD" or "FLOODING" – A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions:
? The overflow or rise of inland waters,
? The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
? The inundation caused by waves or currents
of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior, or
? The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
22) "FLOOD FREQUENCY" - The probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year.
23) "FLOODFRINGE" - That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by flood waters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
24) "FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP" - A map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
25) "FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY" - A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 32
Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
26) "FLOODPLAIN" - Land which has been or may be covered by flood water during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
27) "FLOODPLAIN ISLAND" - A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
28) "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT" - Policy and procedures to insure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
29) "FLOOD PROFILE" - A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
30) "FLOODPROOFING" - Any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
31) "FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION" - An elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see: FREEBOARD.)
32) "FLOOD STORAGE" - Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been
taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
33) "FLOODWAY" - The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.
34) "FREEBOARD" - A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
35) "HABITABLE STRUCTURE" - Any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation.
36) "HEARING NOTICE" - Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Ch. 985, Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (7 days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (7 days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice, exceeding these minimums.
37) "HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL" - Damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
38) "HISTORIC STRUCTURE" - Any structure that is either:
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 33
? Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register,
? Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district,
? Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or
? Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
39) "INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT" - A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge.
40) "LAND USE" - Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see DEVELOPMENT.)
41) "MANUFACTURED HOME" - A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
42) "MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE" - A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
43) "MUNICIPALITY" or "MUNICIPAL" - The county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this zoning ordinance.
44) “NAVD” or “North American Vertical Datum” –Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjusted.
45) "NGVD" or "NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM" - Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
46) "NEW CONSTRUCTION" - For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 34
regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
47) "NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE" - An existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this ordinance for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
48) "NONCONFORMING USE" - An existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.)
49) "OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW" - Any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
50) "OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP" - That map, adopted and made part of this ordinance, as described in s. 1.5(2), which has been approved by the Department and FEMA.
51) "OPEN SPACE USE" - Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures.
52) "ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK" - The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
53) "PERSON" - An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency.
54) "PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM" - A sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the Department of Commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure.
55) "PUBLIC UTILITIES" - Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
56) "REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING" - Means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
57) "REGIONAL FLOOD" - A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 35
a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
58) "START OF CONSTRUCTION" - The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
59) "STRUCTURE" - Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
60) "SUBDIVISION" - Has the meaning given in s. 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
61) "SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE" - Damage of
any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
62) "UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP" - Where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance.
63) "VARIANCE" - An authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance.
64) "VIOLATION" - The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
65) "WATERSHED" - The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water.
66) "WATER SURFACE PROFILE" - A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
Village of North Fond du Lac August 17, 2009
Floodplain Zoning - 36
67) "WELL" - means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use.

Chapter 23
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURES
23.01 Purpose
23.02 Review of Initial Determination
23.03 Determinations Reviewable
23.04 Determinations Not Subject to Review
23.05 Administrative Rules Appeals Board
23.06 Conflicting Code Provisions
23.01 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to afford a constitutionally sufficient, fair, and orderly administrative procedure and review in connection with determinations by all village officers, employees, agents, agencies, committees, boards, and commissions which may involve constitutionally protected rights of specific persons which are entitled to due process protection under the 14th amendment of the US Constitution. Wis. Stats. Ch. 68, relating to municipal review procedures shall be in full force and effect in the village, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
23.02 Review of Initial Determination. Upon the filing of a written request by any person aggrieved to review an initial determination filed pursuant to Wis. Stats. §68.08, all village officers, employees, agents, agencies, committees, boards, and commissions receiving such a request shall conduct an administrative review of their own determination in accordance with Wis. Stats. §68.09. All written requests for review shall be immediately referred to the village attorney.
23.03 Determinations Reviewable. Reviewable determinations will be those specified in Wis. Stats. §68.02.
23.04 Determinations Not Subject to Review. Determinations not subject to review will be those specified in Wis. Stats. §68.03.
23.05 Administrative Rules Appeals Board. The administrative rules appeals board, as specified in section 1.04(3)(d) of this code, shall hear all requests for review.
23.06 Conflicting Code Provisions. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to repeal or supersede the provisions of any other section of this code in conflict herewith or providing other procedures for review of administrative determinations within the village except when otherwise specifically provided in said sections.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
Chapter 24
GENERAL PROVISIONS
24.01 Rules of Construction
24.02 Conflict and Separability
24.03 Clerk to File Documents Incorporated by Reference; Amendments
24.04 Use of Citations
24.05 Penalty Provisions
24.06 Repeal Provisions
24.07 Effect of Repeal
24.08 Title, Effective Date, Citation
24.01 Rules of Construction. In the construction of this code the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the code: (1) WISCONSIN STATUTES. The term “Wisconsin Statutes”, or “Wis. Stats.” wherever used in this code, shall mean the most current edition of the Wisconsin Statutes and Annotations, published under authority of Wis. Stats. §35.18 and §35.23, by the Reviser of Statutes Bureau of the Wisconsin Department of Administration.
(2) GENERAL RULE. In construing the meaning of the language of this code, the provisions of Wis. Stats. §990.001 and §990.01 apply.
(3) OTHER REFERENCE. Any reference to the Wisconsin Administrative Code or other rules and regulations are to the most current edition.
24.02 Conflict and Separability. (1) CONFLICT. If the provisions of the different sections of this code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each section shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such section.
(2) SEPARABILITY OF CODE PROVISIONS. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional according to the laws of the state of Wisconsin or the United States, by any reason of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase or portion thereof. The village president and the village board declare that they would have adopted this code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
24.03 Clerk to File Documents Incorporated by Reference; Amendments. (1) Whenever in this code any standard, code, rule, regulation, or other written or printed matter, other than the Wisconsin Statutes or other sections of this code, are adopted by reference, they shall be deemed incorporated in this code as if fully set forth herein and the clerk is hereby directed and required
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
General Provisions - 2
to file, deposit, and keep in his/her office a copy of the code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited, and kept shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person during the village office hours, subject to such orders or regulations which the administrator may prescribe for their preservation.
(2) The village clerk shall certify one copy of this code as the original Municipal Code of the Village of North Fond du Lac and shall file the same as part of the Village Ordinance Book. Such copy shall be retained in its original form. In addition, the clerk shall retain in his/her office at least one copy of the Municipal Code of the Village of North Fond du Lac in current form in which shall be inserted all supplemental sheets as herein provided.
(3) Whenever any ordinance amending, repealing, revising or creating any section of this code is adopted by the village board, the clerk, after recording such ordinance in the ordinance book, shall cause copies of such ordinance to be reproduced on supplemental sheets in proper form for insertion in all copies of this code in his possession except the aforementioned original copy. The clerk shall make such supplemental sheets available (at cost) to all persons requesting the same.
(4) As each ordinance affecting this code becomes effective, the clerk shall incorporate the ordinance into the code. The rearranging, renumbering, and editing shall not affect the validity of the ordinances or the provisions of the code.
24.04 Use of Citations. (1) AUTHORITY. The village elects the provisions of Wis. Stats. §66.0113 in regard to the issuance of citations by certain village employees.
(2) ISSUANCE. The following village employees and officials may issue citations for the violations of any provision of this code: (a) any village law enforcement officer may issue a citation for the violation of any ordinance.
(b) The following village officials may issue citations for the violations of any section of this code which is directly related to the official’s capacity: 1. fire chief;
2. building inspector;
3. street superintendent;
4. weed commissioner;
5. zoning administrator.
(3) SCHEDULE OF CASH DEPOSITS. Except as provided in this code, the penalty for violation of provisions of the code are adopted from time to time by resolution of the village board.
(4) PAYMENT OF CASH DEPOSITS. (a) The payment of cash deposits shall be made to the clerk of courts or to the police department for citations issued by law enforcement officers or to the village treasurer or treasurer's assistant for citations issued by the village officials listed in 24.04(2)(b).
(b) Receipts shall be given for cash deposits.
24.05 Penalty Provisions. (1) GENERAL PENALTIES. Whenever provided in this code, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code shall upon conviction of such violation, forfeit not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than one thousand dollars, together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
General Provisions - 3
prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding six months.
(2) Village of North Fond du Lac law enforcement personnel are authorized to issue uniform citations for Village ordinance violations even when a statutory counterpart currently exists. The Uniform Municipal Citation and Complaint shall be the form of the citation authorized herein. Any amendments or alterations to that form as a result of subsequent legislation or court rule shall not reduce or impair its use under the terms of this ordinance.
(3) EXECUTION AGAINST DEFENDANT'S PROPERTY. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any ordinance of the village, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
(4) JUVENILE PENALTIES. The Village elects to come under the jurisdiction of the following statutes as they pertain to juvenile penalties: (a) §938.343, Disposition of juvenile adjudged to have violated a civil law or ordinance;
(b) §938.344 Disposition; certain intoxicating liquor, beer or drug violations; and Wisconsin Statutes §938.355(6)(d)2 pertaining to the suspension or limitation on the use of a juvenile’s vehicle operating privilege.
(5) CONTINUED VIOLATIONS. Each violation and each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this code shall preclude the village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this code.
24.06 Repeal Provisions. All ordinances heretofore adopted by the village board are hereby repealed, except all ordinances or parts thereof relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with any of the provisions of this code: (1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance.
(2) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Village.
(3) Any contract or obligation assumed by the Village.
(4) The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the Village not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code.
(5) Any appropriation ordinance or resolution.
(6) Any right or franchise granted by the Village Board to any person, firm, or corporation.
(7) Any ordinance or resolution naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc. any public street or way in the Village.
(8) Any ordinance or resolution establishing the street grades of any street in the Village.
(9) Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special assessments.
(10) Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the Village.
Village of North Fond du Lac June 1, 2002
General Provisions - 4
(11) Any ordinance annexing property to the Village.
(12) Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures, except as these ordinances have been amended as part of this recodification.
(13) Zoning ordinances.
(14) Charter ordinances.
(15) The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the Village of whatever name or description.
(16) Water and sewer rates, rules, regulations and sewer and water main construction.
24.07 Effect of Repeal. The repeal or amendment of any section or provision of this code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the village board shall not: (1) By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the time which such repeal or amendment takes effect.
(2) Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired, accrued, or incurred under any enactment so repealed or, amended, unless the privilege of repealing such obligation or privilege has been reserved by the village board.
(3) Affect any offense committed or penalty or forfeiture incurred previous to the time when any ordinance shall be repealed or amended, except that when any forfeiture or penalty shall have been mitigated by the provisions of this ordinance, such provisions shall apply to and control any judgment to be pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for any offense committed before that time.
(4) Affect any prosecution for any offense or the levy of any penalty or forfeiture
pending at the time when any ordinance aforesaid shall be repealed or amended, but the right of action shall continue and the offender shall be subject to the penalty as provided in such ordinances, and such prosecution shall proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance or ordinances had not been repealed, except that all such proceedings had after the time this code shall take effect, shall be conducted according to the provisions of this code and shall be, in all respects, subject to the provisions of this code.
24.08 Title; Effective Date; Citation. These ordinances shall be known as "The Municipal Code of the Village of North Fond du Lac, Wisconsin" and shall take effect from and after passage and publication as provided in Wis. Stats. §66.0103. Section number thereto shall cite all references.